
Only when the sun goes down do they dare to congregate, and even then they speak in hushed voices as they discuss their plans to develop an underground movement for greater democracy.
Now there are no loudspeakers, printing presses or financial contributions, as there were in the flowering days of May. 
Only seven men remain of the hundreds of people who once were active in a workers' union that pressed for greater democracy.
They meet secretly, in considerable danger, and scribble their appeals for change on crackly, cheap pieces of paper and wait until twilight before they furtively paste up the messages on lampposts and signboards. 
They almost never say the name of their organization, the Workers' Autonomous Union, in public.
'Furious and Frustrated'
''You don't understand what it's like to live here in China,'' the union member said to a visitor. 
''Why do we keep pushing for democracy, even when we risk arrests?
We are furious and frustrated. 
The Communist Party and the Government is so corrupt, and yet it controls us all so completely. 
The officials skim off the country's money and there's hardly anything left for the workers.''
The group decided, after much discussion, to contact a foreign reporter to tell the world that their struggle for democracy was continuing, and to solicit assistance from foreigners, especially people on Taiwan.
So far the union's activities have been scarcely noticeable in Beijing, but if it is able to attract more participants and form a small underground organization, it could become a more significant embarrassment and nuisance for the Government. 
The union spokesman disclaimed any involvement in periodic attacks by snipers against the martial law soldiers who patrol the streets in Beijing. 
However, diplomats do not rule out the possibility of the formation of a sometimes-violent underground resistance to the authorities, and the union could become the core of such an organization.
 
Speaking Among Friends
''Do foreigners know what happened?'' the spokesman asked. 
Then, he abruptly proceeded to describe how he saw a young woman and two men killed just south of Tiananmen Square in the early hours of June 4, when the Chinese Army suppressed the democracy movement in Beijing.
''We are still continuing our fight for democracy,'' said the spokesman. 
''There is no democracy in China. 
We have so little choice in our lives here. 
The Government and the Party decide where we work, where we live, how many children we can have and when.''
They discuss democracy among their close friends, but not a word with fellow workers. 
The spokesman refused to divulge even the regularity of their gatherings, let alone the location.
Each of them has been writing essays on democracy and posting them in alleyways, residential lanes and occasionally on major streets throughout the city. 
At their meetings, they debate how to spread their message. 
At times they despair that their voice will not be heard.
 
Less Repression Than Feared
While martial law and the current political atmosphere have severely hampered their activities, they believe the repression may not be as severe as they had anticipated two months ago.
''I went to Tiananmen Square many times,'' the union member said. 
''I gave many speeches and I must have been filmed many times, but they haven't arrested me, have they?''
Some workers, he noted, had only been detained for interrogation, particularly about leaders of the union, and then released.
The group believes there have been about 40 arrests and detentions of members belonging to their unofficial, loosely formed union that had begun to expand its network throughout the city during May. 
The number, however, may be wrong because they have not been able to contact many colleagues. 
Some may have been arrested secretly, and some of those who they think were arrested may actually be in hiding.
 
Few Recent Court Sentences
Many workers and intellectuals who had been outspoken during the may protests have been frightened about being jailed or dismissed from their jobs if their role in the demonstrations were discovered. 
The Government has announced the execution of 12 people so far in connection with the turmoil, and nearly all of them have been workers.
Few additional court sentences have been announced since then, but the television images of people being sentenced to death still chill many workers.
''Many people are afraid to come out, but we know they support us,'' the worker said.
