
Responding to China's human rights record, soaring trade surplus and continued arms exports to the Middle East, the Senate voted today to impose conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade status with the United States in June.
The vote sends the legislation to President Bush after nearly three years of political maneuvering. 
The Administration has repeatedly threatened to veto the legislation, and the 59-to-39 vote today fell 8 votes short of the two-thirds majority that would be needed to override a veto if all senators voted. 
But the margin was wider than in last summer's vote on the same issue, when the Democrats also prevailed, 55 to 44.
The bill, a compromise between separate measures approved by the House and Senate last year, is the first penalizing China's growing exports to emerge from Congress since Beijing'scrackdown on dissent in 1989.
It would condition the renewal of China's most-favored-nation trade status on the Chinese Government's accounting for and releasing from prison all citizens accused of expressing their political beliefs nonviolently. 
It would also require as a condition of renewal that the President certify to Congress that China has made substantial progress in observing human rights, opening its markets to American goods and curbing exports of missile and nuclear technology.
The Senate's Democratic leadership insisted on the vote today to force the President and Republicans into the politically awkward position of publicly supporting the Chinese Government in an election year.
Several senators who changed their votes cited concerns about Chinese arms exports. 
Among them was Senator Jim Exon, a Nebraska Democrat who voted against the legislation last summer because he feared that China might retaliate against American corn exports. 
He said he voted in favor today because a recent Central Intelligence Agency report made him worry that China sought to replace the former Soviet Union as a superpower and the United States' leading adversary.
Arms exports are "the way you get to be a superpower," he said in an interview after the vote. 
"You surround yourself with a lot of your supporters, you give them a lot of nuclear armaments and then you become Mr. Big."
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader and chief sponsor of today's bill, also cited China's occupation of Tibet and its $12.69 billion trade surplus with the United States last year, the second largest surplus after Japan's. 
Ten conservative Republican senators voted for the bill.
 
Five Democrats Vote No
Only five Democrats, all from farm states, crossed party lines to support the Administration. 
Their leader, Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who heads the Subcommittee on International Trade, said he supported the use of existing trade laws against specific Chinese exports.
Supporting the bill "is the politically easier course to take," he said. 
"It's easier to beat up on the Chinese and, for some Democrats, to beat up on the President in an election year."
The Administration lost today's vote despite weeks of strenuous lobbying to persuade Republican senators to vote with it. 
That effort concluded today with Republican senators meeting over lunch with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser.
Yet so reluctant were Senate Republicans to defend China that Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who led the bill's opponents, was unable to find enough senators to fill all the time allocated this morning for speeches criticizing the measure. 
Mr. Packwood yielded the extra time to Democrats.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican minority leader, had argued for weeks without success for a voice vote, which would have allowed Republican senators to support the President without being identified individually as having done so.
Legislation to revoke China's trade status was introduced shortly after the army crackdown in Beijing in June 1989, but no action was taken. 
The House approved a bill in October 1990 to impose conditions on the annual renewal of China's trade status, but the Senate took no action before that session of Congress expired two months later.
New bills imposing conditions were introduced in the House and the Senate and approved last July, although only in the House were Democrats able to assemble the two-thirds majority needed to override a Presidential veto. 
It was a compromise bill combining and slightly watering down the two bills that passed the House by a vote of 409 to 21 on Nov. 
26 and came before the Senate today.
The most-favored-nation trade status is misleadingly named, referring to very low tariffs imposed on most imports from all but a handful of countries like North Korea and Albania. 
Under legislation enacted in the early 1970's, the most-favored-nation status of China and other countries that had Communist governments at the time requires annual renewal by the President.
