
The Senate voted today to impose conditions on trade relations with China, but sponsors of the legislation failed to muster the two-thirds majority needed to overcome a likely Presidential veto. 
As a result, the day's action was a victory for the Bush Administration.
The 55-to-44 vote for trade restrictions was a setback for the Senate Democratic leadership. 
The legislation was sponsored by Senator George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, the Senate majority leader.
The bill would attach conditions to any renewal of China's most-favored-nation trade status, as of next July, but would allow the President's recent renewal of the low tariffs to continue until then. 
The conditions would include an end to certain Chinese arms sales, the release of some political prisoners, and a halt in exports of products produced by prison labor to the United States.
 
Some Cross Party Lines
The Administration prevailed by retaining the support of 37 Republicans and persuading 7 Democrats from farm states to cross party lines. 
Only 6 Republicans voted against the Administration, led by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, whose state has been particularly affected by a surge in textile imports from China.
Mr. Helms criticized China's human rights record and asserted that China continued to export products to the United States that were made with prison labor, a violation of American law. 
"For more than 40 years, these leaders have maintained themselves in power by the same means," he said.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate minority leader, said the 55-to-44 vote insured that a Bush veto would not be overridden. 
"This legislation is not going to become law," he said.
 
What the Status Does
The term "most favored nation" is a trade term that actually applies to almost all United States trading partners, including Iraq and Libya. 
Countries awarded this status ship goods to the United States at the lowest tariffs available for each category of import.
The House of Representatives voted two weeks ago to pass a similar bill. 
The House vote was 313 to 112, more than the two-thirds majority needed to override a Presidential veto. 
The bills must now be reconciled in a conference attended by members of both houses of Congress. 
The legislation will then go to President Bush, whose advisers say they will recommend a veto of any bill not providing for unconditional renewal of China's trade status.
As recently as two weeks ago, the Administration was still unsure whether it could muster the 34 votes needed to give it a strong chance of sustaining a veto. 
China's opponents and advocates alike focused their lobbying efforts on the Senate as the key battleground.
The Administration stressed party loyalty in a last-minute lobbying blitz and made limited concessions to fence-sitting Democrats and Republicans.
The Administration said it would back Taiwan's application to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a move calculated to win support from anti-Communist lawmakers and free-trade advocates. 
The Administration said it would take legal action against Chinese import barriers if negotiations did not yield results in several months.
A combination of heavy lobbying and a package of limited concessions sent to Congress on Friday helped the Administration win a dozen or more votes in the last week. 
Business interests, led by grain and aircraft exporters and textile importers, joined the Administration in its successful lobbying effort over the last several weeks.
China was the largest importer of wheat from the United States last year. 
Grain exporters estimated that if China halted those imports in retaliation for action by the Congress, wheat prices could fall by 10 percent.
A group of mostly farm-state senators led by Senator Max S. Baucus, Democrat of Montana, chairman of the Senate subcommittee on international trade, sent a letter to President Bush on June 19 asking for concessions in exchange for their support. 
The President made some of the concessions but did not outline new initiatives on human rights or China's arms exports.
Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota, one of six Democrats to sign Mr. Baucus's letter, criticized the President's response today. 
"I found the President's response to be very weak," he said.
But Mr. Conrad said in the debate that he would still vote against the bill because modifying China's trade status was not an appropriate way to respond to address his concerns about China's record on human rights.
Mr. Baucus said the question facing Congress was how much China could be pushed to change its practices without persuading its leaders that the changes were impossible or involved an unacceptable loss of face. 
The conditions in Mr. Mitchell's bill are so extensive that Chinese leaders would rather cut themselves off from the United States than comply, Mr. Baucus said.
Backing Mr. Mitchell was an eclectic alliance of anti-Communists, human rights advocates and protectionists. 
Senator Donald W. Riegle, Democrat of Michigan, was one of several senators who focused on the growth in China's trade surplus with the United States, which reached $10.3 billion last year.
But Senator Lloyd M. Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, posed the same question as Mr. Baucus and reached a different answer. 
Recent changes in the Soviet Union, particularly a huge increase in emigration, show that conditions can foster change in Communist countries, he said.
Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas, assailed the decision of the Chinese leadership to use force against demonstrators in and near Tiananmen Square in June 1989. 
Instead of arresting demonstrators, he said, "They chose to start mowing them down with guns and machine guns."
Before the final vote, the Senate added four amendments to Senator Mitchell's bill that made Chinese compliance more difficult. 
These amendments made it harder for Mr. Mitchell to gather votes.
An amendment introduced late in the evening by Senator Bentsen modified a provision in Senator Mitchell's bill that would have canceled the trade status immediately if China exported certain arms at any time in the coming year. 
The cancellation would instead take effect on July 3, 1992.
The amendment was a last-minute bid to soften the language of Senator Mitchell's bill and win support for it.
