
President Roh Tae Woo said here not long ago that he wants to be remembered as the man who fulfilled South Korea's "aspirations for democratization."
But for Asia and the United States, perhaps most important has been his paramount role in isolating North Korea, a three-year diplomatic campaign that has left one of the world's most menacing powers bereft of its cold-war allies and on the defensive about a nuclear-weapons project that ranks among the biggest threats in Asia.
Yet in Seoul, only 35 miles from the mines and tank traps of the demilitarized zone that divides Korea, South Koreans are hardly celebrating. 
As President Roh (pronounced NO) leaves office, the former general who was once feared as a military strongman in a business suit is now often criticized for going soft, signing empty agreements with the North rather than speeding its collapse.
 
The Generation Gap
A rising generation of educated young South Koreans, with no memory of families fleeing across the border, have begun to question whether their parents' preoccupation with reunification is even worth the price. 
Mindful of Germany's experience, they fear that unification could nearly bankrupt the South, derailing the nation just as it begins to focus on the cold realities of competing with Japan and China.
How Mr. Roh's successor, who is to be elected on Friday, manages relations with North Korea may well determine when and how peacefully the cold war ends in Asia. 
For all their new-found prosperity and democratic values, South Koreans are acutely aware that for most of the last century, their peninsula has served as a battleground for far larger powers maneuvering for strategic advantage -- first Japan, then the Soviet Union, China and the United States.
If the Koreas reunify peacefully, the nation could become a regional powerhouse of 70 million people. 
If relations between North and South collapse totally -- and many American military officials and diplomats fear they easily could -- that could rekindle the first battle the United Nations ever tried to settle with force.
 
Question for Clinton
"North Korea could explode or implode," said Gen. Robert W. RisCassi, the commander of the 40,000 United States troops who remain here. 
As the Stalinist Government of Kim Il Sung is driven further into a corner, its economy shrinking and its people running short of food, General RisCassi contends, "it is a debatable matter" whether the country will change peacefully or lash out as it did once before.
That question, endlessly debated these days in Washington and Seoul, is at the heart of the question of how many American troops the Clinton Administration will decide to keep here, and for how long. 
On the streets, where radical students, nationalists and political opposition leaders once demanded an American pullout, all three candidates for President of South Korea are now urging the United States to stay.
"It's true that America's presence here has sometimes hurt our standing in the international community and hurt the pride of the people of South Korea," said Lee Chul, a former student leader who is now a top official of the opposition party headed by Kim Dae Jung, a leading contender in the presidential race. 
"But when you look at the growing military power of Japan and other countries, it is important to have balance. 
If America pulled out, it would be very destabilizing."
The other candidates for President are Chung Ju Yung, the founder of the Hyundai manufacturing comglomerate, and Kim Young Sam, of the Democratic Liberal Party.
 
Finding Allies in East Europe
When Mr. Roh took office in early 1988, the North and the South were locked in the same standoff they had been in since an armistice was signed in July 1953, and foreign policy was low on the national agenda.
But a year after he took office, Koreans watched on television as the Berlin wall fell, seeing it all through the prism of the DMZ.
"There was a wistful period for a while," Donald P. Gregg, the United States Ambassador, said recently. 
"Everyone thought it could happen as quickly as it did in Germany. 
Then they watched, and added up the costs, and that was sobering."
President Roh, by his own account, seized the moment.
Instead of surrounding himself with his old military advisers, he gathered academics and foreign policy specialists advocating a vast change in South Korea's strategy.
Working quietly, he began to court several Eastern European nations and then the former Soviet Union, eventually welcoming Mikhail S. Gorbachev to a country where Russians had been barred. 
In return he offered Russia $3 billion in aid, a figure North Korea angrily denounced as a huge payoff.
 
Melting the Ice
But the effects were clear: After nearly two decades of silence, the Prime Ministers from North and South began to meet regularly, though the talks always seemed on the verge of foundering, with both sides often shouting accusations at each other.
Mr. Roh, following a path charted largely by his national security adviser, Kim Chong Hwi, began to dangle the investment carrot in front of the North, whose economy is a tenth the size of South Korea's. 
Eventually he even allowed South Korean business leaders to travel North to talk about potential factories.
A year ago this week, the two sides finally struck what seemed like a historic accord on "Reconciliation, Nonaggression and Exchanges and Cooperation."
It fell short of a peace treaty, but it seemed bound to break down the isolation, calling for a military hot line, regular exchanges of news, even telephone, mail and rail service between nations and families that had been totally cut off from one another.
 
Just a Piece of Paper
So far, though, no major provisions have been put into effect. 
To Mr. Roh's critics, the agreement was an empty gesture that allowed North Korea the appearance of compromise while still building its bomb.
"In the past year, Roh's Government was in far too much haste to put together an agreement," said Cha Young Koo, the director of the security policy division of the Government-financed Korea Institute for Defense Analysis. 
Mr. Cha attributes the agreements to "personal ambition" on the part of those surrounding President Roh. 
"They pressured to make something happen in the hope that the North would change," he said.
Government officials defend their approach, saying there is evidence the "pragmatists" are in the ascendency in the North. 
Last week North Korea dismissed the Prime Minister who led the talks -- some speculate because he was moving too slowly -- and promoted several officials who have talked about copying China's combination of limited economic freedom and strict political control.
 
Pleas for Patience
"It takes time," said Lim Dong Won, the vice minister of National Unification Board in Seoul and a key figure in the talks. 
"North Korea is not so weak that it will collapse suddenly. 
North Korean people have been poor for so many years that they are accustomed to it. 
They can eat one meal a day and not be tempted to revolt. 
You can't use a Western yardstick of progress. 
You have to use a North Korean yardstick."
Most United States officials seem to agree: A recent Defense Intelligency Agency report said, "This measured approach may hold more promise than more publicized attempts to twist the economic levers ever more tightly against Pyongyang."
"They are moving away from isolation," President Roh said in a recent interview. 
"There are a number of indications they are opening their doors."
Asked whether it would last, he paused. 
"The fact is that Kim Il Sung is the decision maker in North Korea and the only decision maker," he said.
But to many South Koreans, Mr. Roh is fighting the last war.
"My kids, they don't know where North Korea is," said Park Yung Chul, a professor at Korea University and one of the millions who left family in the North when they fled as war approached in 1950. 
"When pictures of life in North Korea come on the television, they flip the channel. 
They focus on Japan -- they read Japanese comics and watch Japanese movies."
Mr. Park, a member of a Government advisory board on unification, says he is coming to agree that South Korea should focus its attention elsewhere. 
"We are wasting our time and energy," he said. 
"We should be building factories, exporting to the States. 
We have a lot other things to do."
In fact, polls and interviews suggest that South Koreans are unwilling to pay their share of the $200 billion to $400 billion that many private analysts say unification will cost. 
Government officials acknowledge that the younger generation shares little of its parents' interest in building a single nation.
"I know there is such a view, especially among young people in Seoul," said Chung Won Shik, who was Prime Minister until a few months ago and headed the South Korean delegation to the talks. 
"But unification is the goal and the fate of this nation. 
Our young people don't always see the agony of 10 million separated families."
 
Nervousness at the Pentagon
For the United States military in Asia, North Korea remains the region's biggest potential diaster.
The Pentagon's classified five-year "Planning Guidance" describes several situations in which North Korea could lash out, even without Chinese and Russian help. 
The paper warns that United States troops should be "prepared to fight in a nuclear environment" and face a ground force of 1.2 million soldiers. 
It estimates that it would take 106 days of intense combat to defeat Kim Il Sung's forces.
Nonetheless, all the momentum seems on the side of reducing the United States presence. 
Every year the South Korean forces take more responsibility for defending their homeland. 
The Bush Administration reduced the troops here by 7,000 -- more cuts are to come -- and removed tactical nuclear weapons. 
The latter was largely a gesture to the North because nuclear-armed submarines could come right up to the coast.
Increasingly, South Koreans acknowledge that a smaller conventional United States force would also serve the purpose. 
"We are well enough trained and armed now that you could probably withdraw all but a few regiments of ground troops," Mr. Cha said.
 
Then, There's the Bomb
What is likely to turn the debate for the new Administration are the continuing doubts about the North's nuclear program. 
Under tremendous pressure from Seoul, Washington and Tokyo, Pyongyang allowed in international inspectors. 
But in recent weeks officials here and in United States intelligence have suggested that new evidence has turned up hidden arms sites.
One senior Bush Adminstration official said last week that North Korea already had enough plutonium to build a crude nuclear weapon. 
The fear is that a nuclear-armed North would force Japan, Taiwan and the South to follow the same path, something each is capable of.
All this has helped fuel one of the periodic swings toward fear -- fear that the country that has bombed airliners and tried to kill the South Korean Cabinet would make one last lunge for survival.
"The events of the past several years have encouraged optimism," the American commander, General RisCassi, said recently. 
But, he added, "there is certainly an equal, if not stronger, case for pessimism."
 
