
South Korea's President, Roh Tae Woo, said on Tuesday that China's top leaders had endorsed his policy of persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear-weapons program in return for a promise of normal relations with the West and substantial economic assistance from Seoul.
This morning, the two countries issued a joint declaration, and the South Koreans indicated they had received the sort of public endorsement they wanted.
Korean officials had reported that China's head of state, Yang Shangkun, warned Mr. Roh in a meeting here on Monday that while his Government was eager to ease tensions on the Korean peninsula, it felt that too much pressure on the hard-line Communists in Pyongyang might be self-defeating.
On Tueday, President Roh met with two top Chinese officials -- Prime Minister Li Peng, and the head of the Communist Party, Jiang Zemin. 
Afterward, the South Korean leader was careful to say that "the preference is not to press but to persuade" North Korea to meet the terms of an earlier agreement allowing mutual inspections of nuclear sites.
Mr. Roh has insisted that until the North agrees to such inspections, relations cannot move forward.
A Chinese endorsement of the South Korean policy would be significant, since Beijing remains the last ally of Pyongyang and is believed to have more influence on the North Koreans than any other country.
 
Recent Establishment of Ties
Mr. Roh's landmark visit comes just a month after China and South Korea opened diplomatic relations, ending four decades of cold war hostility. 
Chinese troops joined North Korean forces in fighting the South Koreans and other American-led United Nations forces from 1950 to 1953. 
The war left the South devastated, and for more than a decade, mired in desperate poverty.
But on Tuesday, the South Korean President made it clear that his country was prepared to embrace China without looking back.
"No region in the world suffered more than the Korean peninsula due to the cold war," Mr. Roh said. 
"My visit at this time has put an end to the cold war between us and has opened a new era of reconciliation and cooperation."
He emphasized his country's economic achievements over the last quarter-century, hinting that the kind of affluence and success it now enjoys could be shared by the North if it takes the necessary steps toward building relations.
