
CHINA appears to be easing out of its worst economic slump in a dozen years, but Chinese and foreign economists say the recovery will be slow and painful and that there is no sign of any significant move toward a market economy.
Just a few months ago, there were some tentative hints that China might lift price controls and adopt other market-oriented changes.
But these days the central planners are again dominant, and drafts of the country's five-year plan that will take effect in January reportedly contain little in the way of a commitment to change.
"They talk about reform, but there are no specifics," said a Chinese economist. 
"It's a blank when it comes to reform."
Still, Chinese officials, in public at least, are emphasizing the good news: industrial production is rising again. 
At the beginning of this year, some diplomats and Chinese thought that the economy might continue to deteriorate and lead to large numbers of factory closures and new protests, but that risk seems to have receded.
"The economy is now taking a turn for the better, thereby promoting political and economic stabilityI," Zhang Zhongji, spokesman for the State Statistical Bureau, said at a news conference last week.
He noted that industrial output in September climbed 7.5 percent from the same period a year earlier -- the best performance since July 1989, a month after the army crackdown helped push the economy into a slump.
Mr. Zhang also noted other good economic news:
* A bumper harvest, including a record 420 million tons of grain, is expected this year.
* Inflation has been subdued, and the index of retail prices stood last month only 1 percent higher than a year earlier.
* China's foreign exchange reserves are rising because of a strong trade surplus, which totaled $4.9 billion in the first nine months of this year.
Yet some official reports acknowledge that the situation is still grim, and most ordinary Chinese apparently feel the same way.
Beijing workers say that in recent days they have been summoned to meetings in which officials have read to them a document announcing hefty price increases in coal, cooking gas, natural gas, electricity and other necessities.
The price of the ubiquitous cakes of coal that are used as fuel in Chinese homes all winter also soared, by 50 percent, the document discloses.
"Of course, we're unhappy," said a worker in his 20's. 
"But what are we to do?
The Government spent so much money on the Asian Games that they have to get it back somehow."
The price increases have invited some sarcastic comments at these worker meetings, but no strikes or other significant indications of rebelliousness have been reported.
THE Asian Games, a mini-Olympics, concluded successfully in Beijing early this month, and the authorities apparently felt that security was tight enough and the atmosphere calm enough that they could introduce the price increases -- which have not been disclosed in the news media -- without provoking unrest.
But diplomats here and Chinese economists say there is much more to the story. 
For most of this year, the increases in industrial output simply went into ever-higher mountains of inventories. 
The inventories continued to increase even last month, the diplomats and economists note, and they will impede the recovery that may now be under way.
Moreover, part of the reason for the industrial growth is a statistical fluke: China calculates each month's growth as a comparison of the same period one year earlier. 
Since the latter half of last year was severely affected by the slump, it is therefore easier to show growth now in comparison with that period.
Seasonally adjusted production figures, developed by Rock Creek Research Inc., an American consulting firm, also show China's industry generally improving since March of this year. 
But Rock Creek's figures underscore the problems that remain: its models suggest that industrial growth slipped badly in July and August of this year.
Likewise, inflation is subdued now, but the Government has sharply eased credit this year -- $20.4 billion in additional loans in the first eight months of 1990 -- to stimulate the economy. 
Government payments to farmers for the grain harvest in coming months will also expand the money supply and perhaps lead to inflationary pressures, after a lag of six months or more.
"There'll just be more inflation down the road, and we'll be back to the cycle of boom and bust," said a Chinese economist.
One of the main reasons for the economic slowdown was that consumers simply stopped buying goods, apparently in part because of the turmoil in the capital and uncertainties about the future.
Refrigerators, televisions and electric fans piled up at stores around the nation, and some store managers resorted to desperate measures to clear their stocks: they promised to refund the sale price in full, after five years. 
That brought in some cash, but no one knows the extent of this liability or how it will be paid off.
NOW retail sales are gradually picking up again, but companies that make household appliances are still in desperate shape.
In the first three quarters of 1990, production of washing machines was only 69 percent of the level in the same period of 1989, and output of refrigerators was at 64 percent of the level of 1989.
What pains many economists -- Chinese as well as foreigners -- is that the Government has not made use of the slowdown to remove price controls and introduce a restructuring. 
Freeing prices might have been accomplished relatively easily earlier this year, when inflation was subdued, but will be much more difficult as the economy picks up.
Moreover, the economic purpose of a recession, to weed out inefficient companies, is neglected in China because the state always protects companies from bankruptcy.
"There hasn't been any fundamental structural change accompanying this recession," said a Western economist in Beijing. 
"The fundamental problems are still here. 
I don't believe state enterprises are one iota more efficient now than they were two years ago."
Indeed, they may well be less efficient. 
The state-owned sector of the economy is a disaster area: one-third of state-owned companies are losing money, and the total losses in the first three quarters of this year were double the total losses in the same period last year.
WITH state enterprises on the ropes, the recovery is coming from the sectors that have been most pummeled by the central planners over the last year, but that have still managed to maintain a measure of vitality.
Of the 7.5 percent industrial growth in September, for example, the state sector saw growth of only 3 percent, while rural collective enterprises grew at a rate of 9.4 percent, and the tiny sector that includes private businesses and joint ventures soared 57.7 percent.
"There are all these conflicting strains in the economy, in terms of regions and in terms of types of ownership," said a Western diplomat. 
The diplomat noted that growth was strongest in the coastal areas of China that already are richer than the interior.
Many economists would be more optimistic if they saw signs that the Government was embracing proposals for structural change. 
But instead the Government apparently intends to postpone any major changes for at least a year or two.
The only changes that apparently have been agreed upon involve modifications in the contract system that governs most Chinese enterprises.
Chinese and foreign economists say the leadership has agreed that new contracts will include a more systematic method of taxation in which enterprises' taxes will be paid as a proportion of revenues. 
The taxes will also be the companies' first obligation.
A second change is that payments of principal on certain loans will no longer be deductible from the companies' taxes.
These are minor adjustments compared with the sweeping economic changes that many foreign economists recommend and that some Chinese officials have been lobbying for in recent months.
 
 
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RISK
ONE of the principal political risks for the Chinese Government is rising unemployment, in part because it is the employer that has prime responsibility for monitoring and controlling workers. 
Unemployment not only distresses workers, but it also makes it easier for them to act with impunity.
"The unemployment situation is very grave," Economic Reference News, an official newspaper, reported last month. 
It said the unemployment rate has risen to 4.4 percent, from 2.5 percent, "greatly surpassing the warning level of 3 percent."
In China, however, statistics are often at odds. 
Zhang Zhongji, spokesman for the State Statistical Bureau, said the unemployment rate was unchanged, at 2.6 percent.
In any case, these figures do not include large numbers of young people who are officially "awaiting assignment."
In the next five years some 92 million people are expected to enter the ranks of the labor force, and the Government will be hard put to provide jobs.
Perhaps as a result, the leadership has already stopped criticizing private and collective enterprises and is now hailing them and the "free markets" where private traders sell their goods.
"The leaders know that they can't solve the employment problem through the state sector or the agricultural sector," said a Western economist in Beijing.
