
In the evening, after folks here have emptied their rice bowls and put down their chopsticks, the criminal instincts overwhelm the most unlikely people -- high-school students, white-haired old women, even longtime Communist Party members. 
As if by compulsion, someone locks the door and they prepare for an evening of law-breaking.
It is mah-jongg time.
The Communist Party has tackled tough assignments before, like the 1949 Revolution. 
But these days, the leadership of Shanghai, China's largest city, has set itself a truly daunting task: to eradicate mah-jongg, the game that is a national craze.
The crackdown conducted over the last few weeks has been about as effective as a campaign against office football pools would be in the United States.
 
Nothing Better to Do
The campaign seems to illustrate two fundamental truths about Communist Party rule in China.
The first is that the party seems so remote these days that it has an unerring talent for annoying ordinary people without really meaning to. 
Probably more Chinese peasants care passionately about mah-jongg than about freedom of the press, and the result is that even those unconcerned about persecution of dissidents profess irritation at endless political study sessions, at requirements that they "volunteer" to buy Government bonds, and at denunciations of mah-jongg when there are no better entertainment options.
The second fundamental truth is that the party has lost much of its ability either to inspire or to terrorize, and so its edicts are frequently ignored.
"It's no use to try to regulate mah-jongg," said a young woman here. 
"Nobody pays attention to the campaign. 
The Government babbles, and the people play."
"The Government has no authority anymore," she said, pointing to a group of bicyclists careering across the street through traffic. 
"Look at those people -- that's illegal too. 
But the law doesn't matter."
 
Gambling Is the Target
The authorities are trying to stamp out mah-jongg because play is usually accompanied by gambling. 
Most mah-jongg enthusiasts bet only small amounts, often the equivalent of just a few cents. 
But some people become hard-core gamblers and fritter away all their savings, occasionally even staking their wives on a game.
Consequently, many Chinese regard mah-jongg as a dangerous vice -- but an exceedingly fun one -- with much the same ambivalence that some Americans might feel for alcohol or blackjack or double helpings of chocolate cake.
The United States and other countries also control gambling, and sometimes even office pools, but Shanghai is one of the few places that tries to change social habits and ban small-scale betting in the privacy of the home. 
In Hong Kong, in contrast, mah-jongg is legal at social gatherings or in the abundant parlors that have licenses from the Government, which has sought to keep the game out of the hands of Chinese gangs.
The Taiwan authorities allow social mah-jongg betting in the home, while Macao offers all kinds of gambling, including casinos, and consequently attracts large-stakes gamblers from all over Asia.
One reason for the authorities' zeal in Shanghai may be that privacy is not a well-known concept in China. 
Even the Chinese expression for privacy is usually used in a pejorative sense to hint at selfishness or secretiveness. 
Still, even if they don't always value privacy, many ordinary Chinese treasure their small-stakes mah-jongg.
"There's no way you can succeed in banning mah-jongg," said a college-educated woman who supports the Government. 
"You might as well try to ban knives because they can sometimes be used to kill people."
Mah-jongg, which had its origins in the Song Dynasty more than 700 years ago, is played with 144 domino-like tiles with names like West Wind and Red Dragon. 
In the 1920's the game became popular in the United States and Britain, and Chinese who saw the movie "Driving Miss Daisy" were astonished to see a scene in the film in which Americans were playing mah-jongg.
Whether in America or China -- or in other countries like Japan and Korea where mah-jongg is popular -- the rules are essentially the same. 
Four people normally play at a time, each player keeping a "hand" of tiles and leaving the rest in the center of the table. 
The players take turns putting some down and taking up others, with the aim of building up a set of matching tiles. 
The rules are something like gin rummy, but played with tiles rather than cards.
 
Shanghai Gets Tough
China banned mah-jongg during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, but there was a resurgence in the 1980's and now it is normally tolerated, even though it is frowned on. 
Mah-jongg sets are available in stores -- Beijing Department Store has 10 kinds on sale, at prices ranging from $5 to $156 -- but mah-jongg gambling dens are strictly banned and the game is normally forbidden in the workplace and in schools.
While in most of China the Government does not bother people who play in their homes, Shanghai for some reason has been particularly determined to uproot mah-jongg.
"Playing mah-jongg is an ugly social trend," Wenhui Bao, a Shanghai newspaper, declared several months ago. 
"People wallow in it so that it saps the energy and seriously affects production, work and studies. 
Gambling over mah-jongg causes crime and considerable social harm. 
We must absolutely eradicate this mah-jongg craze."
In the latest campaign against mah-jongg, which began around the turn of the year and was timed for the Chinese New Year celebrations, when people have time on their hands and are prone to gamble, the authorities created 5,000 "anti-gambling squads" to prowl the suburbs.
In addition, 270,000 rural Communist Party members in Shanghai were summoned to meetings to watch as 4,300 party members publicly gave self-criticisms and renounced mah-jongg.
One county head in the Shanghai suburbs called a mass meeting and started a bonfire of 400 mah-jongg sets. 
Shops in the outskirts were told to stop selling mah-jongg games, according to official newspaper reports. 
But in central Shanghai, stores continue to sell mah-jongg sets and the police have been restrained.
"If you're just playing at home with the old lady and the kids, then the cops will just give you a warning," said a middle-aged mah-jongg enthusiast.
"But if you've got some friends over, then they'll probably figure you're gambling and confiscate all the money in your pockets."
Shanghai residents said that while the police might enter a house if they heard the sound of tiles from the street, most police officers were too lazy to bother and would hurry on. 
But if a neighbor reported that mah-jongg was being played, the police would almost certainly raid a private house, they said.
Many mah-jongg players said that the real problem in Shanghai was that there was nothing else to do in leisure time that was fun and affordable.
"We need more ways of having fun," said Zhang Weiguo, a Shanghai journalist and dissident. 
"On TV we see these things from the West -- skiing, water slides, hang gliding and so on -- but the only thing that people here have to turn to is traditional old mah-jongg. 
So it's gotten to the point that out of 1.1 billion Chinese, maybe 900 million play. 
Only a melon-head doesn't play."
"The problem is the Communist Party management," Mr. Zhang said. 
"It's true that more people are playing mah-jongg and that this is hurting the economy and harming the society. 
But the reason people play is that they don't have alternatives."
