
Yu Muqiao must stride over the gaping crack in the wooden floor of her two-room house, scurry down a narrow pitch-dark hallway cluttered with wet clothes and stray beams, then down a flight of broken steps and around the corner 20 yards to get to the newly built public toilet that her family uses.
Her son must pull out a thin mattress every night to sleep on the kitchen floor. 
Still, Mrs. Yu, the 62-year-old matriarch who lives with her household of seven in this cubbyhole, pays a monthly rent of just $1.22. 
That sum is split among six salaried adults, and after the family pools its rent subsidies, it takes in more money than it pays out for the home.
Mrs. Yu's experience -- paying virtually nothing for miserable housing -- is duplicated in cities throughout China. 
But now the Government is moving to revolutionize housing allocation, and with Shanghai in the lead, it is starting a national housing program that is expected to be one of China's most important economic and social initiatives of the 1990's.
The housing privatization program -- nobody uses the word privatization, but that is a major component of the plan -- is an indication that China is ready to take important steps to liberalize its economy and move toward the market. 
And for ordinary people in the cities, many of whom are aghast at the idea of rents rising to market levels, the housing plan will perhaps affect daily lives as much as any other single step since the end of the Maoist era 15 years ago.
"If we don't change the way we allocate housing and people continue to pay so little money for housing, this would simply be unacceptable," said Wu Zhengtong, a researcher at the Shanghai Municipal Housing Authority. 
"We must reform the housing system because it affects the stabilityI of society."
China has talked boldly before about housing reform, only to back down in the face of ideological resistance, public apprehension and the magnitude of the task. 
In the late 1980's, the authorities vigorously promoted housing reform and conducted experiments in several cities. 
But those programs withered with the rise of the hard-liners in 1989, and only now is China returning to the course of home privatization.
This year, the Government agreed to conduct the reform nationwide. 
Some cities, including Shanghai, are focusing on raising rents to market levels. 
Others, particularly in the south, are promoting home ownership. 
For instance, in the city of Jiangmen, in the southern province of Guangdong, 76 percent of the citizens live in apartments they own.
"We'd love to buy a house," said Tang Yinmei, a 63-year-old retiree who lives with her husband and her son's family in a one-room house with a loft in the Old City of Shanghai. 
"But my husband's work unit has no houses available."
While her family's housing subsidies more than compensate for the $1.07 monthly rent, the apartment is tiny and there is no running water. 
A nightsoil collector comes to their house every day to empty the chamber pots.
 
Employers Provide Homes
Most Chinese live in homes provided by their employers. 
Because rents are so low, companies have little incentive to build, and there is a chronic shortage of housing. 
In addition, few repairs are made, and workers are tied to their employers because changing jobs would mean losing a home and having to wait years to get a new one.
At present, rents typically amount to less than two percent of an average family's income. 
The real burden, of course, is borne by the employer or Government, which built the house and maintains it for the family.
Each year, the Government spends about $7.5 billion on building new homes and repairing old ones, according to a Chinese news report.
In Shanghai, rents were doubled in May. 
But the Government was clearly concerned that this would upset workers, and so it gave out subsidies that nearly covered the increase in rent. 
The authorities hope to reduce the subsidies as rents rise. 
Many employers in Beijing also have begun to tell their workers that rents will rise, beginning next year.
Still, a rational housing market is a long way off. 
In Shanghai, the Government expects to take 10 to 15 years before it raises rents to the level of the cost of the housing. 
Even at this price, housing would still come to only about 10 percent of the average worker's pay, according to Mr. Wu at the Shanghai Housing Authority. 
The average urban worker earns about $30 a month.
In May, Shanghai also announced that one-fifth of new homes available would be offered for sale at subsidized prices, with the purchaser gaining the right to resell after five years. 
Buyers will be able to buy only one house at the subsidized price.
One stumbling block in the past has been that China was loath to permit the ownership of private property, which it saw as a violation of a fundamental tenet of socialism. 
But a bit of fancy semantics has made the buying and selling of houses more acceptable to the leadership.
"Privatization or marketization, it's the same thing," a Chinese reporter said. 
"But the first word grates on the ears of the leaders."
As a result, the preferred term for the housing program is shangpinhua, or "creating a commodity market."
For Shanghai workers, the new housing policy has meant not only higher rents, but also a five percent deduction from their monthly wages to go to a housing fund. 
The amount is matched by the employer and can be used when the worker decides to purchase a house. 
In the meantime, the money from the fund is used to build new houses for needy people.
A small housing market for individuals is developing, and the prices are rising rapidly. 
Thus, if one can buy a house at the special Government rate -- about one-fifth the market price -- then the purchase option becomes more attractive.
One problem is that unless the Government dares to raise rents sharply, incurring public wrath, most people will prefer to continue renting rather than to pay large sums of money and obtain ownership -- which perhaps will mean little difference except the obligation to repair the building.
"There aren't enough homes sold at the cheap prices, and the market-priced houses are unaffordable," said a Chinese economic reporter. 
"Besides, if you buy a house on the market, who will do home repairs for you?
China doesn't have any private electricians or repairmen."
