
The largest population in the world is proof that it must go on, but sex in China is still laced in secrecy more than sensuousness.
Only recently have social scientists shed light on what happens in the Chinese bedroom -- or, given the acute housing shortage, the living rooms, kitchens, closets and fields to which couples must sometimes resort.
The new research suggests that many young Chinese are enjoying their own sexual revolution. 
That tends to be confirmed by the incidence of venereal disease, which by some official accounts is rising by about 70 percent a year.
A mammoth new survey, already described as the Chinese "Kinsey Report," has led the way in charting the changing mores of the post-Mao period. 
The study, which is expected to be published as a book at the end of this year, profiles a society that remains fundamentally prudish, yet one that is becoming more free-wheeling at the youthful and intellectual fringes.
 
Interviews With 23,000 People
To be sure, "free-wheeling" in a Chinese context may mean little more than removing one's clothes. 
The new survey, which was based on interviews with 23,000 people of all ages and backgrounds, in 15 provinces, found that 60 percent of those surveyed "often or sometimes" were naked during sex. 
The researchers thought that was surprisingly high.
"This is quite different from how it used to be, suggesting that with the reform and opening policies, people are more liberal about sex," Liu Dalin, a Shanghai sociologist who is the architect of the survey, wrote in a recent unpublished essay.
Foreplay is often rudimentary or nonexistent, the survey found, perhaps because many couples keep as much clothing on as possible. 
Among peasants, 34 percent engaged in less than one minute of foreplay.
 
'How to Conceive a Son'
"Older people don't understand the idea of foreplay," Professor Liu, one of China's best-known researchers into the erotic, said in an interview.
Mr. Liu has written some 41 books, including many recent best sellers about sexuality. 
But Chinese publications are very tame by Western standards, and the priority of many peasants seems to be less along the lines of "The Joy of Sex" than something like "How to Conceive a Son."
Partly because of the hasty and purposeful manner with which sex is apparently conducted, more than a third of women reported pain during intercourse. 
The survey did not ask about female orgasm, for fear that many respondents would not understand the concept, but only a third of urban women and a quarter of rural women said they "very often" felt pleasure during intercourse.
"We don't know how to estimate, but we think that female orgasm is very rare," Mr. Liu said. 
"One reason is that traditionally women are very modest and suffer from closed minds and pressure not to feel too much pleasure. 
Another reason is that husbands engage in little foreplay and lack the knowledge and skills to elicit orgasms in their wives."
Shanghai and some other cities now offer "School for Newlyweds": a special class in which new couples are given a basic introduction into sexuality and contraception. 
Giving satisfaction to the woman is among the topics now addressed.
While Mr. Liu's survey is one of the largest conducted anywhere in the world about sexual behavior, he acknowledges that there are flaws in it.
Perhaps the most important is that the sampling often has not been very scientific, and that rural respondents accounted for only one-quarter of the total -- even though they make up about three-quarters of the population. 
In addition, those rural areas chosen for the surveys were somewhat more prosperous and educated than the Chinese countryside as a whole. 
As a result, China as a whole may be even less sensuous in its sex life than the report would suggest.
China has no Judeo-Christian tradition associating illicit sex with sin, and rather seems to regard sex less as a matter of morality than as an issue of propriety and decency. 
In ancient times, China was much more open about sex, and one of the great works of ancient literature, "The Golden Lotus," brims with explicit descriptions of the under-the-covers activities in a wealthy household. 
China recently published the first unexpurgated version of "The Golden Lotus" since the Communist revolution, but only scholars may buy it.
 
The Times Are Changing
"We never used to talk about sex, but there has been a dramatic change," said Hu Jinhua, the editor of Shanghai Public Health News, a daily newspaper. 
"In the 1980's sex education was even introduced in the schools, with Shanghai in the lead. 
The change has been very rapid."
The shift in attitudes is most pronounced among young Chinese, especially university students. 
More than 78 percent of the students questioned in Professor Liu's survey approved of premarital sex, and 90 percent of the students said China's sex education policies are too conservative.
Fewer than 11 percent of the students said they had any sexual experience, but this may reflect opportunities more than appetites. 
University students are often housed six or eight to a room, so arranging a rendezvous is difficult, and in any case students risk expulsion if they are caught sleeping together.
"We've been pretty much Westernized," said a woman who graduated recently from one of Shanghai's best universities. 
"Sex was regarded as no big deal, and while the school authorities discouraged us from falling in love, most of us had boyfriends."
