
In his lifetime, Qin Benli has been buffeted by a Nationalist purge, the Communist revolution, the anti-rightist campaign, the Cultural Revolution, the campaign against spiritual pollution and the campaign against bourgeois liberalism.
Now the deceptively frail-looking editor in the gray Mao jacket finds himself at the center of China's latest social storm.
The Communist Party's attacks on his plucky, Shanghai-based weekly newspaper, The World Economic Herald, more than any other event, have enlarged the Chinese student uprising to include a substantial segment of the country's journalists, and have enshrined the notion of press freedom on the list of popular demands confronting the Chinese leadership.
Mr. Qin, who is in his 70's, picked his way through the chanting crowds on Huaihai Zhong Street today and revisited his office for the first time since April 26, when the Shanghai party organization suspended him and put his newspaper under the censorial supervision of a five-member ''rectification committee.''
Roses and Handshakes
He shyly accepted roses and elated handshakes from his staff, and vowed that his independent weekly would resist the censors in its battle to publish what it wants - which is a broad range of interesting ideas pressing the limits of what is officially acceptable.
''This is a special opportunity,'' he said. 
''We are just one little newspaper, but if we win we can contribute to a free press in China.''
Although he has not been reinstated, Mr. Qin's unflappable optimism does not, just now, seem as outlandish as it might have a few weeks ago.
Like the Chinese leaders in Beijing, the Communist authorities here in China's largest city are showing signs of bending under the pressure of a mounting public siege.
Today, demonstrators in the scores of thousands - a local journalist claimed several hundred thousand -clogged the promenade along the Huangpo River where Western financiers held sway in colonial times; sat in the streets and trees around city hall; occupied Peoples' Square, and marched in small battalions through the narrow streets.
 
Gorbachev Skirts Protests
Their banners and chants called for greater democracy, the removal of the local Communist Party leader, the complete retirement of the country's 84-year-old paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, a clean-up of official corruption and, invariably, an end to the official hounding of Mr. Qin's newspaper.
The wave of protests stemming from a student hunger strike in Beijing reached here on Tuesday, and today the first few clusters of blue-collar workers were evident among the throngs of students and intellectuals.
Their marching eclipsed a visit by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, who skirted the scenes of protest to meet local officials and tour an elevator factory before returning home to Moscow from four days of overshadowed Soviet-Chinese summitry.
''We welcome Gorbachev, but our parade has nothing to do with him,'' said Wu Qangsui, deputy editor of the evening newspaper Xinmin Wanbao and a member of the Chinese Parliament, who marched with a column of journalists past city hall this morning.
''We want to print the truth, but because the way is not smooth for us we are out here today,'' he added. 
''The World Economic Herald is an example for us.''
 
Paper Was Disciplined Before
The Herald, housed in a scuffed and flourescent-lit former French missionary school that now belongs to the Academy of Social Sciences, has had periodic brushes with the authorities since Mr. Qin founded it in 1980. 
Officially tolerated but not affiliated with the party or Government, his paper has a modest circulation, by Chinese standards, of 300,000, mostly among intellectuals.
Twice before the party has imposed short-lived rectification committees after the newspaper's pages scandalized the official ideologists.
''This is the third time we've been rectified, so I'm sort of used to it now,'' Mr. Qin said in an interview today. 
The immediate cause of the latest and harshest crackdown was apparently the Herald's six pages of reminisence and discussion after the death April 15 of Hu Yaobang, the ousted Communist Party leader who is revered by protesters and intellectuals as a strong proponent of political liberalization. 
Mr. Hu's death was also the spark for the initial outbreak of student unrest in mid-April.
Employees at the paper say another major factor leading to the crackdown was its publication in January of an article by a Beijing scholar criticizing the Communist Party.
 
Censors Review All Material
The team of censors, made up of three local Communist Party functionaries, a retired editor and a journalism teacher, insists on reviewing all material before it goes to press. 
The second issue presented for its inspection was deemed unacceptable because it included a letter from the All-China World Economic Association defending the Herald.
Mr. Qin's deputies agreed to cut the offending material, but for the following issue, due out last week, they assembled two full pages of similar letters. 
The censors balked, and this time the Herald staff held its ground.
''If they want the Herald to publish at all, this time they must give in,'' said Chen Hansheng the international news editor.
One Herald reporter said the party had invited Mr. Qin to return to his post, but the editor has refused to do so unless the local party leader, Jiang Zemin, admits he was in the wrong.
 
Journalists Offer Support
Tacked to the newsroom wall are supportive letters, telegrams and petitions signed by journalists at most of the other major Chinese newspapers, including those of the local Communist Party.
Mr. Qin, who has spent much of his career in disgrace and a few years of it in a labor camp, hardly seems a firebrand. 
An underground Communist during the 1949 revolution, he retains his party membership and loyalty.
He defends Mr. Deng, a target of the students' protest, saying, ''China still needs him for direction.''
And he does not approve of the students' hunger strike, a tactic that has sent many to the hospital.
But he supports what the students stand for, and believes that their protest signals something healthy ahead for China - perhaps including a Chinese version of glasnost.
