
Below the reconstructed Long Bar, where the foreign taipans, or big bosses, used to sip their pink gins and chat about the women with gowns slit up the leg past the waist, or about rogues of the underworld like Big-Eared Du and Pockmarked Huang, a symbol of the new Shanghai is taking shape.
It is a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant, the first here in China's biggest city, and it will cheer up the ground floor of the former Shanghai Club, now known as the Dongfeng Hotel. 
The bustle of the workers completing the interior of the restaurant, under Colonel Sanders' frozen grin, reflects the kind of foreign influence that Shanghai is seeking these days.
The restaurant is a world apart from the establishments that characterized this city before the 1949 Communist Revolution: the dim bars and brothels along Blood Alley, the opium dens and movie houses where sozzled sailors recuperated from their voyages, with limousines parked outside next to sleeping rickshaw boys and dying beggars.
The legacy of past glitter and fame - as well as notoriety - are engraved on Shanghai's psyche, and today no city in China is more self-consciously sophisticated, or more aware of the last four decades of stagnation. 
Only in the last few years, residents say, have they felt some hope that the city can succeed in a vigorous campaign to redevelop its economy and restore its relations with the rest of the world.
 
'Never Recover Its Glory'
This strenuous effort to recover a measure of its past greatness, and to keep workers satisfied so that they do not provoke political unrest, is Shanghai's paramount mission, but these days it is running head on into the central Government's economic and political retrenchment. 
Vitally needed foreign loans and investment have slowed since the crackdown in Beijing in June, and industrial growth declined in September for the first time on record.
''Shanghai's golden age was in the 1930's, and it will never come back,'' a young teacher said as he stood in front of the old Shanghai Club. 
''This is the most fashionable city in China, the center of the country, but it will never recover its glory.''
The most worrying problems for the moment are economic, particularly falling industrial output. 
In September, industrial production was 2.6 percent below the figure for August and 1.8 percent below the figure for one year earlier. 
The New People's Evening News, a Shanghai newspaper, reported in October that 72,000 workers had been laid off because of factory closings.
''You've got a situation that can't go on,'' said a Western diplomat here. 
''The problem of factories closing hasn't eased; it has gotten worse. 
And if it continues to get worse, the situation will look pretty grim.''
 
Austerity Policy a Factor
The immediate cause of the difficulties is primarily the austerity policy imposed by Beijing a year ago, and tightened further this summer. 
The retrenchment has hurt Shanghai, like most of the country, by squeezing credit and investment and by slowing retail sales.
The longer-range cause of the difficulties is the decade-long program of economic liberalization, which helped many parts of China but caused enormous dislocations in Shanghai, Western diplomats and economists say.
It used to be that other parts of China would produce raw materials, including silk, cotton and coal, that ran Shanghai's factories. 
But in recent years, other provinces have been allowed to set up their own factories, and they refuse to sell their raw materials to Shanghai.
Shanghai's former Mayor and party leader, Jiang Zemin, took over as national party leader in June, but there is no sign that he is showing favoritism toward the city. 
''It may help Shanghai a little bit to have him in Beijing,'' said a young Chinese worker. 
''But now he has his own concerns to think about, rather than Shanghai's.''
For all the economic difficulties, diplomats say that life in Shanghai is not so tense or repressive as in Beijing. 
A Chinese dissident here estimates that fewer than 100 intellectuals have been detained in Shanghai since the nationwide crackdown on the student-led democracy movement began in June, and says that almost all were seized on orders from Beijing rather than on the initiative of the local authorities.
 
Newspaper Is Suspended
The best-known institutional casualty is the World Economic Herald, a weekly newspaper that was circulated nationally and won a reputation as the best and boldest newspaper in China. 
It was suspended in May and will be formally disbanded at the end of this year, Chinese here say.
Those Chinese say the newspaper's editor, Qin Benli, has been ordered to stay at home and avoid contact with foreigners or with several of his former colleagues. 
Four other staff members have been arrested.
Chinese officials and foreign diplomats who have recently been in both cities say the resentment and bitterness in Shanghai do not run so deep as in Beijing. 
They say the economic challenges may have had the advantage of protecting Shanghai to some extent from purges and political repression. 
Partly for fear of making the economic crisis worse, and partly because Shanghai's Mayor and party leader, Zhu Rongji, is an advocate of political and economic change, Shanghai has been relatively gentle in dealing with protesters.
''Zhu's job is to keep state enterprises producing,'' the Western diplomat said. 
''It is not to lock up dissidents.''
Shanghai sees its mission as the recovery of a measure of its former glory, but China's economic and political retrenchment and the continued closing of local factories has hampered the redevelopment of the city's economy. 
The No. 1 Department Store, above at right, is the most fashionable shop in what a resident says is still ''the most fashionable city in China.''
(The New York Times/Nicholas D. Kristof)
