
This drab, Dickensian city, where a statue of Mao presides over the snow-covered central square, is best known for its soot and industry.
Now, relying on an imagination that rivals Dickens's own, it has found a new product to earn it recognition: ideas about how to make China work.
No one knows quite why Shenyang has become a prime battlefront in the struggle to revitalize China's economy, but there is little doubt that this wintry city 400 miles northeast of Beijing has become a testing ground for the entire country.
''We are proud that we can contribute to our country's reform process,'' said Han Yaoxian, a city official who wrote the nation's first bankruptcy law - and then applied it to several companies that until then had cheerfully been losing money for years.
Shenyang was the first city in China to open a securities market, the first to float shares in a large state-owned company, the first to allow a company to go bankrupt, the first to propose selling stock to foreigners, the first to institute wide-scale job transfers and layoffs, and the only one to open an office in South Korea. 
#5.3 Million People In effect, this city of 5.3 million is pioneering the next big task for China's economic development: revitalizing the state-owned companies that produce more than two-thirds of the nation's output.
Guangdong Province in the south pioneered the system of special economic zones and joint ventures with foreign partners. 
Jiangsu Province pioneered the development of rural enterprises that have flourished in the last decade. 
And now the greatest challenge - to foster incentives in the country's heavy industrial base and inject dynamism in state-owned companies that dominate the economy -is being confronted in Shenyang.
''Shenyang is on the leading edge of reform in many different areas, in housing, foreign trade, stocks, management and development of the private sector,'' said Carl Eugene Dorris, the United States Consul General in Shenyang.
Part of the reason, Mr. Dorris said, is that Shenyang has some leaders who are unusually capable, and some factory managers who are unusually upset with the status quo. 
''These people have become real radicals,'' Mr. Dorris said about the factory managers. 
''They're tired of the dead hand of the state on their businesses.''
Some of Shenyang's experiments, such as the securities exchange and a proposal to sell stocks to foreigners, already have been copied in other cities. 
Others, such as large-scale sales of housing to private individuals, are scheduled to be carried out around the country before long. 
But it still is too early to know how successful the city will be in its most important experiments, those seeking to improve the efficiency of state-owned industries.
 
Opening Ties With Seoul
In the last few months, Shenyang's pioneering spirit has been most evident in its relations with South Korea. 
Officially, China recognizes only North Korea, not South Korea, and while Beijing sees immense opportunities for business with Seoul, officials are cautious about proceeding too openly for fear of offending North Korea.
Yet in August, the city of Shenyang opened an office in Seoul and sent a senior Deputy Mayor, Zhang Rongmao, to the ribbon cutting. 
This is the first Chinese office in South Korea, and it is not clear if Beijing was consulted. 
The central Government had designated a different area, Shandong Province in the east, to open the first office in Seoul and to lead the way in forging ties with South Korea, but those negotiations have dragged on and Shandong still has not exchanged offices with Seoul.
In a sign of the sensitivity of the issue, Shenyang's Foreign Affairs Office disclaims any knowledge of the Seoul office. 
While the city set up the office so that it formally does not represent the city of Shenyang but simply the ethnic Koreans who live in the area, it was a daring move - particularly since North Korea's only diplomatic mission in China outside Beijing is in Shenyang.
Liaoning Province, which encompasses Shenyang, has even set up a concern called the Bohai Company to specialize in trade with South Korea.
One man often credited for Shenyang's dynamism is Li Changchun, the 44-year-old Governor of Liaoning Province and former Mayor of Shenyang. 
Mr. Li, an electrical engineer and former factory manager who is the nation's youngest Governor, has a reputation for being unusually open to new ideas.
Perhaps Shenyang's most risky undertaking is its plan to shuffle 300,000 workers, 15 percent of the city's work force, out of their jobs. 
The plan is a direct attack on the ''iron rice bowl,'' the system in China of lifetime employment, where it is common for companies to have more workers than they know what to do with. 
Streamlining the work force will make industry more efficient, but it could spark unrest among workers who fear being laid off.
 
'Way of Increasing Production'
''Removing surplus workers is a way of increasing production,'' said Guan Weiguo, the executive director of the Economic Restructuring Commission in Shenyang.
While the experiments in Shenyang amount to undoing Mao's work, one of the few changes apparently not being contemplated is tearing down the statue of Mao in the center of the city.
''Mao was a great person, respected by people all over the world, so we couldn't tear down the statue,'' Mr. Guan said, carefully adding: ''Mao had many, many ideas. 
Some of them we can draw upon for reforms, and some of them we can ignore.''
