
Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union arrived here tonight, saying he was ''full of good expectations and great hopes'' for three days of discussions with China's top leaders.
The talks are expected to prepare for the first Chinese-Soviet summit meeting in 30 years.
The summit meeting between Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, and Deng Xiaoping, the senior Chinese leader, now seems all but certain, and plans for it are expected to be the principal topic of Mr. Shevardnadze's meetings. 
But other issues are also to be raised, including the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.
An Eastern-bloc diplomat said earlier that Mr. Shevardnadze would bring with him a team of experts on Cambodia for separate discussions with a team of Chinese officials. 
The talks on Cambodia are to focus on the method of international supervision of the Vietnamese withdrawal and of elections that would follow, the diplomat said.
''We hope to take a step forward in our discussions with our Chinese friends,'' Mr. Shevardnadze told reporters as he arrived here. 
He said in a statement issued on his arrival, ''We are convinced that the summit will open a new chapter in the history of our two neighboring countries.''
The dates of the summit meeting, which will formally end the 30-year Chinese-Soviet split, may be announced this week. 
If the dates have already been largely decided, they are a closely guarded secret - or, rather, various Chinese officials and diplomats mention so many dates that no one is sure who is right. 
But the meeting is expected to be set for no earlier than March and no later than June, and almost certainly will be in China.
Before leaving Moscow, Mr. Shevardnadze told the official press agency Tass that the prospects for Chinese-Soviet relations are ''great.''
He said the summit preparations would include the signing of agreements, discussions of principles to settle border disputes and cooperation to resolve regional conflicts. 
He did not indicate what agreements might be signed.
In addition, the Foreign Minister said topics during his visit to Beijing would include disarmament, Asian security issues and international cooperation to deal with problems of debt and the environment.
Mr. Shevardnadze is scheduled to meet with Mr. Deng, Prime Minister Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen. 
Mr. Deng is in Shanghai with his family, and so Mr. Shevardnadze is to fly there to meet with him.
Strains between the two countries' Communist parties existed before China's Communist revolution in 1949, and continued below the surface in the 1950's, when China and the Soviet Union were nominally close friends.
By 1959, Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader at the time, regarded China as unpredictable and perhaps dangerous, while Mao Zedong was fiercely critical of the Soviet reconciliation with the United States.
 
Deng's Warning in 1960
The rift opened in 1959, when the Soviet Union scrapped a defense agreement under which it was to give China technology relating to an atomic bomb. 
The split became inevitable a year later, when Moscow recalled the 1,390 Soviet specialists working in China. 
By 1969, relations had worsened to the point that the two countries fought brief skirmishes along their border.
Mr. Deng played a role in the split when he represented China at a conference in Moscow in late 1960 and warned that China might be obliged to lead a Communist movement separate from Moscow's. 
Mr. Deng is said to be less friendly toward the Soviet Union than some other leaders, but even he apparently believes that after 30 years it is time to repair relations.
Negotiations between the two countries began again in 1982, but progress was slow because of what China called the three obstacles to normalization: the Soviet military presence in Afghanistan, the Soviet troop concentration along China's border, and the occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam, an ally of the Soviet Union. 
Now each of those problems is on the way to being resolved.
