
AMERICAN visitors to London have always counted on finding and taking home the best in certain kinds of goods: china crafted according to centuries-old tradition, rain gear that will last a lifetime, wool suits tailored to fit royalty. 
They also know that here they will find cashmere clothing of exquisite quality and style.
Nearly all of the cashmere goods sold in London come from Scotland, home of Dawson International, the world's largest importer and processor of raw cashmere. 
Most of Dawson's - and the world's - supplies of raw cashmere, in turn, come from China, and the story of its passage from goat to garment reads like a chapter from an adventure-travel guide.
From the Chinese hinterlands, the rare wool may travel by yak, raft, sampan, even Chinese air force carrier, to the ship that ferries it to Dawson's factory in Bradford, England, where it is checked for quality, washed and dried, then checked again to insure that no long, coarse hairs remain. 
Next it travels to Dawson subsidiary Todd & Duncan in Kinross, Scotland, where it is dyed and spun, then distributed to knitwear manufacturers. 
Finally it arrives in London, where it receives a welcome worthy of any traveler back from an exotic journey.
Cashmere has always been a luxury item. 
During the first half of this millennium in Kashmir (from which cashmere gets its name), it was woven into shawls and scarfs that were bought by merchant traders for the courts of the Roman emperors. 
The shawls, and the wool itself, were introduced to the French fashion world in the 19th century by Empress Eugenie. 
The basic reason for the high cost is that one Kashmir sheep yields only a few ounces to a pound of down fibers in a year, and only a fraction of this raw material ends up as cashmere threads after an elaborate refining process.
Over the past 18 months this cost has risen by an estimated 60 percent, says Michael Gilbert, sales and marketing manager at Todd & Duncan. 
The culprit here, he adds, is the sort of economic, if not social, perestroika that China has undergone in the past few years. 
Now China's cashmere trade, once under total government control, is being run in part by individual entrepreneurs who have bid up prices.
Though inexpensive cashmere clothing can be found, it may not be much of a bargain. 
If you find coarse and discolored hairs in the wool, it was not subjected to the same rigorous sorting and cleaning procedures as fine cashmere. 
Also, cheap cashmere clothing is often knitted with a slacker and longer stitch, causing it to wear quickly. 
Finely knit cashmere, on the other hand, should improve and soften with washing and age.
Cashmere garments come in single-ply, knitted with single strands of cashmere, or multi-ply, knitted with two or more strands twisted together. 
Contrary to a popular belief, ply does not determine quality, merely weight; indeed, faults are harder to hide in single-ply garments.
Intarsia sweaters, those with decorative images and patterns, tend to cost a bit more than unadorned sweaters, and hand-intarsia sweaters a bit more than machine-laid intarsias. 
The designs of hand-intarsias are often sharper, more precise, as the different colors are laid in by hand. 
The more complicated a pattern is and the more colors it has, the more likely it is that it is a hand-intarsia.
In London, cashmere clothing and accessories are sold at department stores like Fortnum & Mason in Piccadilly and Harrods in Knightsbridge. 
Many other shops specialize in cashmere, most stocking well-known brands - such as Scotland's Pringle, Peter Scott and Ballantyne - as well as their own.
THE Scotch House's main store in Knightsbridge is a common first stop for Americans in search of cashmere. 
Popular with the tartan trousers and button-down-collar crowd, the Scotch House stocks classics in unadventurous but popular colors like wine, light gray, navy, red, camel and pastel pink and blue, as well as a few updated styles.
Probably the trendiest of the Scotch House's offerings are found in the second-floor women's cashmere department. 
A red mock-turtleneck mini-dress with a fitted waist sells for $727. 
A knee-length peach dress with shoulder pads, cable trim and scooped neck costs $829. 
One woman's intarsia sweater that, according to Ms. McKenna, ''Americans go mad for'' is a navy-and-red argyle crewneck, selling for $355. 
Also popular are Chanel-style golfer sweaters - gold-buttoned, two-toned boxy cardigans - which sell for $363.
In the men's department on the ground floor, near the domed tartan room, a chunky, eight-ply Aran-stitch pullover sells for $711. 
A crewneck intarsia sweater printed with a camel, navy and green argyle, crisscrossed with golf clubs, costs $553. 
The children's department has basic crewnecks and V-neck pullovers, priced according to size.
Also in Knightsbridge, just off Brompton Road, is the small but elegant Shirin Cashmere boutique, named after the designer whose chic clothes it showcases. 
For Shirin, who has another shop in Paris, there is more to cashmere than twin sets. 
Colors are striking, cuts stylish and prices not for the faint-hearted.
An azure tunic with a stiff white collar and large diamond shapes in fuchsia, khaki, yellow and black sells for $671. 
The collar and sleeves of another azure sweater, this one ribbed and fitted, are trimmed dramatically with jet beads. 
The sweater costs $679; a matching jacket, $987.
In khaki, a miniskirt sells for $314, and a fitted sweater sparkling with red, green and white rhinestones and tiny gold beads costs $569. 
For a mere $103, you can pick up two-toned neckpieces in color combinations like yellow and black or azure and black, which can be worn with plain crewnecks to dress them up.
Like Shirin, N. Peal & Co. specializes in high-fashion cashmere. 
With a design studio in Savile Row and three shops in Piccadilly's swank 19th-century Burlington Arcade, where beadles in top hats and gold-corded coats still stand guard, N. Peal has room for experimental styles. 
It also has shops in New York City and San Francisco, but Americans who buy at its London shops will find not only a better designer selection but better buys - foreign visitors who make purchases in Britain are refunded value-added tax (15 percent of the total value of goods purchased, though in some cases this is offset in part by service charges imposed by the shop) as they leave the country.
At N. Peal, traditionalists will find all the classics; a utilitarian turtleneck sweater costs $292, a sensible V-neck cardigan $371. 
But the shop distinguishes itself with items like an ocher cashmere women's jogging suit - more for apres-jogging - for $932 and mod black leggings for $410. 
For the truly extravagant, there are unlined wraparound dressing gowns with shawl collars for $1,027. 
For men, a green and navy cardigan with leather buttons and a mighty 10-ply sweater each sell for $656.
Also in Burlington Arcade are three Berk shops, with a mix of classic and designer cashmere clothing. 
The shops sometimes run special offers and sales of closeout items and small sizes. 
On one day I visited, some women's single-ply sweaters were on sale for $205.
Definitely not on sale were an elegant red sweater with lace-stitch sleeves and mock turtleneck ($1,077) and snazzy red palazzo pants ($706). 
For those who want to be up to their elbows in cashmere, Berk had charming creamy white lace-stitch evening gloves with silver-and-pearl buttons for $199. 
For men, Berk had blazers, navy with gold buttons, for $940 and a gray V-neck intarsia sweater with a polo scene for $638.
On Regent Street near the Cafe Royal is Estridge of Piccadilly, a small shop that sells mostly predictable classics in standard colors and some intarsias. 
It should be called Sweaters in the Round, for its main room is circular. 
Half the shelves are stacked with lambswool sweaters and the other half with cashmere.
FOR women, a camel-colored golfer cardigan with gold buttons sells for $332. 
The raciest sweater on display was an azure cowl-neck at $261. 
For men, a charcoal, white and black intarsia argyle sweater costs $379, and a royal blue V-neck, $313.
Far from the madness of Piccadilly in quiet, bookish Bloomsbury is Westaway & Westaway, a massive woolen-goods store that sells classics only, leaving designer cashmere to other shops. 
There are some intarsia sweaters but not a shoulder-padded piece in the place.
''You only have to look at the decor,'' says knitwear buyer Julian Sayers, standing in the middle of Westaway's utilitarian basement cashmere department. 
''You wouldn't come here expecting to find cashmere suits. 
You'd come here expecting lower prices.''
And lower prices are what you get - significantly lower if you are willing to forgo better-known labels for Westaway's own. 
For men, a pair of cashmere socks costs $28, a V-neck sweater with a Westaway label $150, a Peter Scott V-neck $189 and a sturdy, four-ply cable-knit sweater $276.
For women, a basic Westaway & Westaway crewneck costs $141, and a Westaway twin set sells for $276. 
A Pringle cable-knit golfer cardigan with gold buttons is $294. 
On special offer the day I visited were women's crewneck and V-neck pullovers and cardigans, in mostly small sizes, for $78 to $110.
 
WHERE TO GO FOR CASHMERE
All the following London shops except Shirin have mail-order catalogues, but be aware that the United States places a hefty import duty on cashmere.
The main Scotch House store is at 2 Brompton Road, Knightsbridge, London SW1X 7PB; 581 2151. 
Other branches are at 84-86 Regent Street and 191 Regent Street, West End.
Shirin Cashmere, 51 Beauchamp Place, London SW3 1NY; 581 1936. 
The shop takes its collection to private clients in New York every May; write for information.
N. Peal & Company, Burlington Arcade, Piccadilly, London W1V 9AE; 493 5378.
Berk, Burlington Arcade, Piccadilly, London W1V 9AE; 493 0028. 
Other branches are at 176 Regent Street, Piccadilly, and 61 Brompton Road, Kensington.
Estridge of Piccadilly, 60-62 Regent Street, London W1R 5PJ; 734 0195. 
(Unlike the other shops mentioned, Estridge is open on Sunday.) Westaway & Westaway, 62-65 Great Russell Street, London WC1B 3BL; 405 4479. 
From the United States you can call Westaway toll-free at 800-345-3219.    - S. 
C.
Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 
19 about shopping in London misstated the source of cashmere. 
It comes from goats, not sheep.
Correction-Date: December 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
A leopard-design hand-intarsia tunic ($774) from N. Peal.; a chic Shirin design ($664); a stylish cardigan from Scotch House ($466) (pg. 
12); a Pringle V-neck ($292) at Westaway & Westaway (Jonathan Player) (pg. 
30)
