
ANTIQUE Chinese textiles are enjoying a great new popularity. 
One reason is that even casual shoppers quickly become intrigued with these highly personal bits of history -- imagining the aristocratic Chinese woman who slipped her bound foot into a tiny pair of four-inch silk shoes, or picturing the pampered Chinese boy who wore embroidered silk earmuffs, each one sliding over an ear like a glove on a hand.
In Hong Kong, shoppers can choose from a fascinating array of antique textiles, from a pair of child's earmuffs for $30 (prices are in United States currency at 7.8 Hong Kong dollars to one United States dollar) to an embroidered rank badge worn by a Mandarin official that sells for $150 to a magnificent dragon robe costing $12,000.
"I think in the United States you are more likely to see either very costly robes, or little bits of embroidery that are pretty and inexpensive but have no historical importance," said an art expert in Hong Kong who does not sell textiles but follows the market. 
"Here, dealers have a wider range of items for sale, and they pay more attention to the history of the pieces."
Valery M. Garrett, a Hong Kong collector and a lecturer and writer on Chinese textiles, said that while they are sold in New York, London, Taiwan and occasionally Singapore, Hong Kong has the greatest concentration of these pieces.
Generally, items will be less expensive in Hong Kong because there is no sales tax and, because they are antiques, no duty is charged when the textiles are brought back to the United States. 
Most of the pieces for sale date from the Ming (1368-1644) or Ching dynasties (1644-1912), although some earlier pieces are available.
These textiles are interesting works of art that are highly decorative. 
The colorful Chinese robes look striking when mounted inside a large plexiglass frame. 
The antique earmuffs, collars, sleeve bands and other pieces also make handsome decorations, matted in silk and framed, or framed in plexiglass.
Dealers say the rank badges, one of the newly popular collector's items, are sought after because they have an interesting history, are relatively inexpensive (prices begin under $200) and look very handsome when framed. 
"These badges were worn by imperial officials and by the military during earlier dynasties, but the wearing of the badges was really formalized during the Ching dynasty," said Ms. Garrett, who has written a book on the badges, "Mandarin Squares: Mandarins and Their Regalia," published by Oxford University Press.
The nine civil service rank badges for officials used different birds to symbolize ranks, while the military badges featured beasts such as dragons or lions. 
Ms. Garrett said that by the mid-19th century, wealthy merchants began to buy ranks, the way some Westerners purchased European titles.
"You could also buy a rank for an ancestor, so a merchant might buy a high civil service rank for his grandfather, who was really an illiterate farmer," Ms. Garrett said. 
"Then he would commission a portrait that would show the relative in fine robes decorated with his important rank badge."
Though Hong Kong borders on China and the mainland is easily accessible, buyers here say few antique fabric pieces are coming out of China now. 
The damp climate and even the politics of the mainland -- all kinds of antiquities were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution there in the late 1960's -- work against their preservation.
In fact, Ms. Garrett said, "Generally, it has been the Westerners, the foreigners in China, who revered these pieces and collected them."
Today, there are many sources outside the mainland, from sons and daughters of Chinese families who left China to the relatives of missionaries, merchants and other colonial officials who once lived and worked there.
While a number of stores now carry some kind of antique textiles, three highly regarded shops here are particularly worth visiting because their salespeople are adept at explaining the history of the pieces they offer and the symbolism of the designs.
Taken together, the shops offer a good indication of what Hong Kong has to offer. 
At Teresa Coleman Fine Arts, a small, bright gallery on hilly Wyndham Street in central Hong Kong, the long, narrow wooden drawers hold all kinds of treasures: embroidered fan cases (long, thin triangles of silk), delicate women's shoes and small purses, sleeve bands that once encircled the wide sleeves of Chinese robes, rank badges, earmuffs, robes and shawls. 
This shop offers the greatest array of antique textiles in Hong Kong and is a perfect place to visit for an introduction to the market.
A tiny pair of deep pink silk shoes here, dating from about 1870 and made for a woman with bound feet, is barely four inches long. 
Foot binding began as a court custom and as tiny feet became the vogue and were deemed beautiful and erotic, the painful practice eventually spread to all but the poorest classes in China, becoming popular toward the end of the 11th century and continuing into the 1930's. 
Little girls would have their toes broken, bent back and tightly bound between the ages of three and five, so that the foot developed as a small stump.
Belinda Winard, a salesperson at Teresea Coleman, said three and a half inches was considered the ideal length of a bound foot, though that was not always achieved. 
These pink shoes, which sell for $282, are embroidered with blue lotus flowers with a ribbon border of red and gold.
A lovely cream-colored silk collar from the 19th century with a black ribbon border, made to wear with a woman's robe, has four distinct gourd-shaped sections, each embroidered with a garden scene depicting one of the four seasons. 
The collar is priced at $256.
A pair of military rank badges worn by a fifth-rank officer, worked in petit point, with the beast, a bear, appliqued on top, sells for $614. 
The badges, which are the usual size of 12 by 12 inches, have a sky blue background; the bear is done in yellows, greens and reds, his eyes facing a bold red sun. 
The bear stands on the waters and waves pattern, surround by swastikas, ancient symbols for infinite good luck.
The large, airy Plum Blossoms gallery in central Hong Kong's glittering Exchange Square carries a smaller, more expensive collection of Chinese textiles. 
Stephen McGuinness, the managing director, has sold to private collectors and to museums around the world, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. 
Currently, one of his prized pieces is a 10th-century tapestry fragment priced at $120,000. 
The tapestry features prancing lions woven in greens, purples, reds and blues on a black background. 
The rectangular piece of cloth is thought to have come from a robe, he said. 
This piece came from a monastery in Tibet, a country that has recently become an important source of rare old textiles.
"THE monasteries in Tibet were virtual treasure troves, and they are the source for most of the pieces coming from China today," Mr. McGuinness said. 
"Tibet is high and dry and its climate helped preserve textile pieces. 
Its monasteries, which had Chinese wall hangings, silk curtains and robes, had thick stone walls that kept the articles at constant, cool temperatures."
Moreover, he said, the monasteries were repositories for Chinese clothing, because the style-conscious aristocracy donated what were considered unstylish clothes.
A later, less expensive piece is a curtain panel that dates from about 1760. 
It is 10 feet of midnight blue silk and gold brocade, the gold design featuring pairs of dragons chasing a pearl, which was the wish-granting gem of the Chinese. 
That piece is priced at $7,000.
A late-19th-century Chinese tablecloth studded with little round mirrors is embroidered with the Hundred Antiques motif, which includes bronze vases and platters. 
It sells for $800.
"This altar cloth was the kind of thing usually presented to wealthy Chinese at their 60th or 70th birthday party," Mr. McGuinness said. 
"It symbolizes their wealth, their importance."
At Charlotte Horstmann & Gerald Godfrey, one of Asia's most respected antique galleries, there are baskets full of small Chinese purses, earmuffs and sleeve bands in the shop at Ocean Terminal Center on the Kowloon side of the harbor. 
A six-inch royal blue silk purse from the 19th century, with a lovely garden scene, sells for only $19. 
The tiny stitches, each as small as a pinpoint, are known as blind stitches because the close work involved was said to inevitably lead to blindness in the seamstress. 
Hiroko Wilde, a salesperson, explained that for this reason, very young people sewed this stitch because by middle age their eyes failed. 
The work was also known as forbidden stitches because until the late 19th century they were reserved for members of the court.
A pair of cream-colored sleeve bands are decorated with geese, butterflies and peonies in beige, browns and blues, all embroidered in the blind stitch. 
They are mounted in plexiglass frames and priced at $1,126. 
Horstmann's also has what it calls a warehouse of antiques downstairs from the shop, where serious collectors can look at more robes and tapestries.
"Chinese gowns were once regarded as decorative objects to be worn, cut up or remade in another style, but today people have a new respect, a new awareness of their beauty and worth," said Gerald Godfrey.
In a recent visit, the warehouse had a beautiful 19th-century gown in a rich yellow-gold silk. 
Made in China for a Tibetan monk, it was lined in soft sea otter fur. 
The silk woven covered in small stylized bats, which symbolize happiness to the Chinese. 
The robe sells for $7,400.
 
BUYING SILKS
All three shops are closed on Sunday.
Teresa Coleman Fine Arts, 37 Wyndham Street, Ground Floor, Central, Hong Kong; telephone 526 2450. 
Open 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Plum Blossoms, Room 305-307 in Tower One, Exchange Square, 8 Connaught Place, Hong Kong; 521 2189. 
Open 10 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.
Charlotte Horstmann & Gerald Godfrey, 104 Ocean Terminal, Harbour City, Canton Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon, Hong Kong; 735 7167. 
Open 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M. B. B.
