
BEFORE the Great Revolution, the Cultural Revolution and the Beijing Spring of 1989, Shanghai was China's most Westernized city, supplying foreigners and Chinese alike with the finest in handmade clothing. 
Somber-hued pajamas and gray serge Mao jackets were not enough to keep Shanghai's custom tailors in business during the succeeding decades, and a number emigrated to Hong Kong, where many of the best tailors are Shanghainese. 
But Shanghai has managed to hold onto its market for silk underwear, hand-embroidered silk blouses and bed and table linens, presumably in part because they are highly transportable and do not depend on multiple custom fittings for perfection. 
And according to the Hong Kong Tourist Association, Hong Kong department stores expect to be able to continue to stock silk underwear from China.
Hong Kong shops, particularly the numerous department stores, blossom with silk underwear of varying degrees of quality and charm. 
The overwhelming majority of the stock is in sets of camisoles and pants. 
Some stores offer a rich variety of shapes, decorative styles ranging from a simple overcast edge to hand embroidery, lacelike drawn work and appliques in flowery or Art Deco-flavored geometric patterns and colors. 
There is usually a smaller selection of pants sold separately, from string bikinis to tap pants. 
Full slips are much harder to find; the selection is usually limited in color and style, and the slips are often not as flattering or as up to date as the camisole sets; once in a while one comes across a real beauty. 
Half slips, too, are scarce and unimaginative, but something basic in a standard length is usually available. 
Bras are almost nonexistent, with the exception of one small independently owned shop.
The fabric of choice these days is crepe-backed satin, sometimes referred to as charmeuse, which has the slicked, glossy surface of satin with the softness and drape of crepe. 
All items should be cut on the bias - on the diagonal grain of the fabric - for give. 
Occasional novelty fabrics crop up, too - figured satins in which the background is satin and a repeated design, of polka dots or hearts, for example, appears in crepe or other textured silks. 
Crepe de chine, a very delicate, lightweight crepe is rarely available.
Workmanship is consistently good. 
Seams should be double sewn; French seams are sewn once with the raw edges on the outside, then sewn again like a regular seam with the first seam enclosed, leaving no raw edges exposed. 
Slips that are entirely handmade, with French seams of tiny hand-sewn stitches and occasional faint pencil marks (guidelines for the embroiderer that come out when washed), might be old stock in the department stores, or found in shops for custom-made goods. 
Embroidery, drawn work and applique are still done by hand. 
Colors range from white and palest champagne, ice blue and pink to classic peach, celadon green and richer tones like garnet, sapphire and emerald as well as, of course, black.
Recently an excellent selection of silk underwear could be found in Hong Kong at the Star House branch of Chinese Arts and Crafts Ltd. 
(weekdays 10 A.M. to 6:30 P.M., Sundays noon to 6 P.M.; telephone 3-674061); it is immediately to the left when you disembark from the Star Ferry on the Tsimshatsui side. 
A bewildering array of camisole sets meets the eye, averaging $35 (at 7.8 Hong Kong dollars to the United States dollar), and adequate dressing room facilities are provided. 
There tends to be a wider selection in small sizes (P, S and M) but L and XL as well if you search for them. 
Pants range from $6.25 to $15.50, depending on the style and amount of embroidery. 
At the lower end of the price range were silk jersey or crepe de chine bikinis. 
Slips were poorly designed and limited in color.
Yue Hwa (301-9 Nathan Road at the corner of Jordan, Yaumatei; 3-840084; 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.) had the double disadvantage of a smaller selection and a no-try-on policy for underwear, but some of their camisole sets, in the standard colors of black, white, pink, or peach had unusually beautifully embroidery ($37), and a few entirely hand-sewn crepe de chine slips ($25) with delicate floral embroidery, in a silvery gray-beige as well as black and peach, but in limited sizes.
Next to Nothing (31 Star Ferry Concourse, Central; 5-238704; 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. daily) is a tiny shop inside the Star Ferry terminal (after you pay your fare) on the Hong Kong side. 
Both merchandise and the shop itself are different in style from the mainland-Chinese department stores. 
Mary Reynolds, the proprietor, has all of the things in her shop (mainly crepe-backed satin) manufactured in Hong Kong itself. 
All are 100 percent silk, made with French seams and, on shirt tops, real shell (not plastic) buttons; the garments will not shrink, but lack the hand detailing of the Shanghai-made goods.
The most appealing items are the simple, no-frill slips ($45) and chemises ($32) several inches longer than the camisole tops sold with pants), bra and pants sets ($26; a string bikini alone is $9.50). 
Deluxe nightshirts ($70), pajamas (either single-breasted with shawl collar or double-breasted, $109 or $122) and full-length robe and gown sets ($154) have the same tailored elegance. 
Colors range from white, gray, peach, pale green and black to jewel tones like ruby and emerald before the holidays. 
There are also men's boxer shorts, available in crepe de chine in a few geometric prints ($17).
 
NO HEAT, PLEASE
The Chinese make silk underwear to last; seams and fabric hold up well. 
The deepest colors (except black) have a tendency to bleed, and should be washed separately. 
Silk fibers, animal protein like human hair, become frizzled and desiccated by heat. 
So wash by hand in lukewarm water, preferably with real soap powder rather than detergent, and rinse thoroughly to remove all traces of soap. 
Dry away from direct heat and sunlight - never in a dryer - and iron with a medium-warm iron.    -  A. 
M. S.
Detail of a silk slip at Yue Hwa; an embroidered negligee with a frog closing at Next to Nothing inside the Star Ferry Terminal; men's silk shorts at Next to Nothing (Ray Cranbourne/Black Star)
