
In the first sign that Chinese dissidents are planning protests this spring, students said illegal posters were put up today at two or more universities, calling for peaceful demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in the coming week.
The authorities immediately tore down the posters, but word of the audacious acts rapidly spread through Beijing, adding to the tension and increasing speculation about whether unrest could break out in the next few days. 
While the most common view appears to be that people are too cowed to launch protests, many foreign diplomats and most Chinese interviewed say the situation is difficult to predict and could change rapidly.
The posters, and a surreptitious grapevine of phone calls and quiet conversations among friends throughout Beijing, called for people to walk quietly through Tiananmen Square on Sunday as a statement of opposition to the Government, students said.
The idea apparently originated with overseas Chinese democracy campaigners, who have been sending the message by fax, letter and telephone to everyone they could reach on the Chinese mainland. 
Many people in Beijing seem to know of the plan, mostly by word of mouth or from listening to Voice of America or other foreign radio broadcasts. 
The turnout on Sunday will be a test of the underground opposition's ability to organize and mount protests during a sensitive period from April through early June. 
The 10 weeks include important anniversaries of last year's democracy movement.
There is nothing illegal about walking quietly around Tiananmen Square, and few expect the Government to topple as a consequence. 
But if hundreds or even thousands turned out, the Government would be embarrassed, and it is difficult to predict what the protesters or authorities might do.
The posters were put up at Beijing University, the most prestigious university in the country, and at Beijing Aeronautical Engineering Institute, which also was a center of protest last year. 
Wall posters are a traditional Chinese form of protest, and they carry much more weight than they would in the United States. 
Last year's democracy movement began after posters were erected at major universities in the capital.
Today's posters, and the appeals from abroad, have called for gatherings in Tiananmen Square not only on Sunday but also on Thursday, which is the annual Chinese day of mourning for the dead. 
The day of mourning, known as grave-sweeping day, has strong political overtones, because in 1976 it became the occasion for massive protests that marked the beginning of the end of the 10-year Cultural Revolution.
China's leadership is sufficiently alarmed at the possibility of unrest that ''work units'' have held meetings in which employees have been advised to stay away from Tiananmen Square in the immediate future.
''We were told to stay away from Tiananmen for our own safety,'' said a teacher at Beijing University. 
Like other Chinese interviewed, he said he did not know how many people would show up at Tiananmen but interest in the idea of the protest was enormous.
A worker in his 20's said his work unit had been told not to wear black, a sign of mourning. 
In particular, workers were told they could not wear black clothes with a white flower to honor those killed by the army last year.
