
Now 67 years old, Prince Norodom Sihanouk still sits in a gilded exile in the old French legation here, pampered by the Chinese, monitored by the Khmer Rouge and haunted by the past and by the fear of making one final, disastrous error to the detriment of the independent Cambodia he has devoted his soul to achieving.
In conversation, over the fine French champagne he offers in his immense reception room, he admits he is a moody man, liable to drive the diplomats and journalists he meets to exasperation. 
They seek an impossible clarity, he says, when little is clear in Cambodia, which has for so long had so little say over its own affairs.
He has spent his life trying to keep his country and himself afloat, with few resources other than his wit and unpredictability. 
Given the devotion to him that still exists in the country he once ruled as a god-king, there is no end to the great powers and minor factions that try to use him, and which he tries to use in turn.
''The Romans had their Janus god, with two faces, for peace and war,'' he said. 
''But there are two or three or four Sihanouks.''
 
Not a 'Changeling Prince'
Still, he said, ''I am not 'the changeling prince' as the Western press calls me. 
I have to use my imagination and my intelligence to find any reasonable solution possible for Cambodia - but one based on fact and the realities on the ground.''
That is why, he says, he has ended up in such an awkward coalition with both the rightists who overthrew him in 1970 and the Communist Khmer Rouge, who turned Cambodia into a charnel house when they overthrew the rightists in 1975.
Between the crocodile of Vietnam, which ended the slaughter in late 1978 when it expelled the Khmer Rouge and set up the current Phnom Penh Government as a subservient instrument, and the tiger of the Khmer Rouge, he has had to choose the tiger, he said, ''for while it, too, is man-eating, it is purely Cambodian.''
He has also been forced to make this choice by China, which has always treated him with ''friendship and dignity,'' he says, but which remains not only the prime ally of the Khmer Rouge, but also the main source of weapons and funds to the non-Communists.
''So we are obliged to be friendly to the Khmer Rouge,'' the Prince said, ''otherwise China will send no more support to us.''
 
Sees Lack of Western Support
It is also true, he says, that the non-Communist forces are more and more coordinating their military activity in Cambodia with the Khmer Rouge. 
''The world may condemn us,'' he said, but this, too, is a result of the comparative lack of military support provided by the West and the non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia.
''It is a terrible choice,'' he said, but the non-Communist forces must keep their legitimacy as actors in Cambodia, and that is only possible through success on the battlefield.
The diplomatic trend, he said, is ''more and more favorable to Hun Sen,'' the Prime Minister of the Phnom Penh Government, ''so the resistance is obliged to strengthen its unity,'' particularly when the non-Communist factions are weak.
''You say if we continue to cooperate with the Khmer Rouge on the battlefield, the outside world may condemn us, and it's true,'' he said. 
''But while on the surface, the outside world condemns us morally, in reality it only gives importance to military strength. 
Despite their fine words about moral values, the outside world is not so moral, because in fact they are observing the developing military situation in Cambodia.''
''And the ones who win will be embraced and recognized - it is very simple,'' he said. 
''So the most important thing is to show that Hun Sen will not win the war, so we can force the outside world not to go so quickly to Hun Sen.''
 
A Quote From 'Hamlet'
The Prince toyed with his white French poodle, Miki, and then gave a sort of giggle that expanded to fill the room. 
''It is something very tragic, very Shakespearean,'' he said. 
''You know Hamlet: 'To be or not to be.'
I don't want to give any justifications, but only to explain.''
As he spoke, his personal secretary, Chhorn Hay, listened from a couch to the side of the Prince. 
Mr. Chhorn Hay was Prince Sihanouk's guardian during years of house arrest in Phnom Penh under the Khmer Rouge. 
Friendly and at times even servile, he exists as a constant reminder of Khmer Rouge power and control. 
When he notices a reporter trying to maneuver him into the viewfinder of a camera, he moves away.
The Prince says he is hurt by charges in the West that he is an accomplice of the Khmer Rouge, which he detests. 
Pol Pot and Ieng Sary, he says, despite their claims to have retired, ''are the real masters'' of the Khmer Rouge. 
''I have no doubt that Pol Pot is heading the army,'' he said. 
''If I were an accomplice of the Khmer Rouge I wouldn't say that.''
Pressed, the Prince said that as more and more Western Governments tell him he must drop the Chinese formula of Khmer Rouge participation in an interim government in Cambodia to oversee new elections, he has embraced the idea of a United Nations trusteeship over Cambodia for a year.
 
Peacekeeping Force Urged
That way, he says, there will be no interim Cambodian government and no Khmer Rouge participation in anything but free elections, which the United Nations would also organize and oversee. 
It just might work, he said, so long as there is also a United Nations-sponsored International Control Mechanism and armed peacekeeping force in Cambodia for at least five years, and preferably for 10.
China and the Khmer Rouge opposed this second condition, he said, and he was sure that Mr. Hun Sen would also reject it, because it would mean the dismantling of his Government, though not his party. 
In return, the Prince would disband his government in exile and allow the country's United Nations seat to be vacant until a new government could be elected.
But if Mr. Hun Sen should somehow accept his proposal, including mutual dismantling, the year-long United Nations trusteeship, the control mechanism and peacekeeping force, the Prince said, ''then I will go home to Phnom Penh,'' regardless of any opposition from the Khmer Rouge or from China.
''The Khmer Rouge,'' he said, ''will continue their war, but never mind, the whole world will condemn them.''
To defy China is a serious personal risk, he said, ''but there must be some way out of this nightmare of stalemate and war.''
Last week, an editor close to the Phnom Penh Government said Mr. Hun Sen would be willing to disband his Cabinet and accept a United Nations-controlled election in Cambodia under what is called the Namibia formula. 
But under this model, the Hun Sen Government would continue to administer the country at the local level, a condition that Prince Sihanouk rejects.
 
No Illusions on Khmer Rouge
For Khieu Samphan, the official head of the Khmer Rouge and the man with whom he often deals, the Prince has a sort of contempt. 
Khieu Samphan, he says, is probably only the seventh-ranking official in the Khmer Rouge hierarchy, coming after Ieng Thirith, the wife of Ieng Sary.
He has no illusions about the Khmer Rouge, he says, or about the Thais. 
''Pol Pot is like Hitler,'' he said. 
''Unless you kill him, you cannot oblige him to stop fighting and killing people.''
He shakes his head. 
''Pol Pot would not be with us in this world, he would not be alive without the Thais,'' he said. 
Pol Pot remains ''terribly weak'' with malaria, ''yet each time he became very ill, the Thai army sent a helicopter to his headquarters in Trat Province to take him to the best hospital in Bangkok, and gave him the best room, normally kept for the best of the Thai generals, and the best doctors took care of him.''
With the introduction of gossip, the Prince brightens. 
It is true, he said, that Pol Pot's first wife, Khieu Ponnary, the sister of Ieng Thirith, is very ill and dying in a hospital here, perhaps dead. 
Ieng Sary, he said, has not been seen in three or four years, and the rumor is that he, too, is dead.
''Did you know,'' he asks, ''that Pol Pot gave Khieu Samphan a wife?''
A princely giggle. 
''She is a Khmer Rouge cadre, a peasant girl and trusted by Pol Pot. 
She is not ugly, she is rather pretty, with a dark skin. 
But I know Khieu Samphan, and it seems he is not so much interested in women.''
 
On 'Very Dangerous' Men
''Men who are not so interested in women are very dangerous,'' the Prince continued, ''for they must concentrate on other things, which makes them very dangerous in wartime.''
He giggled again. 
''But we nationalists, we are very interested in beautiful women. 
We are true Cambodians. 
We say the Cambodians are 'les chauds lapins et les chaudes lapines,' yes, yes, hot rabbits,'' he said, overcome with laughter.
But rather quickly, another mood takes hold, and the Prince grows somber. 
''I cherish my friendship with China. 
I don't want to lose it. 
It's the reason I'm hesitating,'' he said, acknowledging that it would be very easy now to make a tragic mistake.
And then he gave a sort of groan. 
''I have problems of conscience,'' he said. 
''I take sleeping pills each evening. 
I don't sleep without them. 
I have so many problems in my head. 
I suffer, I really suffer. 
It's not a comedy, I assure you.''
