
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Cambodian opposition leader who earlier this year withdrew from talks about his country's future, announced today that he had agreed to return to the negotiating table.
Prince Sihanouk said in a statement issued in Beijing, where he now lives, that he had accepted an invitation to meet with his longtime rival, Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the Vietnamese-backed regime in Cambodia. 
Prince Sihanouk said he had agreed to the meeting because Mr. Hun Sen had indicated a willingness to compromise.
The announcement appeared to end a negotiating stalemate. 
But talks have been disrupted several times, and it is difficult to predict whether a new round will achieve an agreement on a future government for Cambodia.
Because of his international stature, the Prince is widely regarded as a central figure in any resolution of the Cambodia conflict. 
He is the leader of a coalition of the three guerrilla groups that are fighting the Hun Sen Government.
If the talks go well, they could smoothe discussions in the Chinese-Soviet summit meeting that will take place in Beijing in the middle of May. 
That meeting is expected to lead to normalization of relations between China and the Soviet Union, ending three decades of hostility.
 
Chinese-Soviet Sore Point
Disagreements over Cambodia are a major source of discord in relations between the two nations, and China has been putting a great deal of pressure on the Soviet Union in recent months. 
The Chinese have wanted the Russians to press Vietnam to withdraw its troops from Cambodia. 
They also want them to encourage Mr. Hun Sen to be more conciliatory toward the guerrilla movement.
The meeting between the Prince and the Prime Minister could take place as early as next month. 
The Prince proposed a meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, on May 2, or alternatively in Paris in September.
An aide to Prince Sihanouk denied that the announcement represented a reversal in his position. 
In January the Prince announced that he was bowing out of peace negotiations, especially talks scheduled in Indonesia in February. 
Just a month ago, he seemed to rule out another meeting with Mr. Hun Sen, whom he has accused of being ''the valet of Vietnamese imperialism.''
The Prince today refrained from such criticisms of Mr. Hun Sen.
An Asian diplomat in Beijing noted that the Prince often changes his position, and that this makes it difficult to assess the chances for successful negotiations. 
The Prince's reason for declining to take part in the February talks was that Mr. Hun Sen had rejected a five-point peace plan proposed by the Prince.
 
No Breakthrough Seen
''I think there is something going on there, but I wouldn't call it a breakthrough,'' the diplomat said. 
''Prince Sihanouk sees an opportunity and then makes what he can of it.''
The message from Mr. Hun Sen, including the invitation to negotations and an offer of concessions, was conveyed orally March 26 by a high-ranking French diplomat who was visiting Beijing, the Sihanouk aide said. 
She said the diplomat, whom she did not identify, already had left Beijing with a message for Mr. Hun Sen from the Prince. 
Mr. Hun Sen's Government could not be immediately contacted for comment, because it has no diplomatic relations with China and no representatives in Beijing.
One of the main points of disagreement between Mr. Hun Sen and the guerrilla factions is whether the Government in Cambodia should be dismantled or should remain in place before elections are held to form a new government.
Late last year and early this year there was a flurry of negotiations that made rapid progress on some aspects of a Cambodian settlement. 
Vietnam indicated that it would withdraw all of its troops from Cambodia by the end of September if the Cambodian factions could agree on a political solution among themselves.
