
The British Foreign Secretary outlined new proposals today that he said would make it easier for some Hong Kong citizens to move to Britain if China limits their Western-style freedoms after it takes control of the British crown colony in 1997.
The British official, John Major, said in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly that his Government plans to give people deemed ''essential to Hong Kong's future stabilityI and prosperity'' the right to move to Britain after the territory is returned to China. 
He did not explain how the people would be chosen or how many would be allowed to come.
British officials say the offer will encourage China to abide by its 1984 agreement to preserve Hong Kong's way of life so that these ''essential'' people continue to live and work there, preserving the territory's position as a leading Asian financial center. 
The declaration at this time is also intended to encourage those ''essential'' people to stay in Hong Kong.
Mr. Major said Britain plans to give Hong Kong its own bill of rights, which, he said, is intended to enshrine the fundamental rights of citizens that China has agreed to respect. 
This guarantee would codify liberties such as freedom of expression and travel.
In addition, Mr. Major said his country plans to speed the introduction of a democratically elected government in the colony. 
The goal is for at least half the seats in Hong Kong's current legislature, which consists of appointed members, to be filled by direct election by 1995, two years before the Chinese take control.
Both the bill of rights and the election of legislators, which would be in place when China takes over, presumably leave on the Chinese the onus of dismantling such democratic institutions.
These measures, intended to give Hong Kong citizens more confidence in their future, represent a change of approach by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Government, which in 1984 negotiated the agreement returning Hong Kong to China. 
At first, the Government refused to grant any right of asylum to Hong Kong citizens and was reluctant to draw up a bill of rights or introduce greater democracy in advance of the Chinese takeover.
Officials say it was forced to change its position by a groundswell of popular concern in Britain and Hong Kong about the credibility of China's promises that was brought on by the massacre in and near Tiananmen Square and by the crackdown on dissidents that followed.
Today, the British Foreign Secretary called on China's leaders to give ''practical reassurances'' to Hong Kong's approximately three million people that it will respect their freedoms after 1997.
As he spoke, British officials started three days of talks with Chinese officials on the future of the colony. 
Britain suspended the meetings of the joint liaison group of British, Hong Kong and Chinese officials in protest against the suppression of the democracy movement, then decided to resume the talks to try to get Chinese pledges to bolster confidence in the colony.
 
Appeal on Boat People
Mr. Major also said that Hong Kong can no longer cope with the huge influx of Vietnamese boat people, many of whom are seeking better economic situations and thus do not qualify as refugees.
And he called on the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to step up its efforts to persuade these refugees that no other country will take them and that they should therefore agree to be resettled in Vietnam under international supervision.
Britain has said that it wants to forcibly repatriate boat people who refuse to return voluntarily. 
But the United States strongly opposed such forcible repatriation.
The West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, called on Western nations to encourage the process of economic and political reform under way in Eastern Europe.
Mr. Genscher said there is a chance to assure ''a peaceful order in Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.''
He called on East Germany to accept the reforms under way in the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary, saying that the two German states should work together to support what he termed ''the process of European unification.''
 
Appeal From Israeli
Israel's Foreign Minister, Moshe Arens, called on the United Nations to support his Government's plan for elections in the occupied territories and invited Arab leaders now in New York to ''meet with me to discuss how we can move from belligerency to peace.''
Recalling that this week is the 50th anniversary of the Nazis' entry into Warsaw at the start of World War II, the Israeli official devoted most of his speech to describing Nazi Germany's persecution of the Jews and the Arab world's refusal to accept Israel's existence.
In a right of reply, the United Nations observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Zehdi Labib Terzi, criticized Israel for asking other countries to support its election plan in the occupied territories when last year's General Assembly endorsed a comprehensive Mideast peace settlement based on an international conference under United Nations auspices.
Later, Mr. Arens conferred privately with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d before a three-nation meeting on Thursday, in which they will be joined by the Egyptian Foreign Minister, Esmat Abdel Meguid. 
The Americans are hoping to bring about negotiations between Israel and Palestinians based on a peace plan offered by the Israeli Government and modified by the Egyptians.
The Philippine Foreign Secretary, Raul Manglapus, defended his proposal to create an International Debt and Development Commission, a plan that has the support of the third world. 
It would be a United Nations forum where debtors and creditors could meet to discuss innovative solutions to the debt crisis. 
Cuban Attacks U.S. 
The Foreign Minister of Cuba, Isidoro Malmierca, strongly criticized the United States as ''aggressive and hostile'' in a speech to the General Assembly today.
''It is clear that, with respect to Cuba, the Bush Administration has begun to take steps to become the eighth U.S. administration not wishing to establish a climate of peace and good neighborliness and continues to embark on aggressive and hostile actions against her,'' he said.
Replying, the United States representative, Thomas R. Pickering, accused Cuba of casting aside ''the spirit of cooperation and conciliation'' that has characterized this General Assembly session.
Other speakers today were Foreign Minister Joao de Deus Pinheiro of Portugal, Foreign Minister Gianni de Michelis of Italy, Foreign Minister Anisul Islam Mahmud of Bangladesh, Foreign Minister Mark Eyskens of Belgium; the Deputy Prime Minister of Mauritius, Sir Satcam Boolell, the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Abdurahman Jama Barre; the Foreign Minister of Brunei, Prince Bolkiah Mohamed, and Oman's Foreign Minister, Youssef bin Alawi bin Abdullah.
