
While some Beijing residents see parallels between the Soviet crackdown in Lithuania and the Chinese Army's destruction of the Tiananmen democracy movement, there seems to be little interest here in the events in Vilnius and most people express only mild sympathy for the Lithuanians.
"We know about it, because it's been mentioned in the papers and on television," a middle-aged Chinese worker said. 
"But nobody's thinking about Lithuania. 
All we're interested in is the gulf."
Chinese news reports about the Soviet crackdown have been brief and rather one-sided. 
The reports, sent from Moscow by the official New China News Agency, were simply a careful rewrite of the reports carried by Tass, the Soviet press agency.
The reports said two people, including one soldier, were killed after a "conflict" between Soviet soldiers and some people who were protecting the television broadcast building in Vilnius. 
It said both sides fired guns.
 
Augmenting Incomplete Reports
Today's newspapers also carried a New China News Agency account from Washington reporting on President Bush's criticism of Soviet handling of matters in Lithuania. 
But the account did not elaborate on precisely what it was that had happened in Vilnius, nor did it give an updated toll of 15 dead, as has been reported in the West.
Many Chinese are used to incomplete news reports and know how to supplement official information by reading between the lines and by tuning their radios to Voice of America and other foreign broadcasters. 
Even so, there has been little interest in or outrage over events in Lithuania.
One reason may be that most Chinese, particularly members of the Han majority that accounts for 92 percent of the population, are much less sympathetic to calls for regional independence than to demands for national democracy. 
China has its own independence advocates in Tibet and in Xinjiang Autonomous Region in Western China, and even those Chinese who favor greater democracy mostly balk at allowing local regions to choose to be independent.
"In a way, what happened in Lithuania was very different from what happened here in Beijing," a university-educated Government employee said. 
"The students here were seeking nothing more than democracy, while in Lithuania they were splittists. 
It was a tough situation for the Soviet Government to handle."
