
China and the Soviet Union signed a 10-year agreement today for economic and scientific cooperation that is to focus on developing the high-technology proficiency that both nations badly need.
The pact was signed by the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, at the close of a delicate Kremlin visit in which the Soviet Government strictly maintained its policy of not criticizing China's crushing of pro-democracy demonstrators last June.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev set the policy in pursuit of ending three decades of hostile or frozen relations with the Beijing Government.
The pact Mr. Li signed with Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov of the Soviet Union was described as an ambitious, decade-long commitment to cooperation on a score of problems and projects, including improved credit relations and construction of a nuclear power plant in China.
In a separate agreement signed by the Foreign Ministers, Eduard A. Shevardnadze and Qian Qichen, the two nations agreed to seek further reductions in troops on both sides of their 4,300-mile common border.
Mr. Li, who was reportedly deeply involved in his Government's decision to use lethal military force to stop the democracy demonstrations, was quoted as telling Mr. Gorbachev today that while his nation is determined to make complex internal improvements and greater openness toward the outside world, it would do so by ''preserving social stabilityI.''
Mr. Gorbachev, whose visit to Beijing last May was considered one of the inspirations of pro-democracy student demonstrators, replied that he was working to stay ''on the path of reform, of legal processes and to avoid confrontation fraught with violence.''
''This is the main thing now,'' the Soviet leader said.
Tass, the official Soviet press agency, said the new pact would create ''a long-term program for economic, scientific and technical cooperation, determining interaction between the two countries until the year 2000.''
 
Moscow Council Weighs In
While Mr. Li was agreeing to a series of pacts at the Kremlin, the fledgling Soviet political opposition made its first venture into foreign policy with a minority protest petition in the Moscow City Council. 
It cited Mr. Li's role in the repression of the demonstrators and said he was unwelcome in the capital. 
It was signed by 25 of the 465 council members.
Several hundred students protested outside the Soviet Foreign Ministry when Mr. Li arrived Monday.
The chief agreement from the visit listed a broad range of areas of planned cooperation, including nuclear energy and outer space, the fuel and power industries, transport and communications, agriculture, forestry, the chemical industry and environmental protection.
Agreements on government credits for consumer goods were included, but initial reports did not describe the amount or products. 
Both nations are economically troubled and searching for fresh opportunities for a stronger role in the world economy.
The Tass dispatch said the visit confirmed ''full-blooded, good-neighborly cooperation'' between the two nations and said that President Gorbachev and Prime Minister Li agreed that ''there were no universal formulas and cut-and-dried ways to implement socialist ideas.''
In avoiding references to either the past Chinese-Soviet freeze or the violence of last June, the two leaders agreed that ''each country has its own history, its own specific and essential level of development, and this must be considered,'' Tass said.
In the military accord, the two nations agreed as well that an important condition for improving relations was to scale down the hundreds of thousands of troops along their border ''to a minimum corresponding to normal good-neighborly relations,'' Tass said.
Mr. Li's visit ended with the Soviet and Chinese leaders agreeing that ''certain differences in their approaches to the solution of this or that question will not be an obstacle to further developing mutually advantageous dialogue and cooperation,'' Tass said.
