
A diplomatic cable made public today disclosed that the Bush Administration might soften its opposition to membership for the Soviet Union and China in the organization that manages the world trading system.
The disclosure came as a surprise because the United States had suspended talks on Chinese membership in the Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade after the violent crackdown on demonstrators in June in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
Membership in GATT, which sets rules for international trade and settles disputes among member nations, would greatly benefit the Soviet Union and China. 
It could offer both Moscow and Beijing a framework for normalizing trade relations with other countries.
Source of Dissension
The issue has been a source of dissension within the Administration. 
Some insight into the Administration debate came today with publication of the cable by a private group opposed to letting China join GATT. 
The cable was from the American Embassy in Beijing to the State Department, showing that the United States wants to discuss GATT membership with the Chinese on Monday and Tuesday in Washington.
The President's press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, insisted that the China talks about GATT membership did not constitute a breach of the President's ban on high-level contacts with that nation. 
He described them as ''low-level, continuing discussions.''
Soviet membership in GATT is expected to be discussed at a meeting later this month in Wyoming of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze. 
Traditionally, the Soviets and the Chinese have been linked together by American policy makers in considering their membership in GATT.
The United States has long been the leading champion of GATT and has urged other countries to accept its free-trade rules. 
The Americans have been willing to discuss opening the group to Communist nations as part of overall efforts to reduce worldwide tensions.
Because of fears that the Soviets could disrupt GATT, there has been no serious discussion of Soviet membership at this time. 
But some officials, chiefly in the State Department, are willing to consider observer status, and view the issue in the context of a gradual normalization of U.S.-Soviet relations. 
China already has observer status in GATT.
Opponents, chiefly in the Defense Department, fear that the Soviets will seize any trade and economic opportunities offered by the United States to strengthen their military potential to become more formidable adversaries.
As the leading and founding member of GATT, the United States has a big say in the agency's membership decisions.
The issue arises as the Bush Administration makes preparations for the Sept. 
22-23 Wyoming meeting with Mr. Shevardnadze, in which the question of membership is expected to figure among a number of Soviet demands for American concessions to support economic reform in the Soviet Union.
The State Department cable from Ambassador James Lilley in Beijing said the Chinese Government had expressed surprise that Washington had agreed to the talks, which were suspended after the June crackdown.
 
Cable Leaked by Policy Group
The disclosure of the cable, which was leaked to the Center for Security Policy, a policy group that favors a strong military posture, prompted extended explanations today by Administration officials.
Mr. Fitzwater said the Administration was still opposed to China's full membership in GATT. 
''They have to undertake significant economic reforms to be eligible,'' he said.
Before June, the United States pursued steps toward China's gradual admission. 
The decision to resume the discussions with China underscores the importance the Administration places on improving economic ties with Communist nations.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the coming meeting with the Chinese ''will provide an opportunity to exchange views, but is not in any sense a negotiation.''
The 96-nation GATT is a charter of rights and obligations of trading countries. 
It also provides a mechanism for members to resolve trade disputes.
GATT membership implies both recognition of the importance of trade in international economy and a position of legitimacy or acceptance within the international trading community, objectives eagerly sought by both Beijing and Moscow.
 
Observer Status
China, whose observer status allows it to attend proceedings in the 42-year-old Geneva institution, but not to participate, jealously guards its GATT status. 
As part of the economic reforms of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, Moscow is now seeking observer status as a prelude to full membership. 
China could be angered if it does not stay a step ahead of the Soviets, Administration officials said.
For the Soviet Union, GATT membership is part of a long list of demands for economic concessions from the West to assist their program of economic reorganization.
Among other items on the Soviet agenda are membership in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, multilateral institutions that lend money chiefly to developing countries, and an end to restrictions imposed unilaterally by the United States on Soviet trade, including high American tariffs and a ban on export credits.
Mr. Gorbachev made a dramatic bid in July to gather Western support for his policies. 
In a message at the Paris economic summit meeting, he pledged the Soviet Union's ''full and entire participation in the world's economy. 
He added, ''The rest of the world can only gain by the opening of the world economy to a market such as the Soviet Union.''
Some officials said the State Department was weighing as one option the establishment of a United States-Soviet Economic Working Group to put economic issues between the two countries on an equal footing with arms control, human rights and regional issues.
GATT association for the Soviets would be among the items explored by the working group.
