
Chinese officials interviewed privately say that although they believe China's politics are unlikely to be immediately affected by the collapse of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union, they generally foresee a slowing down in the pace of improvement of relations with Moscow and an intensification of political education throughout China.
Vice President Wang Zhen was quoted on the television news today as emphasizing the Communist Party leadership role in the army and the importance the party played in helping the army quell the "counter-revolutionary rebellion," an allusion to the pro-democracy demonstrations of 1989.
On Saturday Mr. Wang completed a nine-day trip to the northwestern province of Xinjiang, which borders on the Soviet Union and which saw unrest last year that reportedly left 22 people dead.
In many neighborhoods of Beijing, where at night the sidewalks fill with families escaping the indoor heat, the talk in the last few nights has reflected both elation at the decay of the Soviet Communist Party and fear that the events in the Soviet Union may bring tighter controls in China.
In the big cities, many citizens are raising their glasses to celebrate. 
But they also worry that a more isolated Chinese leadership may also be a more repressive one.
 
Few Signs of Tension
"After this, they'll have to boost propaganda in the army to make sure soldiers fire on the people instead of backing off as they did in Moscow," said a woman in her 30's. 
"Everybody noticed the difference between what the papers said was happening in the Soviet Union and what we heard on Voice of America and the BBC and that just got people more annoyed at the Government."
So far there have been few signs of tension or stricter patrol measures in Beijing, but the Chinese leadership has been watching events with great concern, officials say. 
Already there have been subtle changes in official propaganda, with articles appearing praising the elderly, an apparent reference to the octogenarians who now rule China.
"Old cadres are the treasures of the party and nation," read an article in the official People's Daily on Saturday. 
An article in the same newspaper today described the achievements of a model Communist Party member.
China has also been concerned that unrest in the Soviet Union's minority areas will spill over into China, an official said, adding that the propaganda in recent days seemed to try to promote harmony among China's minorities and the Han ethnic group. 
In today's People's Daily, a front-page photograph displaying minorities in traditional costume seemed to be an attempt to do just that. 
Inside, the paper reported Friday's news that activities of the Communist Party had been halted in the Russian republic.
 
Leaders Shown Video
Today the local paper, The Beijing Evening News, but not the national television news, reported that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had resigned as Communist Party Secretary General.
Officials say the Government has not broadly circulated any documents carrying significant comments by Chinese leaders on the Soviet Union. 
The party's internal documents, however, carried scores of translations of foreign news reports and commentary about the Soviet Union. 
Many employees in military units were read cables describing the events as they happened.
Chinese leaders were apparently able to learn of the daily events in the Soviet Union by watching a video each day compiled from television footage from various countries. 
During this week's political study session, some officials watched a long video with clips of events from each day of the week.
"They definitely will issue a document with their comment and a conclusion, but only after they see how the situation develops," said an official with access to Government documents. 
"After Romania, China officials learned they had to be more careful. 
They were too quick to support Ceaucescu, and then all of a sudden, he fled, and it was very embarrassing for China."
 
Political Turmoil Expected
Another official said the party had been planning to publish a secret comprehensive analysis of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, but that the work had not yet been completed. 
Still, Chinese leaders had been expecting for many months that political turmoil would break out in the Soviet Union.
"They had predicted something like this would happen," said an official in his 40's. 
"But it would not really influence China. 
The situation, the economies, the traditions are very different in the two countries."
"China is now very stable," he added. 
"It won't be like June 4 again."
He was alluding to the crackdown of two summers ago.
Part of the reason for this, he and other officials said, was that since the collapse of Communism in Romania and other Eastern European countries, the Chinese Government, party and military apparatus have been steadily increasing re-education and political study at all levels.
Indeed, many officials say the Soviet coup failed because its leaders did not have enough control over the military, as the hard-line leaders in China have.
"In a coup, you don't look for a legal means to justify it -- you grab power, make sure you have it, and then explain it," said a Chinese employee at a military unit. 
"The other problem is that they didn't grab Yeltsin."
Only bits and pieces about the breakdown of Communism in the Soviet Union have trickled down to the people, many of whom listen to foreign radio broadcasts.
"The Government was probably sad but ordinary people were rejoicing and toasted Gorbachev when they heard he was back in power," said a middle-aged official. 
"There was a lot of wine drunk that night. 
But it's hard to say which way the Government reaction will go. 
After Ceausescu fell, even though people were very happy about it, controls got tighter."
