
Following are the text of a statement by the Chinese dissidents Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, as made public by the State Department yesterday and reported by Reuters, and the official New China News Agency's report on their release, as distributed in translation by the press agency:
 
Statement by Dissidents
1. I am opposed to the Four Cardinal Principles which are contained in the preamble to the Chinese Constitution, because their purpose is to uphold a political system of class struggle. 
I take note that the above political view violates the preamble of the Constitution. 
2. In order to visit relatives and friends abroad and to obtain necessary medical treatment, I apply to leave the country and travel abroad. 
I hope that the Chinese Government will give this humanitarian consideration. 
3. The purpose in going abroad is focused on scholarly exchange and research. 
We will appreciate and welcome all activities which accord with the progressive interests of Chinese society, and moreover refuse to participate in all contrary activities whose motive lies in opposing China.
Statement by Beijing
Former Beijing Astronomical Observatory researcher Fang Lizhi and his wife, former Associate Professor of Beijing University Li Shuxian, have been given lenient treatment today and have gone abroad for medical treatment, the spokesman of the Ministry of Public Security announced here today.
Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian fled to the U.S. 
Embassy in China because of their involvement in the disturbances that occurred in Beijing last year. 
For that reason, the Beijing Public Security Bureau issued a warrant for their arrest.
Recently, Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian have written to the Chinese departments concerned, admitting that they have opposed the Four Cardinal Principles (i.e. principles of adherence to the socialist road, to the people's democratic dictatorship, to the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party and to Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong thought), and have thus violated the country's Constitution. 
They have expressed the hope to get permission to go abroad for medical treatment as they are ill. 
They have said that they will not engage in activities directed against China after they leave the country.
In view of the signs of repentance by Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian and their illness and out of humanitarian considerations, the Beijing Public Security Bureau has decided to allow them to go abroad for medical treatment in line with China's policy of leniency toward those who participated in the disturbances.
