
Years and years ago, steam locomotives built in this area were exported to railroads around the world. 
And then more efficient diesel locomotives made steam rail travel obsolete, Now, two companies are importing from China 83-ton locomotives, based on a 1918 American design.
Two new steam engines were unloaded from a freighter on Dec. 
17 at the Beckett Street Terminal in Camden, N.J., for the Knox & Kane Railroad in northwestern Pennsylvania and the Valley Railroad in Essex, Conn.
New steam locomotives have not been seen in the Port of Philadelphia since the 1950's, when the old Baldwin Locomotive Works went out of business, but steam engines have survived on short lines, hauling tourists.
Thousands of tourists line up each year to ride old-time trains. 
And the Chinese rely on steam locomotives.
 
They Have the Manpower
They are sturdy, and China has plenty of the manpower and coal that the great engines require.
J. David Conrad of the Valley Railroad waited for the new steam engine at the marine terminal. 
''The repairs we found necessary on our existing locomotives got the railroads thinking about new locomotives,'' he said, The last maker of steam locomotives is the Tangshan Locomotive & Rolling Stock Works, about 140 miles east of Beijing. 
Mr. Conrad went to the Chinese in 1986 to arrange a sale and soon afterward the Knox & Kane line followed suit.
Sloan Cornell, the Knox & Kane general manager, said the new engine would haul tourists through part of the Allegheny National Forest. 
The main attraction of the Knox & Kane is the 300-foot-high, 2,053-foot-long Kinzua Bridge. 
About 17,000 people rode the Knox & Kane in 1988.
The Valley Railroad carries about 130,000 passengers a year on its six-mile trip along the west shore of the Connecticut River from Essex to Chester, Conn.
A delegation from Valley visited three locomotive factories in China and decided on the Class SY from Tangshan. 
Lynn Parrott, the president of the Valley Railroad, said later that the new locomotive was worth the $300,000 price.
 
Learning American Ways
Earlier in the 20th century, the United States built steam engines for export to Japan. 
They were nicknamed ''Mikados.''
Mr. Conrad said the Valley line had chosen a smaller locomotive over a larger one offered at a plant in Datong, and that he and his party also preferred Tangshan's construction methods and the willingness of the Tangshan engineering staff to study American boiler codes and railroad guidelines.
When the new Chinese locomotive finally arrives in Connecticut, Ms. Parrott said, it will be the line's primary engine. 
She said she doubted that passengers would mind that it was not an antique.
''The majority of people who come here just like to ride behind a steam engine,'' she said. 
''Besides, the engine being new and coming from China may arouse some curiosity.''
The brand-new iron horses are to be delivered to their owners on Conrail flatcars.
