
A senior British official arrived here tonight to begin talks on sharp new tensions over the preparations for the handover of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Underlying the tensions are indications that Prime Minister John Major intends to be tougher with China and perhaps add a dash more democracy to the political system in Hong Kong. 
Beijing is outraged, and is withholding approval of the huge new airport that Britain is building as a parting gift to the territory.
Sir John Coles, a special envoy of Mr. Major, will lead negotiators in the talks, which are to begin Friday. 
The talks are supposed to focus on the airport, but some diplomats and others believe that Beijing will demand the abandonment of what it regards as a new "hard line" from London.
 
'A Little Panicky'
"I think the Chinese are a little panicky as to whether the British Government will adopt a different stance on China," said Martin C. M. Lee, the leader of the democracy movement in the territory. 
"They are making use of the airport to show the British who's the master."
Mr. Lee said he was cautiously optimistic that this time Britain would stand up to China and take some steps to build democracy in the territory.
"Once you kowtow to Beijing again and again, then Beijing expects you to be on your knees forever," he said.
British policy toward Hong Kong has long been based on the Foreign Office view that it would be counterproductive to goad China by introducing a more democratic system before handing over the territory in 1997.
But Prime Minister Major and others have given broad hints that they are considering replacing this policy, which critics deride as appeasement.
 
Signals From London
One such hint was Mr. Major's decision recently to meet with Mr. Lee, whom Beijing detests, and pose with him for photographs at 10 Downing Street.
Another was Mr. Major's replacement of Hong Kong's Governor, Lord Wilson, a career diplomat who supported the Foreign Office approach. 
The new Governor, Christopher Patten, who takes up his duties next week, is said to be considering a more democratic style of Government.
The next hint was a statement by Alistair Goodlad, the new British minister with special responsibility for Hong Kong, that it was possible to increase the number of directly elected legislative seats in Hong Kong.
Beijing was horrified.
A China-backed newspaper in the territory, Wen Wei Po, warned that a "hard line" against China could "throw Hong Kong into disorder."
 
A Poor Loser
The problem with direct elections, from China's point of view, is that its candidates never win. 
When Hong Kong held its first democratic legislative elections last year, not one of the 18 seats went to a supporter of China.
Hong Kong is now a free but undemocratic society run by the British colonial Government. 
Many Hong Kong citizens seem to feel that this benevolent dictatorship may lose its benevolence after the handover in 1997, and they favor democratic institutions as a check against the Communist Party.
Chinese officials say it is unthinkable to increase the number of directly elected legislators in 1997 from the 20 planned at present, out of the 60 seats in the legislature.
For its part, Beijing has signaled its irritation by criticizing the spending on the proposed airport. 
Without Chinese support, it would be virtually impossible for Britain to raise the private funds necessary to build the airport.
Many diplomats suspect that China is hoping for a compromise: It would back the airport if Britain dropped its talk of democracy in Hong Kong.
