
To investors in the Taiwan stock market, ''research'' often means talking to a fortune teller, and ''long-term investments'' tend to be measured in weeks instead of years. 
But what the Taiwan Stock Exchange lacks in pinstripes and gravity, it makes up for in size and performance.
The stock market on this island of 20 million people is the busiest in the world, based on the number of shares changing hands. 
More than 20 billion shares are traded on a typical day -about 20 times the average in Tokyo and more than 100 times the average in New York.
When measured by the total value of transactions, Taiwan consistently ranks third in the world, behind Tokyo and New York, although on a really good day the value of transactions here may exceed that of the New York Stock Exchange.
''They're gambling their hearts away,'' Blair C. Pickerell, president of the Taiwan International Securities Corporation, said as he pointed to the hundreds of clients gazing intently at careering prices on electronic tickers above his company's trading floor.
To be sure, with its sharp daily swings, the Taiwan market often seems a gambler's playground. 
For example, the market plunged 5.7 percent on Nov. 
28, leading to street protests in which investors demanded that the Government prop up the market. 
The authorities responded by announcing that a proposed stock-trading tax would be lower than planned, sending the index jumping 6.5 percent the next day.
Still, the Taiwan market has proved to be mainly a one-way bet in recent years. 
The market index first broke through the 1,000 barrier in 1986, and this year it jumped past the 10,000 level. 
It has since come down from that peak, and closed at 8,701.15 on Tuesday, up 35.3 points.
The rise of the Taiwan market reflects more than the speculative froth on a fast-growing East Asian economy. 
The growth of the market is due in part to the financial restructuring of Taiwan companies, as they mature beyond entrepreneurial family businesses and need equity capital to pay for further growth.
 
More Overseas Investment
Moreover, the financial wealth of Taiwan is likely to become more apparent to outsiders as it increases its investment abroad. 
In the first 10 months of this year, Taiwan's overseas investment increased by two and a half times, to $609 million. 
Though far smaller than that of Japan, the financial might of Taiwan owes much to its being a highly competitive manufacturer; its persistent trade surplus creates wealth at home and then is partly invested overseas.
Indeed, the stock market boom gives Taiwan's companies tremendous potential buying power: one financier recently noted casually to a foreign businessman that he could finance the purchase of Chase Manhattan Bank.
The biggest banks in Taiwan have market capitalizations greater than those of Chase Manhattan and Citicorp combined. 
This is mainly because Taipei's price-earnings ratios have soared to breathtaking levels; the stock of Hsin Chu Medium Business Bank, for instance, is trading at nearly 900 times earnings.
The average price-earnings ratio for the market is variously calculated as anywhere from 65 to 130, depending on whether the average is weighted by the market capitalization of the listed companies. 
In contrast, the average price-earnings multiple of stocks in the Standard & Poor's 500 is now about 15.
 
Foreigners Are Barred
Foreigners are not allowed to purchase shares directly in Taiwan, but they can buy into four funds that represent packages of Taiwan equities. 
Two of the funds, the RoC Taiwan Fund and the Taiwan Fund, are listed on the New York Stock Exchange. 
The others can be purchased through specialized brokerages.
The Government has pledged that it will eventually open its markets to foreigners, but it has not given a timetable. 
Some foreign analysts are skeptical, suggesting that the stock market will be opened only after a crash, when investment is needed.
The Taiwan Stock Exchange is often described as a ''cowboy market,'' and playing it has become a national pastime. 
There are several million private investors, and they dominate the market. 
Institutions account for only about 20 percent of trading.
Investors trade very frequently, constantly ducking into and out of stocks. 
The equivalent of the total market value of the Chia Hsin Livestock Company, for example, turned over 2.5 times in October, meaning that the average share was retained less than two weeks. 
Although that was unusually high volume, the average turnover is also much higher here than in other markets.
 
Furtive Visits to Brokerages
Bank tellers and office clerks are often seen with earphones, listening to a radio station that broadcasts nothing but stock prices. 
They periodically assert an urgent need to visit the washroom, only to rush outside to the nearest brokerage. 
After making a trade, they return to work.
''Even a lot of blue-collar workers have decided to quit their jobs and spend the time playing the market,'' said J. C. Chu, vice president of the Taiwan exchange. 
''The ministry of economic affairs has expressed concern about the impact if blue-collar employees decide to stop working.''
Cars are invariably double-parked outside brokerages; investors rush in to check prices and make trades. 
Brokerages are jammed with hundreds of people who play the market full time. 
A slight majority are housewives, but students, businessmen and taxi drivers also rub shoulders.
''The stock market has been growing very irrationally,'' said Fredrick F. Chien, chairman of the Council of Economic Planning and Development. 
''It was growing by leaps and bounds, and it created a lot of fantasies.''
 
Important to Taiwan
But Mr. Chien and others stressed that the market is important to Taiwan's development. 
Chang Liang, president of the Shearson Lehman Hutton subsidiary in Taipei, suggests that the stock market is coming to play an important role in the country's industrial revamping, in which companies take on equity for debt to strengthen their balance sheets.
Outside mainland China, companies founded by Chinese entrepreneurs - particularly those in Taiwan - are often said to be spectacularly successful at the initial stage, when they are run as family enterprises. 
But as they grow and the founders hand them to their children, the companies have frequently encountered severe difficulties.
Mr. Chang suggested that the stock market was helping to overcome these problems, by rewarding firms that adopt international standards of accounting and management.
''The well-being of Taiwan's economy depends on this capital market,'' Mr. Chang said. 
Not everyone is so enthusiastic, particularly about the market as it now exists. 
Diane Ying, a prominent local magazine publisher, said that while Taiwan needed an efficient capital market, it must be supervised and regulated more closely.
''This is a gambling joint, and a rigged gambling joint,'' she complained.
Insider trading is technically against the law here, but almost everyone acknowledges that it is widespread and that a large share of trades are made on tips of one kind or another. 
''Everybody's got a tip,'' Mr. Pickerell said. 
''The only question is whether it's right.''
 
Margin Violations
A greater concern to some analysts are violations of restrictions on margin trading. 
No one knows how widespread the practice is, but some analysts say that up to 30 percent of investments are made with borrowed money. 
One scenario that creates nightmares is that the market would fall far enough to force these investors to sell their stakes and repay their loans. 
A few defaults could drive the market much lower and cause a serious crash, some say.
Almost no one rules out the possibility of a crash - indeed, there have been two plunges of about 40 percent in the last few years, and other smaller plunges - but local investors seem optimistic. 
They say that Taiwan is awash with money, and that there are few other places to invest if people pull out of stocks.
And, they note indulgently, some people grew nervous in 1986 when the index reached 1,000. 
They pulled out of the market and missed the subsequent tenfold leap of prices.
