
A day after staging one of the biggest demonstrations of dissatisfaction with the Government ever held in the capital, most university students appeared today to reject the Government's conditional proposal for dialogue as they jubilantly planned the next moves in their campaign.
In another sign of the growing influence of the student protests, one of the nation's top Politburo members, Hu Qili, told nine major Chinese newspapers that they could report ''the actual state of affairs'' so that ordinary people could decide issues for themselves, according to two Chinese reporters.
Mr. Hu's announcement, which was made on Thursday afternoon and relayed to some newspaper employees today, apparently was a reaction to the march on Thursday and seemed to be a reversal from his warning to the editors a week earlier that they should restrict their coverage of the protests.
Mr. Hu told the editors that the Government and Communist Party held views similar to those of the students - that they all hoped to rid the Government of corruption, for example.
The students' demands include freedom of the press, a re-evaluation of the historical role of the late former party leader Hu Yaobang, more money for education and more accurate press coverage of the demonstrations.
 
Campuses Are Quiet
University campuses were mostly quiet today as students enjoyed what appeared to be growing momentum for their campaign for greater democracy. 
There is a strong perception that Thursday's big demonstration, in which 150,000 students and their supporters marched for 14 hours through the city as crowds of more than half a million cheered them on, was a turning point in recent Chinese history.
''This is the first time since 1949 that the Chinese people have demonstrated a political consciousness,'' said B. F. Yan, a 36-year-old scholar in Beijing.
The Government's announcement on Thursday that it would agree to the students' most basic demand - of entering into a dialogue with the students -was a welcome surprise that many protesters only learned of when they returned home late at night.
The announcement indicated that the Government was willing to hold a dialogue, but that the students must ''go back to their universities at once,'' and ''adopt a calm and reasonable'' attitude. 
It also said that any dialogue must be mediated by the official student associations.
''This is definitely a concession,'' said H. B. Yin, a lecturer in international politics at Beijing University. 
''The Government was forced to do this.''
Many students interviewed said they rejected the offer of a dialogue because it was tied to the official student associations, which they regard as under the thumb of the party organization. 
Instead, they set their own conditions.
At Beijing University, two large posters suggested student conditions. 
One called for the dialogues to be open to the domestic and foreign press, and for them to be broadcast live on Chinese television. 
It added that the meetings should be held alternately at Government and university locations.
