
In his news conference on Wednesday, President Bush pleaded with Congress not to ease the visa rules for Chinese students now in the United States. 
One of his arguments was that the action might lead China to cut back on future programs of study abroad, which he characterized as an important force for change in China.
Many students here share his concern. 
But their more immediate problem is that they cannot persuade the United States Embassy to grant them a visa.
'Making Life Difficult'
"Your consular section is making life difficult for some of these students," said Wu Ningkun, an American-educated professor of English at the Institute of International Relations in Beijing.
As an example, Professor Wu cited a distant relative, an engineer in his early 30's who had been accepted by an American university to study advanced engineering. 
An overseas relative agreed to provide financial support, and the young man resigned his job in order to get Government permission to leave.
He then applied for a United States visa and, since he was willing to leave his wife and child behind, thought he could show that he would return. 
But last month, his application was rejected, probably because the consular officer doubted that the relative would really provide all the money necessary.
Others also share their frustrations: a young man who was not allowed to go to the United States to visit his wife, who was studying there; a successful artist who was not allowed to take up a visiting position at an American university; a journalist with dissident connections who was denied a visa to attend the business school to which she had been accepted. 
Dreams are dashed each day at the United States Embassy, and because applicants have sometimes had to give up their jobs, they now find themselves with neither visas nor any means of support.
 
Proportion of Rejections Rises
While many Chinese focus on the number who are rejected, the Embassy and the American consulates elsewhere in China grant visas to more than 12,000 people each year to go to America to study. 
Since the military crackdown in June, the number of applications has risen by more than 60 percent. 
Some 7,000 Chinese students have gone to the United States to study since June.
In the early 1980's, it was difficult for Chinese to get passports and exit permits, and so most of those who did were granted American visas. 
But in the last few years, the Chinese made it much easier for people to go abroad, and so the American Embassy began to scrutinize applications and reject a larger proportion of applicants.
"The Chinese Government is very clever," said a young writer who is hoping to begin a graduate program in the United States in the fall. 
"They give almost everyone a passport now and let the Americans do the tight screening for them so they don't get the blame."
About half of those seeking visas to study in the United States are now rejected, because they cannot meet at least one of the three principal criteria for visas: that they be well qualified for the program they have chosen, that they have the necessary financial resources and that they intend to return upon graduation.
"Everybody gets the visa who convinces us they're qualified under U.S. law," said Karen Clark Stanton, consul at the Embassy here. 
Backlog on Immigration Visas
Some diplomats say that if the United States did open its gates, hundreds of thousands probably would seek to go. 
As it is, more than 82,000 Chinese have applied for immigrant visas at the American consulate in Canton, which handles those visas. 
At the current rate, someone applying now for an immigrant visa would have to wait for up to 21 years simply to have the case decided.
Some American diplomats admit privately that they are deeply uneasy with their role in destroying the dreams of those who want to go abroad. 
But they say that somebody has to be gatekeeper and that in any case they are only following American law. 
The burden of proof is on the visa applicant to show an intention to return to China, and these days many students find it difficult to sound sincere or enthusiastic when talking about coming back. 
Indeed, some Chinese, at the same time that they complain about the strictness of the Embassy, explain in the next breath that their dreams of starting a new life in America are now dashed.
"We are seeing privately sponsored people who feel that the Embassy rather than the Public Security Bureau is the greatest obstacle to getting to America," said Lee Travers, a program officer at the Beijing office of the Ford Foundation, which has not had difficulty getting visas for the scholars it sponsors. 
"However, it's also true that in those rejections I know about, consular officers have probably accurately predicted who does not want to return to China."
