
Students at Wake Forest University agree that Timothy W. Bell acted heroically last June when he carried videotape of the Tiananmen Square massacre out of China.
But they disagree over whether Mr. Bell, a senior, violated Wake Forest's honor code and whether he should be punished for it.
Mr. Bell, a 22-year-old business major, is appealing a judgment of the school's student Honor Council that he deceived two professors about his intentions to go to the square the night of June 3, when the Chinese Army opened fire on unarmed students who were demonstrating for democracy.
Mr. Bell spent that night in Beijing's Palace Hotel, about three blocks from the square, with reporters from NBC News and other news organizations. 
The next morning the Wake Forest group left for Hong Kong and Mr. Bell took with him the tape of the shootings at the request of an NBC News producer. 
NBC and other television networks had had their direct transmitting capability blocked by the Chinese authorities. 
The tape was broadcast on an NBC program that night.
Question of Intent
The case has centered on the question of Mr. Bell's intent when he told John H. Litcher, who led the study tour, that he was going to visit an acquaintance at The Washington Post's news office in another part of the city.
Mr. Bell says that he ended up at the NBC News office by chance, but did not tell another faculty member, Stephen Ewing, exactly where he was because he thought the professor would make him return to the group in the university district well away from the square.
''I doubt that he would have shared my belief that this was a great opportunity for my education,'' Mr. Bell said.
He argues that he did not violate the honor code because he did not personally gain at another's expense. 
School officials will not directly comment on the case, but they say it illustrates the role of the honor code in the university.
''Honor systems play a role in cementing a relationship of trust between faculty and students which is a central feature of the academic environment,'' said Thomas K. Hearn Jr., president of Wake Forest. 
''The reason you have a system is so questions of this sort can be appropriately addressed.''
The code is like those on other campuses in its prohibitions on academic dishonesty like cheating or plagiarism. 
But the Wake Forest code goes further, also regulating social behavior like lying or stealing. 
Who Should Be Believed?
Stephen Schroth, a sophomore, said the case was important because ''it's a good thing when you're reminded that when you're outside the college environment, you can be held responsible for your actions.''
But a senior, Katherine Lambert, questioned whether the Honor Council's verdict was fair. 
''I'm not sure you can believe a professor over a student,'' said Ms. Lambert. ''Was he intending to deceive the man?''
Others among the 26 students on the trip were angered by Mr. Bell's action because, they said, it could have put them in danger.
''Realizing that if the tapes had been found, the consequences that could have happened, that obviously would make you concerned,'' said Michael C. Smith, a Wake Forest graduate who traveled with the group.
Mr. Bell had also been accused of endangering other students, but that charge was later dropped without explanation, said Christopher R. Nichols, a student who defended Mr. Bell at an Honor Council hearing on Nov. 
28.
Professor Litcher testified at the hearing that the videotape had nothing to do with the case. 
Rather, it was a dispute over whether Mr. Bell had lied to faculty members, he said.
 
A Bad News Homecoming
Mr. Bell spent the summer working for NBC News in Hong Kong as a production intern and returned to the United States on Aug. 
13. He was supposed to graduate on Aug. 
15, but he learned of the charge the day after he returned.
The Honor Council put Mr. Bell on probation until Dec. 
19 and ordered him to write letters of apology to the people with whom he traveled. 
Mr. Bell will not receive his degree until he writes the letters, unless the Honor Council's sentence is modified or overturned by the school's Judicial Council, an appeal body.
While he waited for the hearing, Mr. Bell sold computers. 
He said he wants to go into television news and is trying to get a full-time job with NBC.
Mr. Bell said he first met an NBC News producer in Bejing by chance on June 2, his first day in the city. 
He said he was trying to contact news organizations because he wanted to remain in Beijing and work after the Wake Forest group left China.
