
THE snakes writhe and the crowd shrinks back. 
Then the restaurateur picks up one snake from the open table top and stretches it to its full length of about four feet. 
The crowd -- with the anticipation and horror of a mob at a lynching -- steps forward to watch as he uses a pair of scissors to skin the snake and squeeze the blood from its still squirming body.
Barbarous, no doubt, but a more effective attention-getter than any neon sign. 
As the restaurant's proprietor raves about the wondrous medicinal effects of snake blood (supposedly good for the stomach, gallbladder and male virility), several men step forward and order a glass, and the big spenders splurge on a bowl of snake soup as well.
This is Snake Alley, in the traditional quarter of Taipei, and it is one of the most interesting and unsettling neighborhoods in an interesting and sometimes unsettling city.
Taipei used to be regarded as the ugly duckling of Asian cities, and it still is the equivalent in urban planning of a chaotic and exhilarating rock music festival. 
The Chinese Nationalists, who fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing mainland China to the Communists, were so busy plotting their triumphal return that for decades they paid little attention to Taipei. 
It was simply a temporary base for the recovery of the mainland, and that is why its sidewalks are coming apart and the city is only now building a subway.
So no one will come to Taipei to admire its sidewalks. 
But there are other lures: the best collection of Chinese art in the world; a traditional and sometimes superstitious Chinese society unadulterated by Communism; arguably the best Chinese food in the world (the other contender is Hong Kong), and far more after-hours entertainment possibilities than can be found on the other side of the Taiwan Strait.
Taiwan is not just a place, but a state of mind, and in some ways this mindset is the most authentically Chinese on earth. 
Forty years of Communist Party rule have gutted mainland China of much of its soul, so that it is now in prosperous and highly educated Taiwan rather than the mainland where people devoutly leave offerings for the Kitchen God and the Goddess of Mercy, and summon a "wind and water man" to decide how to orient a building to minimize bad luck. 
The temples on Taiwan, the snake restaurants, the fortune tellers, all bespeak a society that may be rich but that has not forgotten that its roots extend to the legendary Yellow Emperor who supposedly founded China thousands of years ago.
Taipei is a bustling city of 2.8 million set in a large basin that in prehistoric times was an enormous lake. 
The streets -- with names like Eight Virtues Road and Loyalty and Filial Piety Avenue -- are quaint and old-fashioned, but the atmosphere is frenetic and, frankly, not particularly soothing. 
Cars and motorcycles cut each other off with abandon, which would be dangerous if traffic were not so jammed most of the time that vehicles travel at bumper car speeds. 
(Their drivers have manners to match.)
The banking district has its share of elegant high-rises and spacious sidewalks, slightly resembling Central district in Hong Kong, and there are a few huge boulevards to convey grandeur. 
But the more typical scenery in Taipei is of dowdy mid-rise buildings wedged together, spewing out neon and wooden signs for shops and restaurants, overlooking sidewalks crowded with street vendors and shoppers who nervously glance over their shoulders for an early warning of the motorcycles that periodically roar down the sidewalks.
Behind the main streets are small alleys that wind hither-thither among food markets and clothing stalls, interspersed with private homes covered with iron grates and multiple door locks. 
It is worth wandering around these back lanes, following your nose: the aromas range from the scent of freshly baked croissants at the ubiquitous family-run bakeries to the appalling stench of chou tofu, or stinking bean curd, which is sold by private vendors. 
Chou tofu is culinarily remarkable in that it is not only awful-tasting but also smells repulsive from 100 feet away.
Many of the shops in the narrow lanes contain tiny altars in their entrances, honoring one god or another, with offerings in front of them. 
On days of special religious significance, the shops set off long strings of firecrackers, so that it sounds as if a war is going on. 
Wandering along these back streets, one sometimes comes across a wedding or funeral, well worth a peek. 
Sometimes this can shock: Taipei funerals sometimes feature young women strippers, whose job is to lure as many guests as possible, thereby giving honor to the deceased.
The starting point for any visit to Taipei should be the old district around Lungshan Temple and Snake Alley. 
Lungshan Temple -- the name means Dragon Hill -- was built in the early 18th century to honor two important goddesses, Kuan Yin, the goddess of mercy, and Matsu, who helps fishermen.
People come to pray at Lungshan for all kinds of reasons: young people ask for a good husband or wife; young couples request a child; older people pray for good health. 
A Taiwanese friend of mine who is fighting serious illness comes regularly to Lungshan with her family.
The tables in the temple courtyard are laden with offerings to the gods: oranges, suckling pigs, candy, even potato chips. 
One of the charms of Chinese gods is that they appreciate the gifts without actually consuming them. 
So after presenting the goodies to the gods and praying, the faithful scoop up the food and take it back home.
A short walk from Lungshan Temple, along streets lined with clothing shops and inexpensive restaurants, is Snake Alley. 
Most interesting in the evening, it gets its name from the half-dozen snake restaurants that offer their own kind of dinner theater. 
For those not repelled by the cruelty of the snake-skinning spectacle, the alley boasts a famous seafood restaurant called Tainan Tan Tsu Men. 
You pick the live fish or other seafood from the aquariums outside and it is immediately cooked according to your instructions.
Snake Alley also abounds in other unusual products, from fake Rolex watches to dried deer penises, which are supposed to enhance male potency. 
And along tiny paths, just a couple of feet wide, at the end of Snake Alley are brothels employing teen-age girls, many of them Taiwan aborigines who have been sold into the trade by their parents. 
If you wish to wander through the alleys, be forewarned that some of the prostitutes are rather aggressive -- one technique is to grab a man's watch and disappear inside, obliging him to follow to get it.
A more cultured tourist sight is found at the other end of Taipei, the northeast, buried in a hillside that is supposed to protect it from any bomb attack. 
This is the National Palace Museum, which for enthusiasts of Asian art is one of the great museums of the world. 
Its treasures were part of the imperial collection in Beijing, and were removed from the Forbidden City in the 1930's and 40's and carted from city to city to escape the invading Japanese and the ravages of civil war.
"We were just like silly little boys, throwing all our efforts into transporting these things to Taiwan," said Na Chih-liang, an 85-year-old retired curator who helped care for the art during those years. 
Mr. Na and the other curators managed to bring 600,000 of China's finest artworks to Taiwan in 1949, when the mainland fell to the Communists. 
In Beijing it is regarded as plunder; here it is hailed as the nation's artistic legacy.
The collection is so vast that, even though displays are changed regularly, less than 10 percent has ever been shown. 
Most pieces are stashed in chests in tunnels that stretch into the mountain behind the museum.
The Palace Museum, which is open every day from 9 to 5 and charges about $1.90 for admission, has a particularly fine collection of paintings, such as the great scroll "Fawns Under the Maple Leaves" from the 10th century. 
Another famous piece is the "White Cabbage," a priceless white and green jade carved in the Qing dynasty. 
For foreigners, some of the most colorful and striking pieces are the painted vases and bowls from the Qing and Ming Dynasties; one masterpiece is an imperial enamel "Phoenix Plate," with blue, red and green phoenixes prancing against a swirling yellow background.
Another intriguing museum, especially for those interested in politics,is in the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in the center of Taipei. 
The memorial, which is open every day from 9 to 4:30, does not charge for admission. 
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party has suggested closing down the memorial to a man remembered more as a warlord than a national hero, but it is a pleasant patch of green tranquillity in a hyperactive city. 
In the early morning, many older people can be spotted practicing tai ji quan, qi gong and other traditional exercises.
The memorial hall is white, the Chinese color of mourning, and is splendid, whatever one thinks of the Generalissimo. 
A sculpture of him, seated in an armchair, smiles benignly down at visitors and beyond to the park. 
Beneath the statue is the museum dedicated to his life, all presented in hagiographic terms, and including such items as his socks and undershirt, as well as fascinating historical photos of the crises of 20th-century China.
The text on the walls still refers to the "Communist bandits" who evicted Chiang from the mainland (the phrase appears only in the Chinese text and not in the accompanying English translation), and the entire place is an introduction to the art of propaganda.
The memorial park also houses the National Theater and National Concert Hall, and Western tourists can arrange to see Chinese opera here if they are interested. 
But before you subject yourself to several hours of screeching, which is how nonaficionados usually regard the experience, you should know that Peking opera and other varieties of Chinese opera are far from popular among young Chinese.
Most young people in Taiwan and on the mainland would rather spend an evening at the movies. 
That explains why there are so many signs along the streets with the English letters: "MTV."This is not music television, but movie television. 
MTV outlets are like video rental shops except that they also rent out small screening rooms where a couple or a few friends can watch the video together.
One of the best in Taipei, and an excellent place to indulge in this Taiwan pastime, is Solar System (Hsin Yi Road, Section 1, No. 1, phone 704-5555). 
Solar System has a vast selection of video laser disks, mostly in English, and charges about $8 a person, including a drink as you watch the movie.
MTV has already been replaced as the hottest entertainment diversion in Taipei by KTV, which stands for karaoke television. 
(One of the most popular is Cash Box, 385 Tun Hwa South Road, 731-6326; an hour costs about $11 a person, including a drink.) KTV establishments rent out small sound-proof rooms where a few friends get together and choose music videos to play on the screen in front of them.
The background music is there, but the words have been left out and it's your job to belt out the lyrics into the microphone provided. 
The words are written on the bottom as a prompt. 
Many popular American songs are available, and the amplifier system is such that even an atrocious singer sometimes manages to sound surprisingly professional. 
This leaves you with a nice warm feeling about yourself and about the entire experience.
 
 
 
A VISITOR'S GUIDE TO THE ISLAND OF TAIWAN
Visas
Foreigners need a visa before boarding a flight to Taipei. 
This can be obtained from Taiwan's unofficial offices in the United States. 
They bear the name Coordination Council for North American Affairs and are in major cities. 
In New York, the council is at 801 Second Avenue, Sixth Floor, New York, N.Y. 
10017, telephone (212) 370-6600; in Los Angeles, 3731 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 700, Los Angeles, Calif. 
90010, (213) 389-1215.
 
Hotels
In the last half-dozen years, there has been a surge in construction of international hotels, leaving tourists with many choices. 
The Grand Hyatt (2 Sung Shou Road, 720-1234, $242 a night) is among the most splendid but is rather isolated, while the new Sherwood Hotel (111 Min Sheng East Road, phone 718-1188, $255) is convenient to the gleaming business district. 
The Hilton Hotel (38 Chunghsiao West Road, Section 1, phone 311-5151, $260) is less lavish but is in an interesting walking neighborhood.
Less expensive are the Brother Hotel (255 Nanking East Road, Section 3, 712-3456, $180) and the Grand Hotel (1 Chungshan North Road, Section 4, 596-5565, $88), which is a bit out of the way but still worth visiting because of its traditional architecture.
 
Eating
Taiwanese cuisine, based on squid and other seafood, is not nearly as famous (nor, to most Western palates, as tasty) as other Chinese cuisines. 
But Taiwan abounds in all kinds of Chinese cuisines and has some of the best Sichuan, Cantonese and northern-Chinese cooking in the world. 
Taiwan is especially good at dim sum, the Cantonese dumplings and pastries that are normally eaten for lunch but that in Taipei are also available for dinner. 
The Lai-Lai Sheraton and Howard Plaza Hotels both have excellent dim sum, but perhaps better and certainly cheaper is the Brother Hotel. 
Plan on about $15 to $20 a person for a hearty meal of dim sum, including copious tea (try oolong tea).
Americans tend to like Sichuan food, and Taipei has lots of outstanding little family Sichuan restaurants, holes in the wall that serve delicious, clean food. 
Most don't have English menus, but you need only point to anything that looks good that somebody else has ordered, and you can eat your fill for less than $10 a person.
 
Shopping
The New Taiwan Dollar has appreciated sharply against the United States dollar since the mid-1980's, and so Taiwan is no longer a place for finding bargains. 
One suggestion, however: coral necklaces and other jewelry are a Taiwan specialty.
 
Beaches Outside Taipei
If you are seeking beaches in Asia, visit Koh Samui in southern Thailand, and if you want great scenery, Guilin in southern China is your best bet. 
But Taiwan does have some beaches in the southern part of the island, and the scenery at Taroko Gorge on the east coast of the island is attractive. 
If your timing is right, Peigang has a famous festival each spring to honor the goddess Matsu. 
Kinmen Island, also known as Quemoy, is a Taiwan-controlled enclave just off the Chinese mainland, and it is a fascinating and beautiful place that may be opened to tourists if tensions with the mainland ease.
