
For nearly 40 years, defecting in a fighter plane was almost the only way for a citizen of China to visit Taiwan. 
These days Taiwan is cooling its invitation to pilots and instead is admitting private individuals from the mainland for the first time.
In December five mainland Chinese who are doctoral students in the United States became among the first officially sanctioned visitors, and their reactions have attracted great interest on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
''Seeing is believing,'' one of the students, Qian Yingyi, wrote in a report published in a Shanghai newspaper. 
''Although our trip lasted only nine days and could give us only a superficial understanding, what we saw and heard was truly impressive.''
Here in Taiwan, people are patting themselves on the back after the students' favorable reaction - even smiling, with just a hint of condescension, at the mainlanders' observation that Taiwan residents drive like maniacs and that traffic signs ''are suggestions only.''
On the mainland, the first-hand observations are leading to embarrassing contrasts between the economic stagnation of China's socialist economy and the extraordinary vigor of Taiwan's capitalist economy.
 
'We're Open-Minded'
That is the effect that the visits are intended to have. 
James C. Y. Soong, the Deputy Secretary General of the Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, said in an interview that visits by influential mainland figures are likely to do more to subvert Communism than the old strategy of hiring secret agents on the mainland.
''First we'll allow student groups,'' Mr. Soong said. 
''Then social leaders. 
We'll think about letting their reporters come here. 
We're open-minded.''
The mainlanders visiting Taiwan are enormously outnumbered by the Taiwan residents visiting the mainland. 
Since the fall of 1987, when Taiwan began to allow its citizens to visit the mainland, more than 400,000 have made the trip. 
Officially, Taiwan residents are allowed to go to the mainland only to visit relatives, but many also go to sightsee or even to do business.
Forty years after the Kuomintang was defeated on the mainland by the Communists and forced to flee to the island of Taiwan, it continues to assert that it is the legitimate government of all China. 
Officials remain deeply concerned that if the gates are opened too far, visitors from the mainland will turn out to be secret agents or will simply go into hiding and get good jobs. 
But almost everyone agrees that some mainlanders should be allowed to come.
 
Fate of 800 Taiwanese
Ma Yingjeou, a Cabinet member with special responsibilities for mainland relations, said the highest priority was to permit the return of native Taiwanese who were sent to the mainland to fight in the Chinese civil war but then became stranded after the Communist victory. 
Some 800 are still alive, and their names are now being checked to allow them to move back to Taiwan.
A few mainlanders have also been allowed to come to Taiwan to visit ill relatives, but the focus has been on mainland scholars and students. 
Selecting the right ones has been deemed so important that the former Secretary General of the Kuomintang traveled around the United States interviewing Chinese students interested in visiting Taiwan.
The Government still bans Communist Party members from visiting, but it is thinking of making exceptions. 
For example, Taiwan would like to welcome Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicist who is China's most outspoken proponent of democracy.
Mr. Fang, who was expelled in 1987 from the Communist Party, says he would like to go if China's Government allowed him to, but under present rules he would not be allowed to bring his wife, Li Shuxian. 
She is a Communist Party member, though a fierce critic of the party and of Marxism in general. 
Table Tennis, Anyone?
Taiwan is also thinking of inviting sports and cultural figures for exchanges. 
Table tennis, which played a role in the development of ties between China and the United States, may again be called upon to ease the tensions. 
China's Physical Culture and Sports Commission says Taipei has informally invited its team to play in exhibition matches, although no formal invitation has been announced so far.
Some mainlanders have not been waiting for permission. 
Instead, they have been paying fishermen the equivalent of about $2,000 to be dropped off on the Taiwan shore so they can try to find high-paying jobs.
Most of the illegal immigrants apparently work as manual laborers or, if they are women, occasionally as prostitutes. 
Because of rapid increases in Taiwan's living standard, employers have found it difficult to recruit local people in these occupations, and the illegal immigrants from the Philippines or Thailand who often fill these jobs are much more expensive than mainland immigrants.
No one knows how many mainlanders are now working illegally on Taiwan, but most estimates are in the hundreds. 
One mainlander who was discovered, Shi Longta, told reporters that he was one of 26 men who chartered a boat to Taiwan to earn extra money.
Mr. Shi, who worked in a plastics factory for less than a week before he was arrested, said it would be unfair to return him to the mainland. 
He said he was afraid to face both the Chinese Government and the friends and relatives who had paid for his trip.
