
Seven years ago, Hou Dejian, a Taiwan-born folk singer, defected from here to mainland China on a quest for the meaning of life. 
In June, the Chinese authorities put him on a Taiwan-bound fishing boat, and now, like a refugee, he feels uneasy in both lands.
It was a strange homecoming: Mr. Hou went from detention in China to arrest in Taiwan, from being one of the most daring and outspoken dissidents in China to facing charges of illegal entry to Taiwan by fishing boat.
Chinese policeman flew Mr. Hou to Fujian Province in southern China, took him out to sea and then, when they came upon a fishing boat, ordered the Taiwanese fisherman to take him to Taiwan. 
Mr. Hou sat crouched for about 50 hours at the bottom of the boat, lost 10 pounds from his already lean frame, and had to be fed intravenously for three days after he arrived in Taipei.
After fame in China for his role in the democracy movement last year, Mr. Hou is facing a measure of notoriety back home. 
Rather than hear about his heroic deeds in China, the people here want to know why he left Taiwan in the first place. 
To many of them, Mr. Hou chose to live in the wrong China, and returned only because China no longer wanted him.
 
'They Don't Understand Me'
''When I returned, they said I had betrayed Taiwan,'' the 33-year-old Mr. Hou said in an interview. 
''They don't understand me.''
Mr. Hou, who is living at home while awaiting the Government's decision on his illegal entry, has admitted publicly that he now seeks an Australian passport and does not plan to stay long in Taiwan. 
He says that his calling is still to fight for human rights in China and that he feels uncomfortable waging his battle from Taiwan, whose ties with the mainland are slowly warming.
His latest music, whose Chinese lyrics often have political overtones, is not well known in Taiwan, but he says he plans to record tapes in both Chinese and English. 
While his music was relatively popular in China, his reputation grew from his involvement in the democracy movement, when he negotiated with the soldiers to allow students to leave Tiananmen Square in the early hours of June 4, 1989.
After the crackdown, he fled to the Australian Embassy, only to come out more than two months later and support the Government version of the events of that night. 
Mr. Hou was criticized by students for fleeing to the embassy rather than face jail - criticism that is being repeated now by Taiwan people.
 
How He Was Deported
But Mr. Hou became one of the few dissidents to continue speaking out against the Chinese Government, calling the leaders ''mad dogs'' and comparing the senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, to Nicolae Ceaucescu of Romania. 
He was taken into custody at the end of May, just before a news conference at which he planned to announce a petition to release political prisoners.
Mr. Hou says that on June 8 public security officials gave him two choices: he could go to prison in China or return to Taiwan. 
They added that they could expel him, but preferred that he write a letter asking to return to Taiwan, which he did. 
This way, they said, Mr. Hou could return to China at some later date.
Mr. Hou was kept inside a room of a suburban guest house during the 17 days of his detention, and was asked to write a self-criticism on 30 to 40 topics. 
This is a method Chinese authorities often use to alter the mind-set of prisoners. 
For the first 10 days, he said, the public security officials treated him rather amicably, telling him he had not committed any crime, but then they started threatening him, hinting that he could be sentenced to more than 15 years in jail.
After reading his long essays, they told him, ''You can never be reformed.''
They allowed him to collect $1,200 from his home and a few other belongings, then confiscated his telephone and more than 100 name cards of foreign friends.
 
'Peaceful Evolution' Is Goal
In Taipei, the anger against Mr. Hou is complicated by the fact that he left a wife and a baby in Taipei when he defected to China. 
In China, he took another wife, Cheng Lin, a famous singer; she left him to live in Paris with a well-known student leader, Wuer Kaixi, who escaped to France after the crackdown last year.
Not everyone criticizes him. 
''He is more advanced in his thinking than most people are,'' said a China-born woman who travels to Taiwan frequently on a foreign passport.
Mr. Hou still has his ideals. 
''My goal is peaceful evolution,'' he said, referring to a slow process of subversion of Communism, a policy the Chinese have accused the United States of using. 
''Even though the Chinese leaders hate that term, what they are doing, with their reform and open-door policy, is precisely peaceful evolution.''
And he hopes he can convince the Taiwan people that this is why he did not want to leave China at this moment. 
''I really wanted to continue being a noisemaker in China, which few other people can do these days there.''
