
Forty years after Communist forces sent China's Nationalist Government fleeing to Taiwan, Taiwan's Finance Minister today became the first Taiwan Government official to return.
While the Finance Minister, Shirley Kuo, has emphasized that she is here only to attend the annual meeting of the Asian Development Bank and that she will avoid political contacts with mainland officials, her presence behind what are technically enemy lines is the clearest sign so far of the easing of tensions across the Taiwan Strait.
The two onetime enemy Governments still do not recognize each other, but they stopped shelling each other a decade ago, and in the last 18 months contacts have multiplied frenetically.
Taiwan officials no longer refer to the ''Communist bandits,'' and hundreds and probably thousands of mainland peasants have sneaked into Taiwan to work illegally in its factories and brothels. 
Trade between Taiwan and the mainland via Hong Kong soared 80 percent last year to $2.8 billion, and on the mainland, ''Taiwan compatriots'' have invested more than $100 million and can now be seen wherever there is a sight to be seen or money to be made.
The New Look in Portraiture
Miss Kuo will sense the relaxed atmosphere when she visits Tiananmen Square in the center of the city. 
A gigantic portrait of Sun Yat-sen, who is honored by both sides, has been put up in the center of the square for the May Day celebration, but the traditional portraits of Stalin, Lenin, Marx and Engels were left off this year.
''This does not mean any change of political attitude toward Marxism,'' the official New China News Agency said today. 
It said that officials had decided that only national heroes would be honored, and noted that a portrait of Mao Zedong always hangs in a place of honor facing Tiananmen Square.
In a news conference late this afternoon, Miss Kuo announced that the Taiwan delegation would attend the opening ceremony of the development bank meeting. 
Miss Kuo had been expected to stay away, partly to avoid contact with President Yang Shangkun of China, who will apparently attend the opening session.
The opening session may be particularly interesting this year because it has long been scheduled to take place May 4 in the Great Hall of the People, facing Tiananmen Square. 
That date is also the 70th anniversary of famous Chinese nationalist demonstrations that began in Tiananmen Square, and this year students from throughout the capital are talking about a major rally for democracy in the square to mark the anniversary.
Beijing's last big march tied up traffic throughout the city, but if delegates did succeed in getting to the Great Hall of the People on May 4, it would presumably be an embarrassment for the Government to have its foreign guests witness another mass rally.
 
Other Signs of Easing Tension
Miss Kuo's arrival here today is the boldest move in a string of recent changes in Taiwan's policy toward the mainland. 
Last month, Taiwan announced that it would allow its reporters to visit the mainland on business, whereas previously reporters could get permission to visit the mainland only on the pretext of visiting relatives here.
More than 40 Taiwan journalists are here to cover Miss Kuo's visit. 
Even Nationalist-owned news organizations have sent reporters.
Last month Taiwan also allowed its first sports team, a squad of young gymnasts, to compete in a mainland competition and announced that direct telecommunications links would be open soon. 
At the moment such links are banned by Taiwan, although it is possible for people on the mainland to telephone or telex people on Taiwan.
Taiwan's Justice Minister, Hsiao Tien-tzang, even suggested that Taipei might give up its goal of recovering the mainland, if Beijing acknowledged that the Nationalists were an equally legitimate government of China, with sovereignty over Taiwan. 
Communist officials rejected that proposal.
South Korea's Finance Minister, Lee Kyu Sung, is also scheduled to attend the development bank conference, making him the first South Korean Cabinet minister to visit China.
