
President Lee Teng-hui said today that he would soon revoke his Government's 40-year-old declaration of a ''Communist rebellion'' on the Chinese mainland, and would immediately restore the civil rights of nearly 30 dissidents, including 2 of the Government's most prominent opponents.
With the announcement, on the day of Mr. Lee's inauguration as the country's first Taiwanese-born President, the Government signaled its intent to end the formal state of war that has existed with the Communist Government since Chiang Kai-shek led the Nationalist retreat to Taiwan.
But the move will also chiefly have a domestic effect, because it will end the Government's reliance on emergency powers that took precedence over Taiwan's Constitution, a much-awaited milestone in the country's transition from authoritarian rule to a multiparty system.
By restoring civil rights for dissidents, Mr. Lee is permitting leaders of the country's fledgling opposition, the Democratic Progressive Party, to run for office.
Dissidents Gather in Protest
Mr. Lee's inauguration came as students and intellectuals pressed their protests for democratic reforms and in opposition to the appointment of Gen. Hau Pei-tsu, Taiwan's hard-line, conservative Defense Secretary as Prime Minister. 
Though General Hau has said he would resign his military posts and has begun wearing business suits instead of his uniform, 5,000 students and shoppers gathered today at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial to protest against his appointment.
Mr. Lee has served as President since the death two years ago of his predecessor, Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Chiang Kai-shek. 
In that time, he has presided over rapid changes in Taiwan's relationship with the mainland, including a startling number of Taiwanese business ventures in the People's Republic and a flood of more than a million Taiwanese visitors there.
But so far, those contacts have been indirect - mostly funneled through Hong Kong - because of the Taiwanese Government's insistence on maintaining its policy of ''three no's'' toward China: no direct contact, no negotiation and no compromise on the question of which is the legitimate government of China.
President Lee today appeared to back away from that policy, which has already been eroded by the widening network of business and family contacts across the Straits of Taiwan. 
He said that Taiwan wanted to establish direct ''channels of communication'' with the mainland, calling to ''completely open up academic, cultural, economic, trade, scientific and technological exchange.''
 
An Offer Likely to Be Refused
But President Lee presented conditions that Beijing has already said it would reject, including an opening of the Chinese Government's economy, a move toward democratic changes, and negotiations between the two governments on an equal basis. 
Beijing has said it would only negotiate party-to-party, treating Taiwan as a provincial government.
Even though few expect that Mr. Lee's overture will draw the two governments together for talks anytime soon, many saw it as a signal to Beijing of a softening of Taiwan's official line. 
It was a message, a Government official said, ''intended for the next generation of leadership'' in Beijing.
''What the President announced today is a big change,'' said Wu Wen-Cheng, a professor at Soochow University here, ''because it means that for the first time the Government is not insisting on the three no's policy. 
We are moving to a more flexible and pragmatic age.''
Three years ago, Taiwan ended martial law, touching off the beginning of a liberalization move that has in many ways closely paralleled South Korea's. 
But the Government still had broad powers under the ''temporary provisions'' in effect since Chiang Kai-shek led the retreat to Taiwan four decades ago.
Seeming to address the protesters who have been calling for quicker democratic change, Mr. Lee said today that ''if we proceed gradually, one step at a time, our system of party politics will naturally become sounder over time, our foundation of democracy will naturally become firmer, and the time when the country is well-governed and enjoys lasting stabilityI will naturally be in sight.''
 
Uncertain Political Climate
Despite the announcements today, President Lee still finds himself in a precarious political position. 
There are disagreements over what form of government Taiwan should adopt, including whether it should have a strong president.
Mr. Lee is being pressed by entrepreneurs who seek greater direct access to mainland China and reformers, including the students, who are seeking to acknowledge the reality of two separate Chinas, something neither government formally acknowledges.
On the other side, Mr. Lee needs the support of the far more conservative mainland-born politicians who dominate the political scene here. 
The legislature and electoral college are dominated by men in their 80's and 90's who represent regions of the mainland that have not been in the Taiwan Government's control for decades. 
Therefore,the Taiwanese themselves are vastly underrepresented in their own government. 
While the ruling Nationalist Party has asked the elderly mainlanders to step aside in the next two years, the party has stopped short of requiring them to do so.
Included among the 10 dissidents whose release was announced today are Shih Ming-teh, who has served 25 years in jail on two separate charges of sedition, most recently for his role in a 1979 anti-Government protest.
 
A Pardon Reportedly Refused
Mr. Shih, who has been hospitalized for four years since a hunger strike harmed his health, was reported by Chinese-language papers here to have refused the pardon, saying he wanted President Lee to apologize for the treatment of political prisoners in Taiwan.
Others involved in the 1979 protest, which turned into a riot in Kaohsiung had their rights restored today. 
They can now run for office and resume their work.
Also among those pardoned is Hsu Hsin-liang, perhaps Taiwan's best-known dissident, who spent most of the 1980's in exile in the United States. 
For years Taiwan blocked his return, sometimes sparking clashes between the police and Taiwanese waiting for his arrival at the airport. 
Mr. Hsu was arrested last year after he was caught trying to enter the country, and in December, he was sentenced to 10 years in prison.
Many dissidents accused of trying to undermine the Nationalist Government have been released in the last two years. 
With the latest group Taiwan appears to have relatively few political prisoners left. 
Many received pardons today, including top officials of the opposition Democratic Progress Party who are likely to run for election.
