
Taiwan legislators are slipping into mainland China these days, touting their political influence in hopes of meeting with the highest-ranking Chinese leaders possible, and carrying back messages they believe will play a role in the quiet diplomacy that is taking place across the Taiwan Strait.
The visits are only one way that the barriers between Taiwan and the Chinese mainland are breaking down -- not so dramatically as the destruction of the Berlin wall, but with scarcely less significance for this region.The four-decade ban by Taiwan on official contacts with mainland Chinese authorities is eroding, under the pressure of the legislators' visits and as well as joint meetings on repatriation of illegal immigrants from the mainland. 
Last month, Red Cross officials from Taiwan and China met secretly on Quemoy, an island administered by Taiwan off the coast of southern China, to negotiate repatriation of Chinese refugees who had fled to Taiwan. 
The news came out after the talks ended.
"Now there's a race to see who can meet the highest-level officials," said David J. W. Wang, a law professor atChinese Culture University. 
Mr. Wang accompanied a legislator to the mainland in August.
Taiwan opened its gates in 1987 and allowed its citizens to travel to the mainland, and since then, the contacts have expanded to included direct telephone calls, faxes and even some trade to the mainland.
In a step that could conceivably lead someday to two-way negotiations, the Government this month formed a Mainland Affairs Council to monitor cultural and commercial exchanges across the Strait. 
The council may also set up a subsidiary organization that could play a role in negotiating affairsbetween mainland China and Taiwan, and perhaps establish a branch in China.
Such a branch could help protect the interests of Taiwan citizens on the mainland. 
When 30 Taiwan travelers were killed on Oct. 
2 on a plane crash in Canton, travel agencies and private lawyers helped negotiate for information and compensation on behalf of Taiwan citizens. 
The Taiwan Government did not get involved.
Still, the plane crash and an increasing number of personal experiences have checked the "mainland fever."
Take the case of a young woman from Jiayi, a Taiwanese city, who visited the mainland this month with her father, and took a four-day bus ride to her ancestral hometown in a remote part of Anhui province.
"I didn't dare eat the food and my father had to explain to them that he and I are very light eaters," she said, relieved to be on her way back to Taiwan. 
"I couldn't take it in the village for more than two days."
Public opinion toward China was also jolted a few weeks ago, when Chinese officials blocked Taiwan's application to act as host for the 1998 Asian Games. 
The action was seen almost as a betrayal, because hundreds of Taiwan athletes and officials had enthusiastically traveled to Beijing to take part in the 1990 Asian Games.
Thousands of business executives are still flocking to China to build factories with cheap labor, but there is also a growing awareness that many of those ventures are not as successful as people had hoped. 
One report indicated that 40 percent of Taiwan operations on the mainland are losing money.The Taiwan Government is also playing a role in lowering the "mainland fever," for fear that Taiwan will become vulnerable, even hostage, to the mainland.
"That's why we want to reduce the temperature," said Ma Ying-jeou, who heads a commission on relations with mainland China.
In July, Saudi Arabia cut off ties with Taiwan to establish diplomatic links with China, and Taiwan's ally, South Korea, is setting up a commercial office in China. 
Beijing has also stalled Taiwan's application to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
"The Chinese authorities use isolation tactics to suffocate whatever room we have internationally," Mr. Ma said. 
"They want to cut off our international ties, hoping we would embrace the motherland."
