
The authorities are expected to take major steps this year to ease the remaining curbs on political debate in Taiwan.
Pressed hard by the opposition, the Government is easing its ban on seditious speech and will free some political prisoners. 
It is also expected to end its blacklist of Taiwan exiles, effectively fueling political debate.
Adding to the political confusion, a power struggle appears to be under way within the leadership, the Constitution is now being revised by a special conference, and the first free and full legislative elections in more than four decades will be held at year's end.
"This year is a threshold," said Alice H. E. Kao, a newspaper editor and member of the conference that is revising the Constitution.
 
Government Turnaround
Just a couple of months ago the Government seemed poised to move in the other direction. 
The authorities apparently came very close to dissolving the Democratic Progressive Party, the main opposition group, for advocating that Taiwan declare itself an independent country separate from China. 
In fact, while Taiwan is effectively run as an independent nation, it claims to be the Republic of China, with sovereignty over mainland China as well as the island of Taiwan.
Now the authorities are relaxing the old ban on seditious speech. 
While the ban has been widely ignored in recent years, and the opposition regularly excoriates the leadership and proclaims the heresy that Taiwan should abandon its claims to mainland China, the change in the law is still seen as a crucial step.
The sedition law, Article 100 of the criminal code, had provided for sentences as severe as life in prison and was sometimes used to stifle critics.
"My impression is that only those acts that involve violence will be prosecuted," said the Government spokesman, Jason C. Hu. "Expressions will not be prosecuted."
 
Dissidents to Be Freed
Once the law is changed, later this year, the Government is expected to free a handful of dissidents who are in prison for peaceful expression of their views. 
The most famous of these is Huang Hwa, a longtime champion of Taiwan independence who is serving a 10-year prison sentence.
These steps toward democracy and tolerance have caused concern within the Communist Chinese leadership, which fears that Taiwan is gradually moving toward formal independence from China. 
A senior Chinese official said the leaders were closely following the moves being taken by Taiwan this year.
Ending the blacklist, which for decades has kept hundreds of Taiwan's leading political figures and scholars from returning, will also be a major step toward opening up the political system. 
Ever since the late 1940's, large numbers of people from Taiwan have gone to the United States to study or work and have found themselves barred from returning because of their criticisms of the Taiwan Government policy at home.
The authorities are also moving to ease controls on radio and television, though not as quickly as the opposition would like. 
Mr. Hu said that it would take about a year to approve new commercial radio stations, which have been banned in part for fear that they would criticize the Government.
 
Allowing Cable TV
The Government is also allowing cable television systems, though with considerable restrictions. 
It is not clear that this relaxation will make much difference, because Taiwan already has a huge network of cable systems that are illegal but tolerated.
Another major arena for change is the governing Nationalist Party's 14th Congress, which will be held this year or next and is expected to revise the party structure to make greater use of elections by party members.
Hsu Hsin-liang, the leader of the Democratic Progressive Party, said he was optimistic that the opposition might even win a majority in the legislative elections late this year and form a government. 
This is a view that few others share, but Mr. Hsu indicated that the opposition would tone down its advocacy of Taiwan independence and turn to issues that have broader appeal among voters: taxes, pollution and delays in carrying out direct presidential elections.
"In last year's election for the National Assembly, our party platform was about Taiwan independence and that scared the middle class," Mr. Hsu said. 
"We talked about independence a lot last year, and this year we won't."
