
For four decades, one of the world's most bitter rivalries has magnified the distance between the island of Taiwan and the Chinese mainland 90 miles away. 
While the political conflict remains unresolved, thousands of Taiwan businesses are flooding into China and establishing important economic links.
Most foreign investors were frightened away from China after the bloody suppression of the democracy movement in June. 
But Taiwan investors, who themselves lived for decades under martial law, seemed less alarmed. 
They are continuing to open factories on China's east coast.
''Textiles, electronics, plastics - so far, they have all invested in mainland China factories, but not directly,'' said Kao Chunlee, research department manager at the Taiwan International Securities Corporation.
Direct investments in the mainland are still illegal under Taiwan law, but mom-and-pop enterprises have often ignored the restrictions or evaded them by channeling money through companies in Hong Kong.
It is more awkward for large corporations to ignore the rules, but they, too, have their methods. 
For instance, Tuntex Group, a prominent textile company, is considering a project in China. 
It said that the actual investment would come from an Indonesian entity, but Tuntex acknowledged that it would then build the factory, provide the equipment, install it and run the plant.
Like Tuntex, Taiwan's other large corporations are hoping to move production to the Chinese mainland, and they are forcing the Government to rethink its most fundamental policy toward its longtime enemy across the Taiwan Strait.
Tired of waiting for the Government, more and more of Taiwan's executives have traveled to China in search of an answer to the problems of rising costs at home. 
In response, the Government seems to be easing restrictions on contacts with the mainland.
Taiwan's leaders found themselves in a particularly awkward position in January, when news broke that Y. C. Wang, chairman of Taiwan's largest conglomerate, the Formosa Plastics Group, made a secret trip to the Chinese mainland in October. 
Even by international standards, Formosa Plastics is a titan, with operating revenues last year of $5.8 billion, and Mr. Wang is perhaps the single best-known executive in Taiwan.
Instead of grounding him, as the Government might have done in reaction to a public trip by a less prominent person, the authorities issued new regulations to allow business trips to the mainland.
 
Bowing to the Inevitable
''Capital outflow is inevitable,'' said Ma Yingjeou, chairman of the Government's Research, Development and Evaluation Commission. 
''If not to the mainland, they will go to Southeast Asia. 
It's a trend we can't ignore.''
How to accommodate the trend is an extremely sticky problem for the island's leaders, whose one overarching plan has shaped the last four decades of remarkable economic development: strengthen Taiwan against the threat from the mainland. 
Any direct official contact with China is banned, and all trade and investment with the mainland is supposed to go through other places, like Hong Kong.
One stopgap measure the Government settled on was to allow selected groups of Taiwan's declining industries to conduct trade and investment directly with China. 
Later this year, the Ministry of Economic Affairs is expected to issue a list of industries barred from going - presumably those considered crucial to Taiwan's security - while allowing all others to do as they wish.
 
Hopes for Direct Routes
Business executives are hoping for direct air or shipping routes from Taiwan to Xiamen, across the Taiwan Strait in Fujian Province, but the Government denies that it has immediate plans for such a step. 
This month, executives from private Taiwan airlines are expected to visit China to discuss the prospects for such links. 
A spokesman for the Chinese Government airline, however, declined to comment on the visit.
Such changes are only incremental, but they are expected to pave the way to closer links between Taiwan's 20 million people and the mainland, just as the Government's decision in 1987 to allow its citizens to visit relatives on the mainland led to greater business links.
As they contemplate Taiwan's economic future, some officials are becoming alarmed at the prospect of growing dependence on China. 
Last year, trade with China through third countries soared above $3 billion, about 30 percent more than 1988, and investment reached about $400 million, according to official statistics from China and Taiwan. 
Other estimates are higher.
 
Taiwan Authorities' Concerns
What concerns some officials is that if Taiwan authorities do not control the investment in the mainland, the island could lose important industries to China - as well as profits that would not necessarily be repatriated. 
If Taiwan has not yet improved its industrial base, their argument goes, there will not be any new money-making industries to replace the old industries fleeing to the mainland, and the ultimate result could be harmful to Taiwan.
''China and Taiwan have a political conflict,'' said Hong Chichang, a legislator and member of the opposition group, the Democratic Progressive Party. 
''Although China may not attack Taiwan, China still has the strong intention of taking over Taiwan. 
If we don't limit Taiwan's investment there, this could hurt Taiwan.''
Most investment so far has gone in small amounts, coupled with old equipment, from hundreds of small factories making shoes, purses, umbrellas, textiles and apparel. 
Industry executives said more than half of Taiwan's 1,500 shoe manufacturers, for instance, have already moved operations to the mainland to escape Taiwan's rising costs and strong currency, which appreciated more than 40 percent against the American dollar in 1986 and 1987.
 
Effects of Economic Success
The change also in a sense reflects the success of Taiwan's economy: As living standards soared, so did wages, and it no longer was economical to produce labor-intensive products in Taiwan. 
Because of its success, the economy was forced to turn in other directions, and the manufacturers of low-technology products found that to compete they had to transfer production to low-cost countries.
Bankers expect the trade links to grow. 
To capture some of the business, Credit Lyonnais opened a branch last year in the Xiamen special economic zone in Fujian. 
And Citibank is sending a China specialist to Taipei to try to develop that market.
If small manufacturers went to China for survival, the larger Taiwan companies are interested in China to help them remain competitive, and even expand.
 
Big Project Seen at Tuntex
Bankers and industry executives said Tuntex had already embarked on a project that could eventually amount to between $100 million and $200 million, which would be the largest single investment so far. 
The company, which would not comment on the amount, said an agreement had not yet been signed.
Other businessmen said Formosa Plastics has plans to invest, but the company said any projects on the mainland were still under investigation.
''I don't think there is any magic -it's driven by economic factors,'' said Chang Liang, president of Shearson-Global Financial Services Company in Taiwan. 
''If somehow they make Fujian an export processing zone and provide good facilities, move the military 10,000 miles away, and if Taiwan would allow direct sailing from here to there, then we're talking big.''
 
Advantage for South Korea
Formosa Plastics said its longtime customers in Taiwan had been pressing it to build a plastics factory in China to supply their Fujian offshoots with necessary raw materials. 
Some are buying from other countries, including South Korea, that can ship goods to China more cheaply.
To ship a container from Taiwan to Hong Kong, for instance, Formosa Plastics said it cost $400, and then another $800 for shipping to Fujian; South Korean companies, they argued, can ship the same container from Seoul to Fujian for about $400.
''If we don't go, some company will go to build factories in Fujian to supply our customers,'' said Wang Wenyoung, Y. C. Wang's son and a general manager at Formosa Plastics. 
''Then we lose market, and what happens to Formosa Plastics in the long run?
It's very dangerous.''
