
President Lee Teng-hui declared an end to 43 years of emergency rule today, paving the way for greater democracy on the island and closer relations with China.
Mr. Lee took a symbolic step toward reconciliation with Beijing by ending the "Period of Communist Rebellion," a decree issued by the Nationalist Government a year before it lost the Chinese civil war and fled to Taiwan in 1949.
Emergency constitutional provisions under the decree blocked Taiwan's progress toward democracy by freezing in place hundreds of parliamentary deputies elected in mainland China in 1947.
"This will set in place the foundation for the future development of our country," Mr. Lee said at a news conference at the presidential office.
 
'Authorities' in Beijing
He said Taipei would now regard the Chinese Communists as "authorities," rather than merely as a "rebel organization," and reiterated his pledge not to use force to reunify China.
"From now on, we must accept the reality that the Communists control the mainland," Mr. Lee said.
He stopped short of declaring an end to the formal state of war that has existed between the two sides since 1949, or abandoning the Nationalists' claim to be the sole legitimate government of China.
Further improvement in ties would depend on Beijing's renouncing the use of force against Taiwan and allowing the island to join international organizations and establish links with foreign governments, President Lee said.
"If the Communists create military tension between us, or continue to fight us in the diplomatic arena, we will continue to view them as a hostile entity," he said.
Mr. Lee vowed to work toward the reunification of China, which both sides say they want, by encouraging cultural exchanges and unofficial contacts. 
A delegation from Taiwan is currently visiting Beijing to open up a channel for dialogue.
Links with China have grown rapidly since the late 1980's, when Taipei eased a ban on travel to the mainland by the island's 20 million people.
Tens of thousands of Taiwan residents have visited China and economic ties have blossomed, though Taipei insists trade and investment occur indirectly through third countries.
The aging deputies of Taiwan's National Assembly approved Mr. Lee's initial package of democratic changes last week, voting to rescind the emergency constitutional provisions and to authorize elections to the three chambers of Parliament.
All deputies representing constituencies on the mainland must retire by the end of this year, and most members of the new Parliament will for the first time represent areas in Taiwan. 
A minority of "mainland" seats will be retained to back Taipei's claim to sovereignty in China.
Passage of the changes set off brawls in Parliament and a 15-hour demonstration by about 10,000 supporters of the main opposition Democratic Progressive Party, which says the Nationalists are not sincere about full democratic change.
The new National Assembly, to be elected at the end of this year, will debate further changes like direct election of the President. 
The opposition has said the Nationalists aim to include undemocratic safeguards for their power.
Taiwan has been moving toward democracy since 1987, when it lifted martial law. 
After Mr. Lee took power in January 1988, the Nationalists allowed new political parties and considerable press freedom.
Most people say they believe the governing party's iron grip on political patronage, and its success in managing Taiwan's dynamic economic growth over the last four decades, mean the opposition will not pose a serious challenge for years.
