
Prime Minister Li Peng is personally overseeing a proposal by Taiwan's richest industrialist to build a $7 billion petrochemical complex in China, an investment that could provide a lift to this country's hard-line leaders and its coastal economy.
The deal, if concluded, would be by far the largest single foreign investment in China. 
It would also represent a major challenge to Taiwan's Government, which is trying to regulate the flow of Taiwanese investment to mainland China.
The confidential proposal -- including a letter from Y. C. Wang, the maverick chairman of the Formosa Plastics Group, who is behind the project, and classified documents bearing Mr. Li's signature -- is now circulating among senior officials in about a dozen ministries. 
The complex would be built near the city of Xiamen in Fujian Province.
The deal would be a coup for Mr. Li and other Beijing hard-liners who would take credit for it -- and for the billions of dollars in additional investments from other industrialists in Taiwan who are expected to follow Mr. Wang.
Still, it is not clear that the investment will be made, even though a Chinese official said that the Government had agreed in principle to the project. 
Mr. Wang had planned to build a petrochemical complex in southern Taiwan, but growing environmental concern has led to stiff opposition. 
Some financial analysts in Taipei said they believed that Mr. Wang was already committed to the Taiwan complex and would not be able to back out.
 
'Looking for Support'
Others said that Mr. Wang was using the China option as a hedge, in case the authorities in Taiwan do not offer him the terms he seeks. 
"He's looking for support from the Government here in Taiwan," said Benjamin Chen, an analyst at Baring Research (Taiwan) Ltd. 
He predicted that Mr. Wang -- a 73-year-old who jogs every morning, has three women he considers his wives and built his empire with spectacular nerve and business intuition -- would invest with "whichever Government can give him better treatment."
Recently, the Government in Taiwan indicated it would approve Mr. Wang's plans, in an effort to keep the investment at home and out of China. 
However, a spokesman for Mr. Wang's company said that the group had not yet made a final decision on constructing the plant in Taiwan, and had not formally submitted its application for the $3.3 billion project to the Taiwan Government.
The spokesman, reached by telephone in Taipei, declined to comment on the China proposal.
Mr. Wang may be considering building petrochemical plants on both Taiwan and on the Chinese mainland, but securities analysts said it would be difficult to arrange financing for two such projects at the same time.
 
Hong Kong Link Needed
Mr. Wang's interest in China has been known for months, but only with the detailed documents now being circulated was it clear that Formosa Plastics had formally applied to the Chinese Government for permission to build. 
The investment would be made through a Hong Kong subsidiary, because of Taiwan's restrictions on direct investment in China.
Mr. Wang proposes building an integrated operation that would include manufacture of petrochemicals; shipping and transportation links, and even banking facilities, and he submitted a list of conditions to the Chinese Government. 
In September, Mr. Li took a significant step in the negotiations by approving a proposal to establish a small team to explore the feasibility of Mr. Wang's demands.
