
Picking up on the fragmenting of the Soviet empire, Taiwan's opposition party is voicing the official heresy that Taiwan should not worry about reuniting with the Chinese mainland, but should forge an independent future.
"If the three Baltic republics can become independent, why can't Taiwan?" a legislator from the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, Hong Chichang, asked. 
"Taiwan is economically more powerful than they are, it has more people, and it has a military. 
If Taiwan is stronger than they are and China is weaker than the Soviet Union, then why can't Taiwan submit a vote to the people to declare independence?"
Since they fled here from the mainland 42 years ago, the Nationalist leaders have perpetuated the dream that they still are the legitimate rulers of all China, including Taiwan. 
But with China's turning a blind eye to the worldwide trend against socialism, even the leaders here acknowledge that reunification with the mainland under a capitalist system would probably have to wait some time.
The debate over independence is intensifying, as campaigning for elections in December starts. 
Nearly two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly, which has been dominated by aging officials elected on the mainland for 40 years, will be contested in the elections, and the politicians, some too weak to attend sessions, are being forced to retire.
"In the upcoming election campaign, no one would advocate unification, and if someone did, people would think he was crazy," a prominent Taiwan magazine publisher, Antonio Chiang, said. 
"Independence is an issue, but reunification is not."
Pro-independence groups demonstrated last week to call for Taiwan's separate entry into the United Nations, and the success of the Baltic republics' struggle has given them increased inspiration, if not a more sympathetic public ear. 
But polls indicate that 12 percent of the population support independence, with no sign that that number is rising.
No one expects Taiwan to be permitted to join the United Nations any time soon, because China, which has a permanent seat on the Security Council, would veto an application.
Government officials here deny that the independence of the Baltic republics bears any similarity to Taiwan's situation. predicament. 
"The Soviet Union forcefully annexed the three countries, and now that wrong is being redressed," Foreign Minister Fredrick F. Chien said in an interview. 
"We believe in reunification. 
We do not think that independence would serve the interests of the 20 million people here."
Mr. Chien said that the situations of the other Soviet republics, many of which have declared independence but have not been recognized by foreign countries, are more comparable to Taiwan's circumstances. 
Taiwan, Mr. Chien argues, never was an independent country, and so the rest of the world would be unlikely to recognize it if it simply declared independence.
