
After five days of strenuous national debate, a national conference on this island's future concluded today with a call for popular presidential elections.
The endorsement of popular elections by the 150 delegates seemed to give a considerable lift to proposals that would restructure Taiwan's political system along much more democratic lines in coming years. 
President Lee Teng-hui had chosen all the delegates and given them a mandate to grapple with the intensely emotional question of Taiwan's future.
It was the first time that the Government and its opponents had openly discussed on a public stage some critical questions about Taiwan's future. 
They included: Should the nation revise its Constitution or draw up a completely new one?
Should the Government adopt a presidential or parliamentary system?
How should the 20 million people on Taiwan build economic links with 1.1 billion Chinese on the mainland?
''This is a fantastic thing,'' said Kang Ning-hsiang, a prominent member of the Democratic Progressive Party, the opposition group. 
''To bring all these people together to talk about our future is the greatest political event.''
With bells ringing every so often to signal the end of a speaker's floor time, delegates stood up one by one on podiums to state their views on various issues. 
The conference delegates included a student, a Mongolian, a Tibetan, a handful of previously jailed dissidents, and Chinese scholars from the United States.
The conference has no legal authority, and so it is not clear how their conclusions will be carried out.
''Everyone feels a little funny,'' said Jaw Shau-kong, a legislator from the governing Nationalist Party and a delegate to the conference. 
''This is outside the legal system.''
The agreement on popular presidential elections was the most important decision at the conference. 
Currently, the President is elected through the National Assembly, an electoral college that is made up mostly of elderly men, who purport to represent constituencies on mainland China.
 
Charter Revision Proposed
While they agreed on presidential elections, delegates were divided on whether citizens should elect the President through an electoral college or bypass that step and hold direct elections.
The delegates also debated ways to restructure the island's legislature, which has passed only one minor law in its current session, which ends in a few weeks. 
President Lee and other Nationalist leaders have indicated that Taiwan needs a constitutional overhaul, but that that may not be easy to achieve.
In one move that will make Parliament more democratic, Taiwan's highest court ruled recently that those aging legislators - unelected in decades - must resign by the end of next year. 
Opposition members want an earlier deadline.
President Lee said in March that he would revoke within about a year the Government's 40-year-old declaration of ''Communist rebellion'' on mainland China. 
Changing that condition, which vests the President with special powers, would require altering Taiwan's Constitution, and there was no consensus on how to revise it.
The opposition party is demanding that the Government scrap the Constitution and write a new one. 
And while the party's voice has been more influential than its 30,000 membership would suggest, it is not clear that it has much support on this issue.
Still, delegates agreed that constitutional changes are inevitable and some hoped the conference would deepen the sense of urgency.
''We can keep the momentum of reform, and not just of the Constitution,'' said Ma Ying-jeou, a Nationalist Party delegate and Cabinet-level official. 
''The party structure has to be democratized to cope with new constitutional democracy.''
Probably the most delicate and emotional issue of the conference focused on Taiwan's policy toward mainland China. 
During the last couple of years, relations between China and Taiwan have warmed dramatically.
