
THE SECRET SPEECHES OF CHAIRMAN MAO
From the Hundred Flowers to the Great Leap Forward.
Edited by Roderick MacFarquhar,
Timothy Cheek and Eugene Wu.
561 pp. 
Cambridge, Mass.:
The Council on East Asian Studies/
Harvard University Press. 
Paper, $15.
Two Chinese texts for the day: ''It's good to have a bit of disturbance. 
Students making a disturbance is not equivalent to rebellion. 
. . . I say let them agitate to their hearts' content. 
. . . Make the process of the disturbance serve as an educational process, serve as a political course.''
And: ''The People's Liberation Army is for dealing with imperialism, not for dealing with the people. 
The People's Liberation Army is the son of the people. 
How could the son [of the people] ever oppose the father of the people?''
These observations, so poignant in light of the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in May and June and the subsequent Beijing slaughter, were made by Chairman Mao Zedong 32 years ago, in February and March 1957. 
Mao was trying to get support for what became known as the Hundred Flowers Movement, a broad-based airing of views on the problems facing China, which he believed would dissipate the tensions that had arisen since the suppressions of the Hungarian and Polish risings in 1956. 
The reassurances Mao offered to intellectuals, party workers and students, in many informal speeches and off-the-record discussions, had the effect desired. 
By the spring of 1957 the movement was in full swing, and a deafening chorus of complaints was surfacing in every available forum.
Unfortunately for Mao, the complaints were directed not only at shortcomings in the political, economic and intellectual life of China, but at the Communist Party as an entity, and at Mao himself as an authoritarian and incompetent leader. 
Bitter and chagrined, Mao backed off from his support of the Hundred Flowers and joined forces with more conservative cadres who had never wanted the campaign in the first place. 
By the summer of 1957 the party was conducting a full-fledged ''Anti-Rightist Campaign'' against those who had been most outspoken. 
At least half a million Chinese were punished for having answered the chairman's call.
Mao gave hundreds of informal speeches, containing phrases and thoughts similar to those quoted above, but very few of them made their way into the five volumes of his official collected works. 
For the Mao canon was too important to be left to Mao, and batteries of senior comrades and editors were at hand to tidy up his work, remove indiscretions and try to reach a point of view consistent with whatever the party line of the time happened to be. 
However, for over 30 years Mao was the most revered and most feared person in China, and his words were stored in countless ways by those who heard them - in secret party archives, internal memos, private notebooks, tape-recorded transcripts. 
When the young Red Guards were encouraged by Mao in 1966 and 1967 to lash out at the senior officials in the party, the bureaucracy and the educational establishment, they customarily ransacked the homes and offices of their victims. 
In the course of these raids, much confidential material came to light. 
Some of it was used as evidence against the senior personnel concerned. 
If the words were Mao's, they were transcribed by Red Guards and circulated in various published or informal ways, as evidence - if more was needed - of Mao's creative originality as a thinker. 
Occasionally bits of these collections reached scholars in the west and were translated there; two important examples were the pieces published by Jerome Chen in 1970 as ''Mao Papers'' and by Stuart Schram in ''Mao Tse-tung Unrehearsed'' (1974).
Now, in ''The Secret Speeches of Chairman Mao,'' Roderick MacFarquhar, a professor of government at Harvard University, together with Timothy Cheek of Colorado College and Eugene Wu, the librarian of Harvard's East Asian collection, have edited a remarkably comprehensive collection of these informal Maoist texts. 
Wisely, I think, they have chosen to focus on just two key events in China's recent history, rather than using a scattershot approach that would give a little taste of many topics.
Their focus on The Hundred Flowers Movement of 1957 and the Great Leap Forward of 1958 is particularly apt, because each presents such a different side of Mao's character and his approach to politics. 
The Hundred Flowers texts show Mao almost as a petitioner among his own people, ''a wandering lobbyist,'' as he described himself in a talk to army cadres in Nanjing. 
He is genial, relaxed, sharp in comment but open to give and take. 
The Great Leap Forward texts, by contrast, show a much darker side of his character - angry, impatient, visionary, uninterested in arguments that might have brought him back to earth.
Obviously, these texts, by such a major political actor, collected in such informal ways, raise complex problems of authenticity. 
Mr. Cheek, in an opening essay called ''Textually Speaking,'' confronts this problem directly, reflects on the pros and cons of the authenticity of different texts, collates various speeches from different editions with their variant forms and with official published versions where possible, and concludes the speeches published here are genuinely the words of Mao. 
Mr. Cheek knows the field extremely well and has had the help of an international array of Chinese analysts, along with the bibliographic skills of Mr. Wu (who directs an essay of his own to similar problems), so I accept this judgment, especially since Mr. Cheek is not dogmatic about the works in question and tells us when he has doubts.
As Mr. Cheek nicely phrases it, in Mao's earlier official collected works, Mao himself accepted the need for a ''consensual approach to his own deification,'' whereas in the official collections published by the Communist Party since Mao's death in 1976, one gets a kind of ''academic theology'' in which '' 'scientific,' linguistic and historical analyses seek to contribute to a living faith.''
In contrast, the Red Guard editions that never ceased praising Mao, ''genius'' editions as Mr. Cheek calls them, provide both ''a gold mine of political and psychological data for Mao studies'' and ''a cesspool of run-on sentences, obscure grammar, and simple nonsense for the translator.''
Three other essays by eminent China scholars help to give us a valuable set of contexts in which to read Mao's informal texts. 
Mr. MacFarquhar's opening essay, as one would expect from the leading expert on both the Hundred Flowers Movement and the origins and implementation of the Great Leap Forward, gives an excellent overview of Mao's state of mind as he argued with his senior party colleagues over the need for change and criticism at the center. 
Benjamin I. Schwartz gives a moving analysis of Mao's ''deep anxieties, soaring exaltations, injured pride, deep resentments, and unexamined complacencies.''
Mr. Schwartz concludes that the ideas behind the Great Leap were more central to Mao's being than those of the Hundred Flowers, and presented an apocalyptically utopian view of the fusion of his mind with those of China's masses (as opposed to the bourgeois intellectuals) that represented Mao's ''final spiritual resting place.''
Merle Goldman, looking at the Mao of the late 1950's from the vantage point of her deep familiarity with the manifestations of political and literary dissent in China, explains how the Hundred Flowers slogans sprang from Communist Party intellectual history - specifically, from an earlier 1951 Maoist analysis of the Beijing Opera tradition and from the roots of a historiographical academic debate that Mao refused to pass judgment on. 
She also shows how Mao was enraged with his propaganda chiefs and newspaper editors, and concludes, forcefully, that Mao comes across in these talks as ''contradictory, repetitious, and obsessed.''
What, then, are the central contributions made by this new collection to our knowledge of China?
Perhaps the greatest is that they show us how much frank discussion was in the air during this strange period of Chinese history, and how difficult it sometimes was for Mao to get what he wanted despite his immense prestige. 
The final impression is that Mao felt so far above the fray, even while so grubbily absorbed in it, that he ceased to have any clear sense of the country's terrible suffering. 
People really had become ciphers to him, mere details on the way to some ultimate colossal goal. 
''In the past during the revolution numerous people died without asking anything in return. 
Why can't it be like that now?''
Mao asked his senior colleagues in August 1958 as he discussed the Great Leap. 
Maybe they should think of letting the peasants have two days' rest a month, he ruminated a little later, but then at once modified the thought: ''during the busy season, rest a little less,'' he said, and eat and sleep at the work site too, to save precious time. 
''This point should be written in the documents but not be talked about too much,'' he told his colleagues. 
Sometimes Mao's thoughts strayed to stranger zones: to great wide roads in every commune with no trees on their verges so that every road would be an airport; or to a world of Chinese so healthy that physicians would have no patients, and could go till the fields and do research.
Almost everything Mao was saying in 1957 was something students and workers wanted to discuss with their own Government in 1989. 
Perhaps most ironically, it was presumably Hu Yaobang, then directing the Communist Youth League, who tried to give Mao accurate information on student unrest. 
Hu Yaobang's own death in April 1989 was the initial spark that culminated in the June tragedy, even though the deeper causes had been smoldering a long time. 
As Mr. MacFarquhar says, this 1989 Tiananmen crisis ''would almost certainly have the same numbing effect on China's intellectual elite as the Anti-Rightist Campaign, and could deter rural and urban entrepreneurs and foreign investors.''
As we can now see, thanks to these texts, the paradoxes at the center of this Government were paradoxes that lay also at the heart of Mao's being. 
Or, as Mr. Schwartz puts it so beautifully in his essay: ''In the end, on the level of his final abstract vision, Chairman Mao may be not so much 'alone with the masses' as alone with himself.''
 
THE CHAIRMAN, UNEDITED
One added richness in this strange and absorbing book is that if we so choose we can take any one of Mao's off-the-cuff draft speeches and then see how it compares with the final party version (if there is one). 
To do this in the case of one of Mao's most famous speeches, ''On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People,'' is a fascinating exercise. 
The history of this speech is more than usually devious, since Mao initially delivered it on Feb. 
27, 1957, to a large group of nonparty intellectuals and bureaucrats, whom he was trying to persuade to join in the Hundred Flowers Campaign. 
It was not published at the time, to Mao's anger. 
But after he himself swung against the protesters, he apparently acquiesced in the publication of a totally revised version in The People's Daily of Peking on June 19, 1957. 
This latter version was doctored to make it appear that Mao wanted the Hundred Flowers Campaign to serve as a vehicle of class struggle, and that he anticipated trouble from the start.
The ''speaking notes'' for the original speech that have now surfaced bear almost no relation at all to the mood or content of the dogmatic and tedious June 19 version. 
The newly discovered version occupies 58 pages of ''The Secret Speeches of Chairman Mao,'' and there is a surprise on nearly every page. 
Some examples must serve for the whole: Mao's frank discussion of the troubles in Poland and Hungary, his sense that the people wanted two news agencies in competition with each other, his analysis of the way China's national bourgeoisie is not an enemy, his frank announcement that 770,000 Chinese were killed in the mass campaigns of 1950 to 1954, his portrayal of the constructive role of student protests in modern Chinese history, his analysis of problems in China's cooperatives and his estimate that in some areas 15 percent of the households were ''lacking grain,'' his mention that many Chinese now feel ''disgust with Marxism.''
Among other important things Mao discussed in February that never made it to the June text were the urgent need for birth control in China, the fact that 40 percent of school-age children had no schools to go to, and the fact that during 1956 China had been troubled by a mass of protests and strikes: 7,000 students protesting in 28 different cities, according to Communist Youth League figures, and 50 strikes conducted by urban workers, some involving over 1,000 workers, according to statistics Mao admitted were still incomplete.
 
JONATHAN D. SPENCE
