
AS the sun rises along a deep and smooth bend in the Huangpu River, where the boats known as sampans tie up at the mouth of the Suzhou Creek, the river bank already shows signs of bustle. 
On the main street, Doric columns, Gothic windows and plaster friezes adorn the grand buildings towering above the rest of the city's low, flat-roofed houses and hint at the past presence of European brokers in the opium trade. 
But now the street overflows with Chinese workers - officials, bankers, shippers, dumpling vendors and cart pullers.
The Bund, the long, winding embankment along the river in the eastern part of Shanghai, welcomes dozens of freighters and hundreds of sampans every day. 
It is a crossroads where American executives run into martial arts experts, where canvas-covered skiffs glide close to Mercedes limousines, where Tudor-style buildings overshadow common brick houses and where foghorns muffle the murmur of busy pedestrians.
In some ways it is as Western to the Chinese eye as it is Oriental to the foreign visitor. 
The Chinese inhabitants have shaped the Bund to their own needs - sellers of hot pork buns scout for hungry passers-by, brightly clad Tibetan women offer cow horns and herbal roots for sale and tip their tall headdresses to anyone who glances at their wares. 
Policemen in khaki uniforms make their patrols, wide-eyed children stare off at the water as their mothers point to the huge ships and lovers stroll hand-in-hand.
Yet to the Chinese visitors, who come to this waterfront by the thousands every day, the city's Bund represents a world of finance, a place where Shanghai's shrewd merchants meet the rich businessmen of the West. 
Unlike the simple houses or small inner-city flats that most Chinese live in, the buildings here are grand, stark reminders of Western imperialism, yet symbols too of Shanghai's old opulence, of its history and of its industry when it outshone the rest of China.
The Huangpu River, the source of Shanghai's riches, was named after a prince, Huang Xie, who more than 2,000 years ago mobilized thousands of laborers to dredge the river. 
In Chinese ''pu'' refers to an area where a river flows into the sea. 
Three tributaries feed into the river, which from the Bund runs 50 miles to the East China Sea and then blends into the Pacific Ocean. 
This river gateway has made Shanghai's port the busiest in China. 
Scores of cargo ships anchor near the tall cranes that lift gigantic containers onto shore. 
Sampans ferry goods from land to boat or from boat to boat. 
Vessels pause only long enough to exchange goods between China and the rest of the world.
In its heyday, beginning with the opium trade in the 1830's and lasting until 1949 with the Communist victory in China's civil war, the Bund was the enclave for the British, American and French Consulates, the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, as well as companies like Jardine Matheson & Company, David Sassoon Sons and Dent & Company. 
These were the hongs, the foreign trading companies that grew on the opium trade in the last century and today thrive on international trade from their Hong Kong bases.
The Chinese people had used opium as medicine for years, but in the 1830's and 40's its use as a drug expanded. 
The astute European traders smuggled thousands of chests of opium from India to the coastal areas of China in exchange for tea and silk. 
After legalization in 1860, which brought regulation, the trade began to decline; in the first decade of this century it was abolished. 
By then the hongs, which had diversified into many other kinds of merchandise, had already settled along the Bund.
This stretch of magnificence had muddy origins. 
Nearly a century and a half ago the wide space along the water was reserved for trackers towing boats and mooring ships. 
The shore became crowded with sheds and workshops and later infested with dirty kitchens, latrines and refuse. 
The British, French and Americans had staked out territories along the river to house their merchant traders, officials and missionaries. 
They helped transform this wide embankment from a muddy towpath, whose shape varied with the tide, into a beautiful esplanade. 
Their name for it comes from an English-Indian term, band, for embankment or dike.
In the latter half of the 19th century the Chinese authorities allowed the embankment to be cultivated and the dirt path filled. 
With the aid of Chinese laborers, the British built a garden on the shore front, across the wide street from their consulate. 
The garden overlooks the creek spilling into the Huangpu River and is site of the infamous, although probably apochryphal, sign declaring, ''No dogs or Chinese allowed.''
One legend even has it that the youthful Mao Zedong was inspired to revolution in part after seeing the sign. 
For all the legends, however, no such sign apparently existed.
F. L. Hawks, in ''A Short History of Shanghai,'' published in 1928, said, ''All respectable and decently clad Chinese were admitted'' to the parks in the Western concession areas, ''but when it was found that coolies used the benches for siestas, notices were posted on the benches restricting their use to foreigners.''
Another author, Pan Ling, in a 1982 book, ''In Search of Old Shanghai,'' said there were two separate regulations on a long list, one banning dogs and another excluding Chinese unaccompanied by foreigners.
The garden has become Huangpu Park, where fathers come to snap pictures of their little girls, where couples from the countryside toting newly-purchased televisions and radios come to rest, and where rustic Chinese tourists come to marvel at the rock gardens and fountains. 
The park has an entrance fee of less than a penny. 
Gatekeepers are unlikely to be able to change the large bills that foreigners usually carry, so bring small change from your hotel. 
The old British Consulate, a longtime symbol of foreign imperialism, now houses the Shanghai Foreign Investment Commissions: a site that once represented the evils of foreign encroachment now reflects China's attempt to woo foreign investors back.
By the entrance to Huangpu Park, cruise boats leave to take visitors north up the river for a view of the vast harbor and a glimpse of the East China Sea. 
The wind blows fiercely, so take a warm jacket. 
On board is a 64-year-old magician, Ye Mafei. 
Accompanying him might be his son and daughter, magicians in their own right who have performed with him in several countries. 
The boats leave for the three-hour trip at 8:30 A.M., 1:30 P.M. and 6:30 P.M. First-class tickets cost $4.70. 
Every day at dawn, the aging masters of tai qiquan, a meditative form of kung fu, and wu shu, or martial arts, come to the Bund and sometimes to the park to practice. 
By seven in the morning, the bank along the river is lined with more than a hundred exercisers, some engaging in slow breathing routines, others taking a sword or spear in hand to perform sparring dances. 
As a visitor looks on, a wiry old man stretches his legs in a ballet split, his head bent to the ground in line with his legs. 
Nearby, a white-haired master leads a middle-aged student through the high kicks and hard punches of a wu shu routine. 
A group of men and women perform their tai qiquan movements in unison in an area of the walkway where the sun shines between tufts of trees. 
For at least an hour in the morning, the sounds of the traffic are deadened by the blast of rock music as a team of men and women begin their day with disco dancing. 
Across from Huangpu Park on Beijing East Road is the Friendship Store, which sells everything from local chocolates to silk rugs to wood-carved screens to candy to Chinese paintings. 
Souvenirs include contemporary vases, jade and jewelry, even furniture.
Turning the corner onto Zhongshan East Road, the main strip along the Bund, and crossing the creek brings the visitor to the territory on the right that more than a century ago was part of the American concession. 
The territory changed hands several times. 
It passed to the Japanese after the Sino-Japanese War began in 1937 and then a part of it was used by the Soviet Union as its Shanghai Consulate at the base of the old drawbridge, known as the Bridge of the Outer Ferry. 
Later the consulate, an old-style mansion with bay windows and cupolas breaking through a red-brick roof, became a club for sailors. 
With relations between China and the Soviet Union warming again, the Soviets last year regained the building and renovated it as their consulate once more.
Two hotels flank the consulate on Suzhou Road: Shanghai Mansions, a tall red modern building with a good Chinese restaurant, and a cheaper alternative, the Pujiang Hotel.
Back on Zhongshan East Road, past the Greek columns of the Shanghai Textile Industrial Building and the granite-block Bank of China Building, the visitor should turn the corner on Nanjing East Road. 
On both sides of the street are the two buildings of the grand old Peace Hotel, where limousines line up outside waiting for wealthy businessmen negotiating deals over dinner banquets inside. 
Noel Coward reportedly finished the draft of ''Private Lives'' in this hotel. 
The older building on the south side of the street was formerly the Palace Hotel.
Farther south along the Bund is the Tudor-style Customs House, where giant spools of thick cables cover the floor in front of the large doors, seemingly unnoticed by customs officials and shippers scurrying about or engaged in disputes over goods. 
On the southern tip of the Bund, where the old French concession used to be, is the Dongfeng Hotel. 
Here was housed the Shanghai Club - for men only, and serious tipplers at that. 
The members used to come for a drink at the mahogany bar, which stretched 100 feet. 
It has now been shortened to fit comfortably in the popular Suzhou Restaurant, but in the late afternoons a smaller bar upstairs opens for seamen. 
The old hotel has been converted into government offices, and a Cantonese restaurant on the first floor there also serves dim sum or dumplings at lunchtime.
Nanjing East Road, a slight detour from the Bund, takes a visitor through the bustling shopping strip that gave Shanghai its worldly and avant-garde reputation before the Communist revolution. 
In those days the nearby Fuzhou Road was the red-light district, where teahouses and bordellos teemed with singsong girls whose lilting dialects lured clients. 
Now Western modernity with a Chinese flavor continues to pervade the streets, which are lined with shops selling all sorts of wares from radios and watches to ''lotions for the aged'' to pianos and silks. 
Children gather around a Japanese video recorder display that shows them and the street scene on a large television.
Farther down, by an overpass crowded with people looking down at the river of people below, lies Shanghai's No. 1 Department Store, a far cry from Bloomingdale's but worth a visit. 
The store sells televisions and other electrical appliances, sporting goods and winter and spring clothes.
On Sunday couples stroll and window-shop, parents chase their wandering children and visitors cart away their new purchases. 
Store lights glitter as darkness descends and still the crowds of pedestrians pour out onto what has been called the ''great white way.''
 
SOME HOTELS TO CONSIDER
Among the hotels worth considering in Shanghai are these:
Hua Ting Sheraton Hotel, 1200 Caoxi North Road; telephone 386000. 
Double room $94 plus 10 percent service charge. 
Try the Chinese restaurant, which serves Sichuan and Cantonese food, for about $27 a person.
Peace Hotel, 20 Nanjing East Road; 211244. 
Double room $62 and $49. 
On the eighth floor of the north wing, completed in 1928, there is a large banquet hall and a parlour restaurant that offers very good Shanghai-style food (about $10 a person) and a splendid view of the Bund.
Pujiang Hotel, 17 Huangpu Road; 246388. 
Double room $16.
Shanghai Hilton International, 250 Huashan Road; 550000. 
Double room $135 plus 10 percent service charge. 
Hotel has a Western-style buffet that is a treat for travelers who yearn for American gourmet salads and cold cuts as well as hot food and desserts. 
The hotel also has a Shanghai-style restaurant.
Shanghai Mansions, 20 Suzhou North Road; 246260. 
Double room $50 a night. 
There is a good Chinese restaurant on the second floor.     S. 
WuD.
