
A handful of Asia-based diplomats are willing to give President Bush the benefit of the doubt. 
They are willing to believe that he canceled his trip to Asia this month for reasons that go beyond opinion polls suggesting that the President's globetrotting habits have cut into his approval rating among voters.
In fact, some diplomats say, President Bush may have been well advised to stay home until he knows with certainty how Washington should respond to the political and economic changes that are sweeping across the Far East, and that appear destined to alter the American role. 
"Everything is fluid in the region right now," said a senior European diplomat in Bangkok. 
"Perhaps now is not the moment for the President to visit Asia. 
The United States needs time to absorb it all."
Since World War II, American policy in Asia has centered on -- indeed, tens of thousands of Americans have sacrificed their lives over -- the two great land masses on the Pacific rim of China: Indochina and the Korean peninsula. 
But consider the news from the region in just the last few weeks: Cambodians announced the end of their 12-year civil war; Vietnam restored full diplomatic relations with its chief adversary, China, in hopes of concentrating on economic development; North and South Korea reported the first substantive progress on a framework to resolve more than four decades of brotherly hate.
Any one of those developments would have been startling a few years ago. 
Taken together at a time when the cold war is all but over, they could be important evidence of a new era of peace and prosperity, even amid reminders of lingering suffering like that of the Vietnamese boat people now resisting forced repatriation from Hong Kong..
Last week Mr. Bush and the other NATO heads of state met in Rome to chart a new role in a Europe without the Soviet threat that had defined the alliance's reason for existence. 
It was a get-together that Mr. Bush, who considers himself a sort of honorary chairman of the club of world leaders, might well have relished not only for its reassuring pomp but also for its comparative lack of ambiguity.
The Bush Administration has made its own Asia headlines in recent weeks by announcing its willingness to open talks with Hanoi to normalize diplomatic and trade ties 16 years after the war's end, its plan to remove tactical nuclear weapons from the region, and its intention to send Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to Beijing this month. 
Mr. Baker would be the highest-ranking American official to visit China since pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananman Square were put down in a bloody confrontation by Chinese soldiers two years ago.
The American Century in Asia is not over yet, but already the United States is facing what could be the starkest policy choices since 1898, when President William McKinley invaded and colonized the Philippines even though he knew it as little more than a group of islands "somewhere away around on the other side of the world."
The question for the United States is whether it should continue in the role of policeman and mediator in a region that is increasingly able to resolve its own conflicts and that, far from being the home of "little brown brothers" of old, is now America's fiercest economic competitor. 
The Bush Administration insists that the choice has already been made, and that the United States military will remain in Asia indefinitely, although the Pacific force, which last year numbered about 140,000 men and women, will be cut by more than 10 percent as part of worldwide Pentagon reductions.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney says a complete military withdrawal would almost surely result in a "series of destabilizing regional arms races, an increase in regional tensions and possibly conflict."
Yet that has not silenced forces on Capitol Hill and private defense analysts in the United States who argue that, at a time of domestic austerity, there is no need to continue defending nations that are able to do it themselves. 
They say, too, that American military forces in Asia are seen increasingly as a paper tiger, since it seems unlikely that the United States, still traumatized over the war in Vietnam, would ever allow itself to be drawn into another large regional conflict in Asia.
"This isn't Kuwait -- there's no oil here for the United States to rush in to protect, and the threat of Communism is dying here as it is everywhere in the world," said a Thai official. 
Selig S. Harrison, a senior associate of the Carnegie Endowment, argues that the American military umbrella in Asia has subsidized the economies of booming East Asian nations, particularly Japan, by freeing them from large military expenditures. 
"We are helping to make Asia safe for Japanese investment," said Mr. Harrison, who estimates that the United States spends $42 billion a year in direct and indirect costs for its Far East military forces. 
"It's a ridiculous expenditure."
There is one important area of agreement between analysts like Mr. Harrison and the Bush Administration, and that is over the need for a continued American military presence in South Korea, which faces an isolated and unpredictable enemy to the north. 
Pyongyang is believed to have an active program to develop nuclear weapons and in the near future could have the bomb. 
Even in the Koreas, however, there is hope of finally making peace. 
Late last month, the two nations agreed on the broad outlines of a peace plan reported to include a non-aggression pact, a pledge of respect for each other's political systems and provisions for reuniting families across the border.
 
China and Vietnam
In Indochina, the optimism about peace is greater still. 
Despite apprehension among their neighbors that China and Vietnam might be contemplating a destabilizing military alliance, diplomats say the recent warming between Beijing and Hanoi is instead a marriage of convenience between two still-bitter rivals wishing to put aside their differences for now to focus on economic progress.
Closer ties between China and Vietnam may also be the factor that prevents Cambodia from collapsing into civil war again. 
Beijing has broad control over the genocidal, Chinese-armed Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, while Vietnam retains influence with the government it helped install in Phnom Penh under Prime Minister Hun Sen. Under a United Nations peace treaty, the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Hun Sen and his political allies, and two other Cambodian factions will share power in what amounts to a coalition government.
In the expectation that the United States military will gradually reduce its presence in Asia, countries now living under the American defense umbrella have begun putting forward proposals for stepped-up regional military cooperation.
Several of the more ambitious proposals have come from Japan, which last summer recommended to the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations that they begin regular consultations on military issues. 
Last week, the new Japanese Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, expressed his hope that Japan would soon rewrite its defense laws to permit the use of its troops outside Japanese borders, as part of United Nations peacekeeping forces.
But with only a month to go before ceremonies to mark the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor and with memories of Japanese occupation and atrocities during World War II still vivid across Asia and the Pacific, Mr. Miyazawa's suggestion met with a decidedly unenthusiastic response outside Japan.
Said an American diplomat: "Given a choice between an Asian defense umbrella provided by the United States and one offered by Tokyo, you'd better believe that we're going to remain the more popular option."
