
CHINA'S favorite hat used to be the army cap. 
As recently as this spring, young boys wore them everywhere and doting parents beamed their approval.
These days, most boys go bareheaded. 
Scarcely anyone is willing to be seen in an army cap, and a vendor acknowledged that sales have slowed greatly since the army's violent repression of the democracy movement in early June. 
''Chinese don't buy these caps now,'' the vendor said. 
''Now I try to sell them to Japanese visitors.''
The changing fashions point to the problems the Chinese army faces these days. 
The television propaganda of recent months has not erased the memories of troops firing on protesters. 
And in Beijing, which remains under martial law, the army has been further discredited by what is perceived as an arrogance on the part of the troops, most of whom come from the countryside and feel a certain contempt, readily reciprocated, for city residents.
The army must deal not only with the public dislike but also with the knowledge that even its repression was not handled well: if the army lost more than a dozen troops and scores of vehicles when taking on unarmed civilians, what would have happened if it had faced armed opposition?
Beyond that, the army is searching for the role it wants to play in China, according to many diplomats and other experts on the Chinese military. 
They say that many elements of the army resent being used as an instrument of repression and favor a professional force that would be on alert at the borders rather than in the capital.
Yet if the army has rarely been so burdened with difficulties, it has rarely been so important in recent years. 
Deng Xiaoping, China's 85-year-old senior leader, is trying to arrange a transition to a circle of younger leaders headed by Jiang Zemin, the new Communist Party chief. 
But Mr. Jiang is relatively weak and is likely to face a power struggle as soon as Mr. Deng is no longer able to protect him. 
At that point, the army, one of the few relatively cohesive forces left in China, could step forward and help choose the next generation of leadership.
''The army has seen its power grow whenever there have been periods of chaos or uncertainty or transition, and I think that is still true today,'' said a Western diplomat here.
If the army does gain greater influence, the generals might tend to favor hard-liners like Prime Minister Li Peng. 
But that is not certain. 
The politics of top officers are scarcely known, and much would depend on which general comes out on top. 
It is possible that a deal would be worked out, with the military offering support in exchange for a commitment to spare it from further budget cuts.
The last two party chiefs, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, were doomed in part by the reluctance of military leaders to accept them on the Central Military Commission. 
The absence of such support left them particularly vulnerable when Mr. Deng and others of his generation chafed at their unwillingness to crack down on protesters.
 
Misgivings in the Ranks
This time, Mr. Deng seems to be trying to help Mr. Jiang by installing him as either chairman or vice chairman of the military commission, an attempt to give him a chance to consolidate his power. 
Beijing is full of reports about shifts in the commission and in the army itself, changes that could shape civilian politics.
The increasing influence over the political struggles is just what many younger officers want least, diplomats and other analysts say.
These misgivings about its political role - and especially concerns about a role in repression - were behind the cracks in the military monolith in May and early June. 
The commander of the 38th army, General Xu, took sick leave rather than move his troops into Beijing in late May, Chinese officials say. 
The commander, the son of a famous General, Xu Haideng, had been thought absolutely reliable. 
In addition, military units took up defensive positions that suggested they feared attack from other units.
Chinese officials also say that a mutiny in Inner Mongolia in late June resulted in the execution of about 20 officers. 
No further information is known about that incident. 
Still, it now seems that the threat of civil war was not so great as it seemed at the time. 
While some skirmishing apparently took place among units, this may have been the unintended result of nervous troops stumbling across one other in the darkness.
''There was never an open split,'' said a Chinese official with contacts in middle and high levels in the army. 
''The officers generally agreed with their mission, but there was disagreement on how to do it, and many thought that it wasn't handled very well and was unnecessarily bloody.''
Today, the worst disagreements within the army seem to have been resolved, but conflicting ambitions still exist. 
One problem is that the generation of civilian leaders after Mr. Deng has had very little military experience. 
Many diplomats expect that the ascendancy of leaders without such ties will mean more pressure on the army to cut spending, after a decade in which it already has faced austerity and the demobilization of more than a million troops.
The army also must come to terms with its inadequacies. 
In 1979, China was shocked by the punishment it took from the Vietnamese Army during a brief border war, and that embarrassment led to efforts to modernize the military. 
China's generals are said to be aware of the shortcomings and to favor continued cooperation with the West to gain the equipment and technology they need. 
Western sanctions on military aid are likely to increase the army's distaste for political interference, diplomats say.
The military's needs are now as obvious as ever, for the crackdown against the democracy movement was the military's first big test since the Vietnam clashes, and few people were impressed.
Said a Western diplomat here, ''Even aside from the killing, it wasn't a performance to be proud of.''
