
Following is the official text of the political declaration issued today by the Group of Seven major industrialized democracies:
 
EAST-WEST RELATIONS
1. We, the leaders of our seven countries and the representatives of the European Community, reaffirm the universal and supreme importance which we attach to freedom, democracy and the promotion of human rights.
2. We see signs of this same desire for greater freedom and democracy in the East. 
The people there, including the young people, are reasserting these values and calling for a pluralist democratic society. 
Some of their leaders are aware of the positive contribution that greater freedom and democracy can make to the modernization of their countries and are starting to make changes to their laws, practices and institutions. 
Others are still endeavoring to resist this movement by taking repressive measures which we strongly condemn.
3. We hope that freedom will be broadened and democracy strengthened and that they will form the basis, after decades of military confrontation, ideological antagonism and mistrust, for increased dialogue and cooperation. 
We welcome the reforms under way and the prospects of lessening the division of Europe.
4. We call upon the Soviet Government to translate its new policies and pronouncements into further concrete action at home and abroad. 
Military imbalances favoring the Soviet Union, both in Europe and in Asia, remain an objective threat to each of us. 
Our governments must therefore continue to be vigilant and maintain the strength of our countries. 
For the foreseeable future, there is no alternative for each of us, within existing alliances, to maintaining a strategy of deterrence based upon an appropriate mix of adequate and effective nuclear and conventional forces. 
In order to hasten the advent of a world in which the weight of arms and military strength is reduced, we recommit ourselves to the urgent pursuit of a global ban on chemical weapons, a conventional forces balance in Europe at the lowest possible level consistent with our security requirements, and a substantial reduction in Soviet and American strategic nuclear arms.
5. We offer the countries of the East the opportunity to develop balanced economic cooperation on a sound commercial basis consistent with the security interests of each of our countries and with the general principles of international trade. 
We have noted developments of relations between the E.E.C. and countries of the East, in particular the conclusion of an agreement with Hungary, the progress already achieved during the current discussions with Poland and the opening of negotiations with the Soviet Union.
6. We welcome the process of reform under way in Poland and Hungary. 
We recognize that the political changes taking place in these countries will be difficult to sustain without economic progress. 
Each of us is prepared to support this process and to consider, as appropriate and in a coordinated fashion, economic assistance aimed at transforming and opening their economies in a durable manner. 
We believe that each of us should direct our assistance to these countries so as to sustain the momentum of reform through inward investment, joint ventures, transfer of managerial skills, professional training and other ventures which would help develop a more competitive economy.
Each of us is developing concrete initiatives designed to encourage economic reforms to promote more competitive economies and to provide new opportunities for trade.
We agreed to work along with other interested countries and multilateral institutions to concert support for the process of reform under way in Hungary and Poland, in order to make our measures of support more effective and mutually reinforcing. 
We will encourage further creative efforts by interested governments, the public and the private sectors in support of the reform process.
Concerning concerted support for reform in Poland and Hungary, we call for a meeting with all interested countries which will take place in the next few weeks. 
We underline, for Poland, the urgent need for food in present circumstances.
To these ends, we ask the Commission of the European Community to take the necessary initiatives in agreement with the other member states of the Community, and to associate, besides the summit participants, all interested countries.
7. We are in favor of an early conclusion of the negotiations between the I.M.F. and Poland. 
The strengthened debt strategy is applicable to Poland, provided it meets the conditions. 
We are ready to support in the Paris Club the rescheduling of Polish debt expeditiously and in a flexible and forthcoming manner.
8. We see good opportunities for the countries of West and East to work together to find just solutions to conflicts around the world, to fight against under-development, to safeguard the resources and the environment and to build a freer and more open world.
 
CHINA
We have already condemned the violent repression in China in defiance of human rights. 
We urge the Chinese authorities to cease action against those who have done no more than claim their legitimate rights to democracy and liberty.
The repression has led each of us to take appropriate measures to express our deep sense of condemnation, to suspend bilateral ministerial and high-level contacts, and also to suspend arms trade with China, where it exists. 
Furthermore each of us has agreed that, in view of current economic uncertainties, the examination of new loans by the World Bank be postponed. 
We also have decided to extend the stays of those Chinese students who so desire.
We look to the Chinese authorities to create conditions which will avoid their isolation and provide for a return to cooperation based upon the resumption of movement toward political and economic reform and openness.
We understand and share the grave concern felt by the people of Hong Kong following these events. 
We call on the Government of the People's Republic of China to do what is necessary to restore confidence in Hong Kong. 
We recognize that the continuing support of the international community will be an important element in the maintenance of confidence in Hong Kong.
 
TERRORISM
1. We remain resolutely opposed to terrorism in all its forms. 
We confirm the commitment each of us has undertaken to the principle of making no concessions to terrorists or their sponsors and to cooperating, bilaterally and in all relevant international fora, in combatting terrorism. 
We reiterate our commitment to the policies agreed at previous summits; in particular we condemn state-sponsored terrorism. 
We are determined not to let terrorists remain unpunished, and to have them brought to justice within the framework of international law and in conformity with the rule of law. 
We call upon those states which have supported or encouraged terrorist acts to demonstrate by their actions that they have renounced such policies. 
We reaffirm in particular our absolute condemnation of the taking of hostages. 
We call on those holding hostages to release them immediately and unconditionally on those with influence over hostage-takers to use it to this end.
2. Deeply concerned for the safety of all travelers and outraged by the murderous attacks perpetrated against international civil aviation and the frequent threat to air transport safety from terrorist groups, we reaffirm our commitment to the fight against all forms of terrorism affecting civil aviation. 
We reiterate our determination to contribute to reinforcing internationally agreed measures for protection against aircraft hijackings and sabotage.
3. We particularly condemn the recent attack on an aircraft over Scotland, which killed 270 people. 
We have agreed to give priority to preventing such attacks by further strengthening security measures. 
We attach importance to the implementation of the work plan recently adopted by the I.C.A.O. 
Council for this purpose.
4. We have also agreed on the need for improved methods of detecting explosives. 
We endorse efforts currently under way in I.C.A.O. to develop, as a matter of high priority, an appropriate international regime for the marking of plastic and sheet explosives for detection.
 
HUMAN RIGHTS
In 1789, the rights of man and of the citizen were solemnly proclaimed. 
Just over 40 years ago, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which have been further developed and codified and are now embodiesd in the Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
We reaffirm our commitment to freedom, democratic principles and human rights. 
We reaffirm our belief in the rule of law which respects and protects without fear or favor the rights and liberties of every citizen, and provides the setting in which the human spirit can develop in freedom and diversity.
Human rights are a matter of legitimate international concern. 
We commit ourselves again to encouraging and promoting the universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Looking toward the future, we see opportunities as well as threats; this impels us to pledge our firm commitment to uphold international standards of human rights and to confirm our willingness to reaffirm them and to develop them further.
We stress the protection of freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and of freedom of opinion and expression; for without these freedoms, other rights cannot be fully realized.
We stress also respect for the rule of law and the plurality of opinion, for without them there can be neither representative government nor democracy.
We believe equally in freedom of association in a pluralist society.
We hold that the right of each individual to physical integrity and dignity must be guaranteed. 
We abhor and condemn torture in all its forms.
We believe that all human beings must act toward each other in a spirit of fraternity.
We believe that everyone has a right to equality of opportunity as well as to own property, alone or in association with others. 
Extreme poverty and exclusion from society violate the dignity of everyone enduring them. 
Those who suffer or are in need should be supported.
We stress that the rights of the child, the disabled and the elderly require special protection.
We consider that developments in the human sciences, for instance the progress achieved in genetics and organ transplantation, must be applied in accordance with all human rights if the dignity of human beings is to be preserved.
We, the present generation, have an obligation to ensure that future generations will inherit a healthy environment.
We reaffirm our belief that these rights and freedoms cannot be properly safeguarded without the rule of law, impartial justice and genuine democratic institutions.
