
Despite turn-of-the-century photographs of hollow-eyed Jewish and Italian children gazing at their teachers with gratitude and zeal, history presents a less rose-tinted picture of immigrants in the New York public schools.
The swarms of children in the Lower East Side ghetto were often crammed into classrooms of 60, and truancy and delinquency were rife. 
Reading and math scores plummeted and history classes were curtailed so more English could be taught. 
A 1911 Teachers College study shows that only 60 percent of elementary school children went on to high school; even the most ardent pupils had to work to support their families.
But history also shows that waves of immigration have enlivened New York's schools at the same time as they have overwhelmed them. 
The news two weeks ago that 120,000 immigrant children from 167 countries have entered the city's schools over the last three years was greeted as a sign of renewal as robust as the cherry and apple blossoms coloring the cityscape.
During the 1970's and 80's, the city's schools had seemed doomed to fade slowly, hurt by the middle class's steady exodus to the suburbs, by fiscal cuts, decaying buildings and a growing population of poor youngsters from chaotic families.
Now immigrant families from the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Russia, Guyana, China and other countries have rejuvenated some floundering schools.
Many families are fleeing political oppression or poverty. 
"Every time there's an upheaval anywhere in the world, the schools in New York are the first to absorb it," says Mitchell L. Moss, director of New York University's Urban Research Center.
Some arrive illiterate even in their native languages. 
But others, says Dr. Emanuel Tobier, an economics professor at N.Y.U., are among the most ambitious and best educated of their compatriots, with an enormous craving to make it and an energizing fear of catastrophe if they don't.
Seward Park, the Lower East Side's neighborhood high school, was for a long time a place to avoid, but an influx of Chinese and Latin American students has brightened its academic tone. 
The annual dropout rate, for example, fell from 13.5 percent in the 1982-83 school year to 10.7 percent in 1989-90.
The prestigious Westinghouse national science competition is still dominated by New York City schools, as it has been since it began in the 1940's, but the faces have changed. 
Winning often requires working after school in a laboratory for two years, and many of the recent winners hungry enough to do that have been the children of immigrants from China, India and the Soviet Union.
Soundings like these, says Dr. Tobier, buoy many executives, who have long despaired about the quality of the city's work force.
Also, countries like South Korea and Thailand are gaining new prominence in the world economy. 
Today's immigrants raised in New York will be well-positioned for international commerce.
"This is a multicultural world, and we're rich in terms of who is in our system," said Joseph J. Saccente, who is retiring as the Board of Education's chief executive for monitoring and improving schools.
But an influx of immigrants brings problems too. 
District 6 in Washington Heights is so crowded that students are sent to the east Bronx. 
In District 24 in Queens, classes are held on the auditorium stage and two assistant principals moved into the principal's office so classes could be held in their offices.
 
Hunting Albanian Teachers
Schools are scrounging around for bilingual teachers, and not just in Spanish and Chinese. 
District 11 in the northeast Bronx is considering hiring teachers of Albanian, but they are hard to find. 
Most immigrants who don't speak Spanish must take their classes entirely in English, and some educators fear they will suffer in mathematics and science classes.
The debate over bilingual education, settled legally but not philosophically, is being stirred up by the new wave of immigrants. 
Some teachers complain that students are being funneled into bilingual classes to furnish jobs for bilingual teachers, and say immigrants would learn more English the old-fashioned way -- by breaking with their own language cold turkey.
But others who grew up in the old system argue that it forces students to endure years of feeling stupid in subjects like mathematics when their handicap is linguistic, not arithmetical.
 
Ambition, Pluck and Pressure
"I was competent in my own language," recalls Angel Villarreal, the Puerto Rican-born assistant principal of Junior High School 98 in the Bronx.
Schools are also being asked to revamp their curricula to take account of the cultural backgrounds of newcomers. 
Such sensitivity, says David Reimers, a historian of immigration, was never shown the Irish and German immigrants of the mid-19th century.
And experts like Mr. Moss believe that new immigrants have injected the system with ambition, pluck and pressure for better schools. 
He says Asian families in the Forest Hills neighborhood where he grew up are joining longtime residents in demanding improvements.
Perhaps cognizant of that emerging constituency, Mayor David N. Dinkins last week decided to restore $600 million of almost $1.5 billion he had taken out of a $4.3 billion school construction plan. 
Overcrowded District 24 is already building one elementary school, has a junior high school on the drawing board, and has five other additions in the works.
"It's more or less the way my family arrived in this country a generation or so ago," said John Falco, the district's deputy superintendent. 
"You have industrious people who come to this country for all the benefits our family came for -- freedom and economic prosperity -- with children eager to learn."
