
THERE are two Southeast Asias, Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan of Thailand is fond of saying: one thriving and capitalist, the other socialist and stagnant.
So it should be no surprise that even the famously stubborn Vietnamese leadership, despite its divisions over the pace of change, has realized that it must join the development race now or be forever left behind, floundering in a politically unstable swamp of unemployment and inflation.
That is the prime reason Vietnam finally decided to cut a deal on Cambodia and withdraw the bulk of its troops after an occupation of 11 years -- to end its international isolation and attract Western investment. 
And it is the prime reason that Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, went to Washington recently, the highest-ranking Hanoi official to do so since the north became independent in 1954.
That year, when the French left Vietnam, Hanoi was the most modern city in Southeast Asia. 
In 1975, when the Americans left, the region's most advanced city was Saigon. 
Both cities today have a sort of aspic charm, with moldy French provincial buildings in Hanoi and American DeSoto buses still grinding through the streets of Ho Chi Minh City.
The isolation and stagnation have been the price of both war and ideology. 
But now Hanoi, like the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, needs the West, and seems more willing to pay the price.
Vietnam eased central controls on the economy beginning as early as 1987. 
But a Cambodia-related embargo on aid, investment and trade with Vietnam, led by Washington, has successfully blocked vital loans from multilateral agencies like the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
While more countries now trade with Vietnam, the American veto on the lending agencies has forestalled significant Western investment and stifled domestic development, particularly as Soviet aid declines.
A settlement in Cambodia, much more than the emotional and easily manipulated issue of the American M.I.A.'s, has always been the key to economic and diplomatic normalization between Washington and Hanoi. 
And only normalization will open Vietnam in a serious fashion to the West.
So it is Washington's main card with Vietnam, and even the American Chamber of Commerce, eager to do business with Vietnam, should not be surprised that the Bush Administration will continue to play it, at least until a Cambodia settlement is ratified.
Cambodia is also the main obstacle to normal relations between Hanoi and Beijing, whose support for Vietnam's revolution soured quickly over its Cambodian adventure. 
Hanoi's expulsion in 1979 of China's allies, the Khmer Rouge, no matter their crimes, was an insult for which the Chinese, especially Deng Xiaoping, were eager to extract the severest pain.
But China's own isolation over the killings near Tiananmen Square, coupled with the collapse of Eastern Europe and Moscow's sudden retrenchment everywhere, have also pushed Vietnam and China closer together.
Both leaderships are intensely aware of being socialist holdouts, but hope that Asian socialism will be a more lasting brand. 
They cite the communitarian nature of Asian societies and the fact that Communist rule rose from revolution and nation-building, and was not merely imposed, as in Eastern Europe, by a conquering army.
Still, there is an element of whistling in the dark. 
Vietnam's aging leaders, like China's, hope to embrace Western aid, investment and private enterprise while preserving the one-party nature of the Leninist state. 
But increasingly, younger intellectuals and those with more experience in southern Vietnam are expressing doubts that economic and political development can be separated -- or that the country can walk with one leg shorter than the other, as one Politburo member, Tran Xuan Bach, put it before being purged in March.
All this is taking place in the context of a leadership struggle. 
The party General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, has begun the reforms but lacks the time and strength to see them through. 
He has said he will retire at the next party congress, probably in May, and the battle between conservatives and reformers has gathered bite.
The conservatives, who had been grouped around Le Duc Tho, who died two weeks ago, and his brother, Interior Minister Mai Chi Tho, have used the collapse of Eastern Europe to try to brake any move toward even a Soviet-style multiparty system.
In the last five months, the Vietnamese have had a security crackdown, arresting as many as several hundred people, some for just a few days, especially in the south. 
They include retired soldiers of the old National Liberation Front, religious figures, businessmen and others with what the Government calls "too much" contact with Westerners.
While the internal crackdown has now eased somewhat, there continues to be a public campaign about the reported efforts of "reactionary forces overseas" to sabotage the state and socialism. 
Two weeks ago, a court in Hanoi convicted 38 people of trying to overthrow the Government with the help of Thailand and of Vietnamese exiles based in the United States.
While these people represent no real threat to the regime, the trial is apparently being used to justify the crackdown and serve as a warning to others, including the Western-leaning reformers in the leadership, among them the urbane Mr. Thach.
But while some might see his international prominence as a stepping stone of sorts, he will almost assuredly not be Vietnam's next General Secretary. 
Even in a collective leadership, there are other, less congenial forces at play.
