
For years, this outpost of Europe behaved like a standoffish neighbor to the Asian community it lived in. 
Instead of cultivating ties with the community, it relied on its own natural wealth and its political, economic and cultural links to Europe.
But now, fearful that it will lose European markets after the European Community is fully established in 1992 and aware that its Asian neighbors' economies are flourishing, Australia is accepting, even embracing, its geographic location, hoping to share in the regional growth.
''In the sense of being a true part of the growth in this region, developing ourselves in the rapid pace of Southeast Asia, we're a sort of hanger-on-er, rather than a full participant in the growth,'' said Paul W. McCarthy, chief economist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
In the two years since Prime Minister Bob Hawke traveled to Seoul and announced a drive for closer economic cooperation within the Pacific region, Australians have been shaking the hands of more Asian officials, business executives and tourists than ever before. 
There are more Hong Kong Chinese immigrants mingling in Australian society, and in the last three years Australia has run trade surpluses with Japan, which now accounts for more than one-fifth of Australia's total trade.
Japanese investment, which exceeded $26 billion in the end of the 1989 fiscal year, has been the fastest growing source of foreign investment in the country. 
Britain and the United States, however, still have higher levels of investment.
Yet many Australians say more needs to be done, especially economically, to integrate their island with Asia. 
Trade with Southeast Asia, for instance, has grown only slightly in the last three years.
While Australians still crave American imports, Japanese businesses have become such a dominant influence in trade that 4 of the top 10 largest Australian exporters are Japanese companies. 
After Broken Hill Property Group, Australia's largest industrial corporation, the No. 2 exporter is Mitsui & Company (Australia) Ltd. 
Most of the exports are commodities, such as wood chips, ore and coal, and many of them go straight to Japan, which receives more than twice the value of exports of Australia's second-largest market, the United States. 
For Australia to become a larger force in Asia, many economists and business executives say, the country must restructure its own economy.
 
Plyboard, Not Chips
''Instead of sending wood chips, we should be sending plyboard, and where they take paper pulp, we should send paper,'' said Paul A. Everingham, a corporate lawyer.
He said one concern is the Australian view of Asia. 
''One of our problems is that Australians think of Asia in terms of Japan and China, and they think of the other countries as places they can go to for holidays.''
Japan and China have been the focus of Australia's ties to Asia. 
In a dramatic turnaround from the White Australia policy, which essentially shut out Asian immigrants until the early 1970's, Mr. Hawke this June granted 19,000 Chinese students the right to stay for four years in Australia. 
And Australian businesses have called on China for years.
Japan, on the other hand, sends not migrants but money. 
Japanese companies operate throughout Australian financial and trading circles, and more and more Japanese honeymooners are coming to Australia to eat steak and play golf. 
In Brisbane and the nearby sunny Gold Coast, Japanese corporations have purchased nearly a dozen resort hotels to cater to large Japanese tour groups. 
In 1989, nearly 350,000 Japanese tourists came to Australia, buying large blocks of seats on the planes and paying for spaces on the golf courses.
The area has always been a Shangri-la for Australian retirees, but now some Australians are finding that the Japanese presence involves a price: some Australians are priced out of the market as purchases by Japanese companies push up property values.
While some Australians fear or criticize the influx of foreign capital, others are calling for measures to develop the export of services in which Australia is strong, such as education, health and advanced technology. 
These may be areas of opportunity for trade with neighbors like Indonesia and Malaysia.
 
A Joint Venture
In Adelaide, Japanese and Australian business executives and politicians are planning together the construction of a high-tech metropolis, where tiny villages would be linked to a modern network of communications, a research university, a science and industrial park and other commercial facilities that would attract investors.
But the move toward Asia has been bumpy, because Australia still values its historic ties to Europe. 
More students are studying Japanese, but many Australians still aspire to attend Oxford. 
More trade delegations are going to Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, but the country remains part of the Commonwealth and Australians still celebrate the Queen's birthday.
''No doubt we have to come to grips with becoming a part of Asia,'' said William J. Shields, executive director of Macquarie Bank Ltd. 
''But it's dangerous to see us as an Asian country. 
Culturally we have other links.''
Some Australian companies find it difficult to break into Asian markets, and many do not speak the languages or know the local customs. 
Moreover, most of the economies are still viewed as developing ones, compared with Australia's rather mature economy, where per capita gross domestic product was $17,100 in the last fiscal year. 
Australia is trying to develop its manufacturing base and looks upon certain Asian countries as stronger competitors, with their cheap labor.
''A lot of people claim that Japan, Hong Kong and Taiwan are catching up to us'' in output, said Saul Eslake, chief economist at McIntosh Hamson Hoare Govett Ltd., an investment firm in Melbourne. 
''And there's a lot of angst about all that.''
