
Viewing American foreign policy these days can seem a bit like watching a badly dubbed and poorly edited foreign movie. 
The actors often seem to be speaking the wrong lines and their actions often seem to be all out of order.
Consider the last two weeks. 
One day the United States intervenes in Panama and the next day it virtually invites the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact to invade Rumania to support the democracy movement there. 
One day the Administration sends two senior officials to Beijing to patch up ties with China, apparently out of concern that the Chinese leadership, if alienated, might rush into an embrace with Moscow, and the next day it invites the Soviet Foreign Minister to visit NATO headquarters. 
For years the United States railed against the Marxist Sandinista Government in Managua, but it turned out that the threat deemed worthy of an invasion was from a 19th-century-style tinpot dictator in Panama.
Is there a method to this melange?
Actually, yes. 
The ideological competition between East and West, so prominent in global politics in the last 40 years, is giving way, making what was unimaginable a year ago, such as a visit by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze to NATO headquarters, almost routine. 
At the same time, more traditional power politics is becoming more apparent.
In the classic form of power politics, ideologically inspired actions take a back seat to basic territorial and economic imperatives. 
Dominant powers assert themselves in their own regions or spheres of the world while competing for mastery in areas where there is an opportunity for a contest. 
This is the real meaning of the Panama invasion, and of Moscow's insistence on keeping Eastern Europe in the Warsaw Pact, even while allowing it to retreat from Communism.
The object of this game of nations is not necessarily a freer world or a workers' paradise, but survival of the fittest and everything this requires: influence, resources and allies.
When the glow over the end of the cold war fades, watch for Washington and Moscow to go on competing for advantage on the Eurasian land mass, just as they have for nearly a half-century. 
''The end of the cold war does not mean an end of a global competiton between the superpowers,'' said Michael J. Sandel, a political theorist at Harvard. 
''Once the ideological dimension fades, what you are left with is not peace, harmony and sweetness, but old-fashioned global politics based on dominant powers competing for influence and pursuing their national interests.''
But, at least in the view of some critics, it seems that not everyone in the Bush Administration - particularly the President - is alive to the subtleties of this transition and the new opportunities it may be opening. 
President Bush has never fully explained his decision to send his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, on two secret missions to China, except to say that for geopolitical reasons he did not want to isolate Beijing by punishing its leadership too harshly for the murders in Tiananmen Square. 
Some in the Administration argue that such a policy is the essence of ''realist'' power politics.
To the critics, though, it seems a bad imitation. 
To be sure, it might not be in America's interest to be isolated from China, both because China is the biggest power in Asia and because of the potential for a Moscow-Beijing alliance against Washington. 
But the question is not whether links between the United States and China should be maintained but on whose terms and, in the wake of Tiananmen Square, with what timing. 
And with whom should these ties be maintained - with the current aging Chinese leadership or with the next generation of the Chinese people?
Given the changes in Moscow, Beijing's leaders are not in the same pivotal position in the superpower contest that their predecessors enjoyed two decades ago. 
And given the alienation of today's leaders from their people, their future tenure is questionable. 
Therefore, the critics argue, catering to the sensibilities of Deng Xiaoping and his colleagues isn't realism, but an anachronism.
''The Scowcroft China mission is a classic case of cultural lag: a President applying 1970's thinking to a 1990 situation,'' said Edward N. Luttwak of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. 
''The United States-China relationship in the 1970's was a natural coalescence against a dynamically expansive Soviet Union. 
With Soviet activism in decline, the importance of the Beijing-Washington strategic relationship declines as well. 
Certainly Washington need not worry that Beijing will be driven into the arms of Moscow. 
Today it is the economic relationship that is increasingly important, and in that relationship the United States is the giver and China the taker.''
In addition to traditional power politics, something more is emerging as the ideologically driven East-West competition wanes. 
Moral concerns like human rights could take on new force, while the environment, terrorism, drugs and above all economics rise as factors in international relations. 
In the days when power depended on who had the biggest army and navy, it was easy to identify which country was predominant. 
Today, a country's balance of trade is becoming as important an indicator of its status as its place in the balance of power. 
In this economically interdependent world, America's place will increasingly depend as much on how it deals with its trade deficit with Japan as on how it coexists with the Soviet Union in Europe.
''In many third world areas, we will find ourselves both competing with and cooperating with the Japanese and not the Soviets,'' Geoffrey Kemp, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment, argued. 
''The Russians just are not going to be players. 
Aside from military equipment, the Soviets have nothing to sell. 
Not only are they unable to compete with Europe, Japan and the United States, but also with their own former satellites in Eastern Europe - which is naturally going to draw Eastern Europe westward and leave the Soviets with a shrinking pie.''
As long as the world economy continues to expand, there will be room for the United States, Europe and Japan to act in cooperation, Mr. Kemp noted. 
But, he added, if there is a global recession ''one would be foolish to assume that this will remain the case.''
President Bush leaving the Pentagon last week after a briefing on Panama (Associated Press)
