
RELATIONS between the Chinese and the Mongols have been a bit strained ever since Genghis Khan slaughtered millions of Chinese in the 13th century. 
By one account, the Mongols considered converting all of northern China into a vast pasture; they relented when an adviser pointed out that the Chinese, if spared, could be taxed.
The tradition of mutual distrust is again bubbling to the surface in Chinese-controlled Inner Mongolia, a desert region more than twice the size of California. 
More and more Mongols there are reasserting their ethnic heritage, establishing links with the outside world, and even organizing underground networks to press for democracy and autonomy.
"This is our last chance to achieve democracy, to reassert our culture," Huhehada, a 29-year-old leader of the underground movement, said recently. 
"Mongols need their own culture, their own history -- recorded in their own hands. 
Or else they'll face the fate of American Indians or of Tibetans."
Mr. Huhehada was interviewed in exile in Ulan Bator, the capital of the neighboring independent nation of Mongolia, from which he and other Inner Mongolian dissidents are orchestrating their campaign. 
They say about 2,000 people, half of them living in Inner Mongolia, have joined their newly formed General Coordination Committee of Inner Mongolian Rejuvenation Movements. 
The group is banned within China and the dissidents fear that Beijing will now press Ulan Bator to ban it as well.
Mongolia itself abandoned one-party Communist rule in 1990, and has since seen a tremendous flowering of traditional Mongol religion and culture. 
Mongolian radio can be heard in Inner Mongolia, and the growing contact across the border seems to be a major reason for the surge of nationalism among China's Mongols. 
In addition, Beijing has just announced that it will open the entire border to trade, and that is certain to multiply links with Mongolia and perhaps the demands for change.
Inner Mongolia so far is not nearly as much of a headache for the Chinese leadership as is Tibet, where Buddhist monks and nuns regularly protest for independence and human rights. 
Nor is Inner Mongolia even as much of a concern as oil-rich Xinjiang, the Muslim region of northwest China where there was an abortive armed uprising in 1990. 
But many of the same pressures -- resentment at Chinese arrogance and immigration, yearning for self-rule and prosperity, and outrage at repression -- seem to be at work in Inner Mongolia.
"Our economy is based on colonialism," said Tsenglet, another of the Mongol leaders exiled in Ulan Bator. 
"Our land is rich, but the Chinese take our resources and leave us poor. 
We see that!
And there's been pressure from immigrants. 
We're now a minority in our own land. 
Life for our people is worse than ever."
 
Resentments Grow
The statistics do not bear that out: Ethnic Mongols in Inner Mongolia have rising incomes and improving health conditions. 
But living standards are not rising as fast as those of most Chinese, and resentment seems to be growing. 
As in Tibet, Chinese immigration to Mongolia is a particular irritant.
The Han, the main ethnic group in China, began to migrate to Inner Mongolia 200 years ago. 
By the time of the Communist revolution in 1949, the Han reportedly outnumbered Mongols 5 to 1. 
The 1990 census found a total population of 21.5 million, of whom 3.4 million were Mongols -- a ratio of 6.4 to 1. 
It would be even more skewed, except that the Mongols have more children than the Han, and many families of mixed heritage have reclassified themselves as Mongols to win educational benefits and other advantages available to minorities.
There are periodic reports of large anti-Government demonstrations in Inner Mongolia, but many foreign diplomats and Chinese alike are skeptical. 
The situation is murky in part because China normally will not let foreign journalists visit.
The Chinese Government denounces reports of unrest as lies and fabrications. 
But most foreigners who have visited have reported modest signs of discontent, and dissidents are forging links with the West to get out documents and information on human rights. 
"It's been a long-overlooked corner of China," said Robin Munro, a researcher for Asia Watch, a human rights organization that has published two reports about Inner Mongolia in the last 12 months. 
"Until recently, dissident activity there met the fate of being repressed in obscurity and isolation. 
Nobody would know about it. 
But there has been this link forged now with international channels of communication, so that repression in the region is reported on. 
When it's published outside China, it filters back in through international radio stations, the Inner Mongolian dissidents hear about it, and it basically emboldens them to continue."
As everywhere in China, dissidents face considerable risks. 
At least 17 people are known to be in Inner Mongolia's prisons for their political activities; the true number may be much higher.
While many of the dissidents would like to see Inner Mongolia reunite with Mongolia, they acknowledge that this would be difficult to achieve because of the preponderance of Han Chinese. 
Some say they would like to expel the Han, or at least relocate them, while others say they would settle for a solution short of reunification.
"In any case, the first thing we need to get is the freedom to speak out, to express our grievances," said Uringkhai N. Tumen, a 27-year-old in Ulan Bator who heads an underground cultural organization in Inner Mongolia. 
"At the least, we need real autonomy -- real autonomy, not what we have now."
