
By SUSAN MERNITd wonders of Oriental cuisine, bao bing, a simple fruit dessert, has long stood out as one of the most ubiquitous in Asia. 
Yet it is almost unknown in the West.
A sweetened froth of seasonal fresh fruit and finely shaved ice topped with flavored sugar syrup and condensed milk, bao bing, or bing, has always been immensely popular throughout Asia. 
Now it is beginning to gain popularity in the United States as more Asians settle in this country.
Made with regional fruits like mangoes, litchis and rambutans, bao bing is ''Asia's answer to the ice-cream soda,'' said Gim Yee, owner of the Bamboo Garden, a restaurant in New York's Chinatown. 
In Taiwan, Malaysia, China and Vietnam, bao bing stalls do a brisk business; in Hong Kong, bakeries sell bao bing along with custard eclairs and pork bao.
Bao bing (pronounced bow-BING) can be traced back more than 1,000 years. 
According to Reay Tanahil, the author of ''Food in History'' (Stein & Day, 1973), bao bing, which means ''shaved ice,'' was eaten in China as early as the seventh century A.D. In 1972, when President Richard M. Nixon made his first visit to Beijing, bao bing was served during state dinners with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai.
Not surprisingly, the dessert has evolved over the years. 
Nina Simmonds, the author of ''Classical Chinese Cooking'' (Houghton, Mifflin, 1982), said modern bao bing reflected westernization in Asian cuisine.
''The bao bing Asians eat today uses condensed milk and sweeter syrups, and is often served in tall paper containers,'' she said. 
''Classical bing skips the condensed milk, uses sugarcane juice and is served in a shallow bowl.''
Today, restaurants in Asian communities across the United States offer bao bing on their menus. 
Alfred Shu, owner of Memories of China, a Chicago restaurant, said bao bing is as popular with Asians in the United States as it is in Taiwan or Hong Kong.
Ten years ago, only one restaurant in New York's Chinatown sold bing. 
Today, more than 40 do. 
In Elmhurst and Flushing, Queens, and the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn, restaurants catering to Asians make and sell bing, as do those in other large cities with Asian communities.
At the Bamboo Garden, at 22A Bowery between Pell and Bayard Streets in Manhattan, Mr. Yee and his staff sell 40 to 100 orders of bao bing a day. 
Mr. Yee, who was reared in New York, said he began to serve it only after customers began to request it. 
''A lot of the new immigrants, especially people from Hong Kong, really like bings,'' he said.
But Asian and Western tastes can differ. 
Red bean and custard are two of the most popular flavors in Taiwan, said Tony King, director of the China Council of the Asia Society in New York, while in New York, watermelon and litchi are favorites. 
Henry Hugh, a chef for a Manhattan investment house from Flushing, Queens, said many of his Asian-born friends prefer Malaysian-style bing, made with corn, green taro gelatin, starch beans and strawberry syrup.
Fortunately, there are many varieties of bao bing that please Western palates. 
Mango, litchi, mixed fruit and watermelon bing all have their Western devotees. 
''I have litchi bing at least once every two weeks,'' said Spencer Jarrett, an audio-visual producer based in New York. 
''I go to Maria's or Yuen Yuen Tea Parlor and get one to take out.''
There are signs that bao bing is gaining favor with an increasing number of Westerners. 
The Stony Wok, a Chinese restaurant in Flushing, Queens, has been serving bao bing to its customers every spring and summer for five years. 
The manager, Pai Kang, said: ''At first, customers ordered the ices out of curiosity, but then, they taste them and get hooked. 
Now, many people order them every time they come in.''
 
>Litchi Bing
 
Preparation time: 10 minutes
Cooking time: 5 minutes (for the sugar syrup)
 
1 1/2 cups water
1/2 cup sugar
1 tablespoon shredded orange peel (optional)
1 16-ounce can litchis in juice or heavy syrup
3 to 4 cups finely shaved or chopped ice, approximately.
1 3-ounce can condensed milk
1.Combine the water, sugar and shredded orange peel, if desired, in a heavy saucepan and bring to a boil. 
Reduce heat to medium-low and cook, uncovered, about 5 minutes, until you have a light sugar syrup. 
Remove from heat and let sugar syrup cool.
2.Open and drain the litchis. 
Reserve juice. 
For each serving, place 1/2 cup of the fruit in the bottom of a tall sundae glass or shallow bowl, and top each with about 1 cup of ice.
3.Top litchis and ice with 1/2 cup of sugar syrup, 1 tablespoon of reserved juice and 3 tablespoons of condensed milk. 
Serve.
Yield: 3 or 4 servings.
NOTE: This basic recipe will work with many types of fruit, including watermelons, mangoes and peaches.
 
Almond and Fruit Bing
 
Preparation time: 30 minutes
Cooking time: 10 minutes
 
2 tablespoons unflavored gelatin
1 cup cold water
Y cup sugar
3 cups milk, room temperature
1 1/2 teaspoons almond extract
Fresh or canned fruits, 16 ounces or 2 cups, peeled and chopped and juice reserved (see note in previous recipe)
3 cups of finely shaved, cracked or chopped ice
1 3-ounce can condensed milk.
1.Sprinkle gelatin over water in saucepan to soften. 
Add sugar and stir over medium heat, stirring constantly, until gelatin dissolves.
2.Bring to a boil, then remove from heat. 
Stirring constantly, slowly add milk.
3.Add almond extract. 
Pour into shallow baking dish, 8 by 11 by 2 inches, or into a six-cup mold, and chill.
4.After pudding is set, prepare fruit. 
For each serving, place about 1 cup of ice in shallow dish or deep container, then top with 1/2 cup of fruit and 1/2 cup of almond pudding. 
Sprinkle with 3 tablespoons of reserved fruit juice and an equal amount of condensed milk and serve.
Yield: 3 or 4 servings.
 
Where to Find the Delicacy In an Assortment of Flavors
IN Chinatown in Manhattan, many coffee shops, restaurants and bakeries sell bao bing.
Yuen Yuen Tea Parlor, 61 Bayard Street near Elizabeth Street, offers one of the widest selections in the city for $1 to $1.25. 
Yuen Yuen's light, refreshing flavors include litchi, pineapple, watermelon and Yuen Yuen, the house special, made of fruit cup, litchis and red beans. 
The telephone number is 212-406-2100. 
The two Chinatown branches of St. Honore, a Hong Kong bakery chain, feature bao bing made with a delicate slushy ice. 
Watermelon, litchi and lotus-seed bing ($1.50) are among the most popular. 
The chain has shops at 28 Bowery near Canal Street (212-962-1012) and 6 East Broadway near Catherine Street (941-0735). 
At Wun Loy, 66 Bayard Street near Mott Street, an unusual fruit-custard bao bing ($1.50), made of sweetened egg custard and mixed fruit, resembles a version popular in Taiwan. 
The telephone number is 212-219-3822. 
In Brooklyn, the Ocean King, 5418 Eighth Avenue near 55th Street (718-633-8580), and Tasty Villa, 5902 Eighth Avenue near 58th Street (718-439-9607), both serve bao bing. 
In Flushing, Queens, the Stony Wok at 137-40 Northern Boulevard (718-445-8535) also serves bao bing.
