
The aging Mao Zedong, feeling frustrated with the Communist Party bureaucracy in the 1960's, traveled south and used provincial newspapers to launch his calls for change. 
The result was the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, and nothing in China was ever quite the same.
When the aging Deng Xiaoping felt frustrated with the Communist Party bureaucracy in the 1990's, he too traveled south -- this January -- and used provincial newspapers and television stations to shake up the regime. 
But Beijing is still locked in a power struggle, and it is unclear whether Mr. Deng's efforts to impose his will will have the sweeping effects that Mao's did.
Mr. Deng has criticized several hard-liners by name, and he declared that "anyone who isn't a reformer must leave the stage."
But a political stillness hangs over the capital so far, and the bureaucracy is waiting for the other shoe to drop. 
Those whom Mr. Deng criticized remain in their posts, although at least one has checked into the hospital with what appears to be a political illness.
This is widely expected to be a decisive year in Chinese politics, in part because this fall a party congress is to convene for the first time in five years. 
But the power struggles and prospects are exceedingly murky. 
"There's a lot of speculation about what will happen, but nobody really knows," said a Chinese official who circulates among the leaders. 
"Even Deng Xiaoping doesn't know yet how it will all come out."
Some Chinese are giddy with hope that there will be tremendous change: that Prime Minister Li Peng and other hard-liners will be dismissed, that political prisoners will be freed, and that ousted figures like the former party leader Zhao Ziyang will make a comeback. 
For now, however, the evidence does not support such expectations. 
Mr. Deng's speeches during his trip to the south suggest that while he would like accelerated economic change he has no intention of easing political controls significantly.
"We must not be soft-hearted," Mr. Deng declared, and he said that the regime would have to "exercise dictatorship against our enemies" for perhaps several dozen generations to come. 
The speeches, which were circulated among Communist Party members as Central Committee Document No. 2, reiterate that China's leaders acted correctly in June 1989, when they ordered tanks and troops to crush the democracy movement at the cost of hundreds of lives. 
Mr. Deng also urged that officials watch for "the initial symptoms" of anti-government activity, so it could be wiped out more easily.
 
Frank and Consistent
Few world leaders have been so consistently misunderstood as Mr. Deng. In the 1980's, his advocacy of economic liberalization was widely mistaken as an indication that he was a closet capitalist who might tolerate democratic reform as well. 
Then, after he helped destroy the democracy movement in 1989, he was reviled as a brutal hard-liner. 
But in fact Mr. Deng has been reasonably frank and consistent about his views for the last 30 years: He believes firm dictatorial control is essential to manage China and preserve stabilityI, but he differs from the ideologues in that he will try almost any form of agricultural and industrial management that seems likely to promote economic growth and raise living standards.
"Reform and opening up require greater boldness and courageous experiments, and must not proceed like a woman with bound feet," Mr. Deng urged in Document No. 2. Officially the document is confidential, but Hong Kong publications have obtained and published it.
Document No. 2 also makes clear Mr. Deng's visceral fear of the instability of democracy. 
He says that if the army had not crushed the democracy movement "there would have been a chaotic situation which might have led to civil war."
Still, Mr. Deng's campaign to promote economic liberalization has left the hard-liners in trouble. 
The Communist Party Discipline Inspection Commission is believed to have sent work teams to investigate three bastions of the hard-liners: the Culture Ministry, the People's Daily and the Propaganda Department. 
The leaders of those three units are expected to be dismissed later this year.
One difficulty in gauging the impact of Mr. Deng's campaign is that so far it is virtually all talk rather than action. 
"There's a risk that the winds of reform will blow for a while, but then they'll die down and the landscape will be pretty much the same as before," said a Chinese with close ties to the reformist faction in the leadership that lost power in 1989.
There also are mixed signals. 
Four weeks ago the Politburo denounced Bao Tong, a reformist official who has been in prison since the Tiananmen democracy movement, and expelled him from the Communist Party. 
Zhu Rongji, a Deputy Prime Minister, was in Hainan Province last week quietly telling officials to scrap the stock market they started a month earlier.
Still, even the oratory about bolder change has an impact at the local level, in that local leaders -- especially in southern China -- use it as an excuse to push a little harder for their pet projects. 
Local officials often have little patience for Communist ideology and simply want to promote economic growth, and now some think they can get away with a bit more. 
Some are forcing state-owned enterprises to face the discipline of the market, even if that means layoffs, and Guangzhou, Shanghai and Shenzhen are all imitating Hong Kong and trying to introduce the bourgeois pastime of horse-racing.
"Whatever you want to do these days, you cite Deng Xiaoping," an official says. 
"If you want to start a brothel, then you say, "Well, comrade Xiaoping says we should take bolder steps!"
