
Ever since Chinese troops ''liberated'' Tibet in 1950, the Communist authorities have tried to pressure Tibetans into submission. 
But these days many Tibetans seem more eager than ever to pry themselves from the Chinese embrace, and there are signs that time is running against Beijing.
Government officials acknowledge that they face a long-term struggle against what they describe as ''a tiny number of separatists.''
Yet the very trend of economic and social development seems to be running against the Chinese. 
The worldwide pattern since the early 19th century has been that nationalism increases rather than diminishes as peasants earn more money, drift to cities and become more politically aware. 
In Tibet, as peasants buy televisions and radios to plug into the modern world, they may be swayed by the independence movement and nationalism that already flourish in Lhasa.
Economic factors may provoke even greater discontent. 
Incomes are rising in Tibet, but not as fast as in the rest of China. 
While the region has some natural resources, it is difficult to see how Tibet could catch up with the rest of China - unless it went all-out to attract foreign tourists, a strategy that the Government has judged too risky politically.
''The city dwellers are better off than in the past, but they're not satisfied,'' acknowledged Hu Jinan, the deputy head of the Tibetan Government's Cultural Bureau. 
''They know it's better elsewhere.''
Tibet is officially an ''autonomous region'' of China, but the Government's legitimacy has been in doubt at least since the Dalai Lama, the traditional leader of the region, fled into exile in 1959. 
There is little armed resistance to Chinese rule, partly because Tibetans are Buddhist and generally pacifist, but the Dalai Lama has set up an exile government and many Tibetans would like him to return and lead Tibet as a sovereign state.
Government officials here often seem amazed that Tibetans should resent Chinese rule. 
Indeed, there is little doubt that Beijing has been, by its standards, not only very repressive but also very generous in Tibet. 
Torture is said to be common, and the Government has expelled politically active monks from monasteries and planned new limits on the number of monks. 
But Tibet is materially better off than it used to be, and health and educational standards have risen - although the same would have been expected without Chinese rule.
Each year the central government not only excuses Tibet from its tax obligations but also provides about $275 million in subsidies. 
About one-third goes to salaries, but much of the rest is used for schools, hospitals and infrastructure projects. 
The Chinese seem to feel that they are owed a bit of loyalty and gratitude, but the distrust is so great that they get little credit either in Tibet or outside of it.
Outside of Tibet, the Dalai Lama and those around him have tried to build support by telling of forced sterilization of Tibetans, huge influxes of Chinese and a deliberate policy of either genocide or forced assimilation. 
But many diplomats and other experts regard the anti-Chinese propaganda from the Dalai Lama as little more reliable than the Chinese propaganda about Tibet. 
With access tightly curtailed, the debate about Tibet has been waged more with polemics than with information.
Among the most poignant claims by the Dalai Lama is that Tibetans have become a minority in their own land because of large-scale Chinese immigration. 
But the exile movement's estimate of a Tibetan population of 6 million Tibetans and 7.5 million Chinese is considered misleading because it refers to a vast area of China that extends far beyond present-day Tibet. 
The official Chinese figures for Tibet's population are often viewed as more relevant: 2.12 million ethnic Tibetans and 79,000 permanent Han Chinese inhabitants, not including tens of thousands of Chinese cadres, soldiers and entrepreneurs without permanent residence permits.
Chinese immigration into Tibet has accelerated, but this seems to be a result not of a conspiracy by Beijing but of economic subsidies to the region. 
Chinese traders say they find it more profitable to do business in Tibet than in their home provinces.
Despite rumors about Chinese hospitals killing Tibetan infants, the family planning policy seems to be much more relaxed for Tibetans than it is for Chinese. 
Peasants interviewed said they were allowed to have as many children as they wanted, and most couples seemed to have three to five.
It is also striking how little assimilation has occurred after four decades of Chinese rule. 
Even in Lhasa only a minority of Tibetans speaks any Chinese, and in the countryside it is virtually impossible to find Chinese speakers. 
The Chinese language is not even taught in rural elementary schools, which is as far as most Tibetans pursue their education.
This strategy of trying to buy friends in Tibet with subsidies and various benefits showed some promise of succeeding in the 1980's, but in Lhasa it already seems to have collapsed. 
The last three years of protests, each time brutally crushed, have led to new bitterness on each side.
Despite the repression and mistrust, many Tibetans are optimistic that they will gain independence in the coming decades. 
They are inspired partly by the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and partly by signs of a weak and unpopular central Government in Beijing. 
Tibet has turned out to be fairly indigestible, and they hope that Beijing will eventually spit it out.
''We don't like the Chinese,'' a Tibetan in his 20's explained the other day. 
''They've turned to repression and terrorism to keep us down, but most people still want independence and want the Dalai Lama to return. 
Independence is a real possibility.''
