
TIBET is manifest proof of the smallness of human beings. 
The Himalayan landscapes are so vast, so bereft of any inhabitants except the odd nomad, that here it is the land that has shaped the people instead of the other way around. 
When Tibetans die, they do not build tombs; they leave the corpse for the vultures to devour. 
Occasionally the Government makes an effort to tame the plateau, to show who is boss, by carving a road through the emptiness, but nature gets its revenge by bogging down vehicles in snow or mud.
It is from the roof of the Potala Palace, where the Dalai Lama as a boy rigged a telescope to study ordinary people as they strolled among the yaks on the streets below, that Tibet is at its most magnificent. 
As Tibetan pilgrims shuffle by, turning prayer wheels and mumbling chants before disappearing into little chapels to light yak-butter candles, the mysticism and beauty of the land are simply overpowering.
Tibet inspired the notion of Shangri-La, and it retains a remoteness and exotic quality now rare elsewhere in the world. 
The Tibetan pilgrims who prostrate themselves in the dust have nothing but their faith, but they count themselves as very rich indeed -- for they have been able to make the holy journey to Lhasa. 
The pilgrims clutch prayer wheels as they walk clockwise around the Jokhang Temple, according to ritual.
In recent years, to be sure, Tibet has been an unhappy sort of Shangri-La. 
It had links over the centuries with the Chinese empire, and in 1950 the newly installed Communist Chinese Government used those relations to justify sending its army to "liberate" Tibet, which it claimed was part of China. 
These days there is a Tibetan Government in exile, but the United States and other Western governments recognize Chinese sovereignty over Tibet -- while urging Beijing to halt the torture and repression there.
In the mid-1980's there seemed to be some hope for a compromise between the exiled Dalai Lama and the Beijing authorities, but then pro-independence demonstrations erupted in September 1987 and were bloodily suppressed. 
Tensions rose, and the unrest culminated in clashes in March 1989 that left at least a dozen dead and led to the expulsion of all tourists and the imposition of martial law. 
China lifted martial law in May 1990, and since then the region has been largely quiet. 
As a result, the Chinese Government is again encouraging Western tourists -- so long as they come in organized groups and do not encourage Tibetan separatists.
The groups are escorted to a limited number of places where tourists are welcome. 
Last year, 10,375 foreigners visited Tibet, including 1,441 from the United States. 
Tibetan tourism officials say they expect 13,000 visitors this year, including about 1,400 from the United States. 
In general, there seems little risk for Westerners, partly because most Tibetans regard them as allies.
Tibet can be reached from Nepal -- there are two flights a week -- but most tourists arrive on the daily China Southwest Airlines flights from Chengdu, China. 
In my case I went as a journalist rather than as a tourist, but my itinerary was similar to what a tourist might see. 
I spent a week there, and it seems foolish to stay less than that.
Lhasa is 11,830 feet high, and most visitors feel some shortness of breath at first. 
In Andean cities like Cuzco, Peru, foreigners often deal with similar altitudes by drinking coca tea, which contains a raw ingredient that goes into cocaine. 
In Tibet, there is no such exotic remedy, but the Lhasa Holiday Inn -- by far the best hotel in Lhasa, and the place where most foreigners stay -- does offer an oxygen hose in each room to assist those with breathing difficulties. 
Occasionally a new arrival has to fly out by the first available plane to a lower altitude.
Tibet is not a place of luxury, but the hotels and food are adequate. 
Most hotel restaurants serve principally Chinese and Western food, with a certain Tibetan influence: yak burgers, for example, at the Holiday Inn. 
Guides vary enormously, from local Tibetans who are one with the land to Chinese who have only lived in Tibet for a short period.
The pride of Lhasa is the Potala Palace, the former home of the Dalai Lama. 
Since Tibet's spiritual leader fled into exile in 1959, the palace has been turned into a museum and it is one of the most spectacular sights in Asia. 
I find it far more impressive than the Chinese Imperial Palace in the Forbidden City in Beijing. 
While the Forbidden City is sterile, the Potala oozes faith. 
It is the Tibetan version of Versailles: 13 stories tall, 1,300 feet by 1,150 feet, with 16-foot walls protecting a warren of more than 1,000 rooms. 
The Government regards the Potala as a museum, but many Tibetans still regard it as one of the holiest spots in the world. 
They come not so much out of curiosity as out of reverence, which is seen in their eyes as they shuffle from room to room, lighting candles and praying before the jewel-studded tombs of past incarnations of the Dalai Lama.
They wind up narrow stairs, little more than ladders, and emerge on an open roof with views of all of Lhasa.
The rooms in the Potala have names like Chapel of Immortal Happiness and Chapel of the Stages on the Path to Enlightenment. 
The contents are as vivid as the names: altars and carvings are everywhere, all weighed down with gorgeous pieces of cloth of every conceivable color. 
White scarves, left by pilgrims to show their respect, adorn many of the altars. 
The entire Potala is a celebration of color, and clothes and books and carvings and tombs seem to be crammed wherever there is space.
THE Potala was built mostly during the rule of the fifth Dalai Lama, and the regent concealed news of his death in 1682 for a decade because of fear that the mourning would halt construction of the palace. 
Only when it was virtually completed did the regent announce the Dalai Lama's death and launch the search for his reincarnation. 
By the time the successor was found he was already a teen-ager, and he proved to have a strong and rather ungodly interest in the opposite sex. 
The sixth Dalai Lama disappeared in 1706, but he is still fondly remembered for his poetry and sometimes roguish behavior.
Most visitors to Lhasa also tour the Jokhang Temple and the surrounding Barkor Market. 
This area is the political and religious focal point of Tibet, the gathering point of pilgrims who come from hundreds or even thousands of miles -- these days usually by bus, instead of by crawling and prostrating. 
It is also the site of most pro-independence demonstrations in the last few years, but if there is a prospect of a protest then your guides are almost certain to keep you away.
The entrance to the Jokhang is crowded with pilgrims, prostrating themselves, and with vendors who peddle prayer wheels, bugles and other souvenirs. 
The atmosphere is half carnival, half mystical. 
Inside, the oldest part of the temple supposedly dates from the seventh century and houses an ancient Buddha that was carried to Lhasa 1,300 years ago from the Chinese capital of that epoch, Changan, now called Xian. 
This holy of holies is in a cramped, dark room that magnifies the spiritual intensity: pilgrims are shoulder to shoulder, murmuring prayers as they edge their way around the statue.
The Chinese are sometimes reluctant to arrange visits to the monasteries that surround Lhasa, because the monasteries function as an alternative university system and as centers of opposition to the Government. 
If a visit is permitted, it is well worth the trip. 
These used to be the largest monasteries in the world -- Drepung Monastery near Lhasa once had nearly 10,000 monks -- and they are still influential in Tibetan society.
In addition to Drepung, alternatives are Sera Monastery, on the outskirts of Lhasa, and Ganden Monastery, 45 miles by rough road from the city. 
Ganden is one of the most poignant sights in the area: the monastery was devastated in the Maoist period, and most of it today is only rubble. 
It is as if Notre Dame had been bombed. 
The destruction helps explain the bitterness that many Tibetans feel for the Chinese authorities.
In the evening it is well worth taking a bicycle-rickshaw to the area around the Jokhang Temple and perhaps popping into one of the small bars. 
Studying English is the rage in Lhasa, and it is likely that someone will approach to start a conversation. 
I remember a doctor who spoke to me for more than an hour about the political situation. 
He was torn in his emotions: he wanted to get his anger at the Chinese off his chest, but he was also terrified of being arrested for his candor. 
Speaking in Chinese, he repeatedly said he risked being beaten and imprisoned for years for talking to a foreign journalist.
Tourists are allowed to travel to certain other parts of Tibet, and I relished a three-day circuit that encompassed the towns of Shigatse and Gyantse. 
The trip begins with a six- or seven-hour ride along a newly constructed highway that still has a few rough edges: a truck became stuck in a patch of mud, blocking traffic in both directions.
Shigatse was the traditional seat of the Panchen Lama, who ranks second in the religious hierarchy to the Dalai Lama. 
The 10th Panchen Lama died in 1989, and visitors to Tashilhunpo Monastery in Shigatse stroll around the glass case in which his embalmed body is seated. 
A dozen or so monks constantly pray for a rapid incarnation of the Panchen Lama in the form of an infant.
The monastery is built against a hill, and the tombs of past Panchen Lamas are on display, as is the site where the tomb of the 10th is now being prepared. 
The monks consult oracles and study divine lakes for hints about where to find the infant 11th Panchen Lama. 
A few candidates will presumably be selected within the next year or two, and in theory the child who recognizes the personal belongings of the last Panchen Lama will be pronounced the new one. 
There is considerable room for manipulation of the process, and many Tibetans fear that the Chinese authorities will try to select a boy whom they can control and turn into a spokesman for the regime.
AS I wandered through the lanes and corridors of Tashilhunpo, admiring the sculptures and altars, I chatted with Barsan, who came to the monastery in 1947, when he was 7 years old. 
Then there were perhaps 3,000 monks at the monastery, now there are 800, and Barsan says there will never again be as many as there used to be. 
In the Cultural Revolution, he was forced to work for five years as a construction worker and farm laborer, but today he hides what bitterness he may feel.
From Shigatse it is less than two hours by car to Gyantse, a small town whose claim to fame is the Kumbum, part of the Palkhor Monastery on the edge of town. 
The Kumbum, built in 1427, is the largest stupa, a kind of Buddhist tower, in Tibet: built with a dome, it soars heavenward and dominates the arid landscape for miles around. 
A few monks will show you around the dim interior, illuminated by yak- butter candles and crammed with ancient manuscripts.
In the evenings, after the official tourist itinerary is completed, it may be possible to take a four-wheel vehicle and drive independently to a nearby village. 
Traveling without any Chinese official, I found that villagers were extremely friendly and happy to show me around their crude homes.
One of the best reasons to visit Gyantse is simply to enjoy the road connecting it to Lhasa. 
Yes, the dirt road is miserable after rain -- on my trip, many trucks were stuck in the mud, and my four-wheel-drive vehicle frequently had to drive across open fields rather than the road itself -- but the scenery is spectacular. 
The terrain is the classic image of Tibet: a vast emptiness full of mountains and glaciers and occasional herds of yaks. 
The emptiness is broken only by a telephone wire that goes along the road. 
Because of the absence of trees, the telephone poles are not made of wood but of mud bricks.
 
SIGNPOSTS FOR A VISIT TO LHASA
 
The Border
While the police sometimes tolerate individual tourists who sneak into Tibet by overland routes, the only legal way to enter is as part of an organized tour -- even if it is a tour of one. 
The difference between an illegal individual tourist and an authorized tour group with one person is that the latter has a schedule and an escort and pays hefty fees.
A tour agent will arrange for the Chinese visa and the permission slip to travel to Tibet, both of which are essential. 
Backpackers who cross the border without permission, mostly by bus from Sichuan or Qinghai Provinces, often stay at the budget Yak Hotel in the center of Lhasa. 
On occasion the police have taken to seizing some of these unauthorized visitors, and detaining them rather roughly at the airport until the next flight. 
Budget travelers have made daring midnight escapes from the airport, even swimming a river to avoid soldiers.
The Chinese Government is very concerned about tourist involvement in the independence movement, and so it is illegal for foreigners to give out photos of the Dalai Lama; everywhere you go children will ask for his photo. 
Tibet is generally very safe, but tourists of Asian ancestry, who might be mistaken for local Chinese, should be somewhat cautious about roaming the Tibetan quarter at night. 
A Japanese friend had pebbles tossed in his direction at a monastery; some monks believed he was Chinese.
 
Tours
A number of travel agents can arrange the tours, as can Holiday Inn, which manages the best hotel in Tibet. 
Information is available from the Holiday Inn sales office, (800) 331-3831, or from Holiday Inn Lhasa, No. 1 Minzu Lu, Lhasa, Tibet, China (telephone 222-21; telex 68010 HILSA CN). 
The Government tightly regulates tour costs and keeps them high. 
The Holiday Inn's weeklong tour of the Lhasa area, excluding the air fare to Lhasa, costs $1,475 for a single traveler, or $860 each for a couple, meals included. 
Discounts grow as the size of the group grows, with 10 people paying just $590 each.
Some cheaper package tours stay at the nearby Tibet Hotel. 
The Tibetan decor in the rooms is charming, but guests say that service leaves much to be desired. 
There is one tourist hotel each in Shigatse and Gyantse; neither meets international standards.
 
Weather
Most tourists visit in the warmer months from April to October. 
In winter, there is some snow and the days are shorter, but Lhasa becomes a more interesting city as the nomads leave the hills and roam the streets of the capital. 
In December, the coldest month, the temperature averages 32 degrees. 
Because the weather is changeable, travelers should take clothing that can be worn in layers -- such as sweaters. 
Sunscreens are also useful, because of the altitude. 
You should not count on being able to buy anything at all other than food in Lhasa, so take film.
 
Reading
Partly because of the limitations of the guides, it makes sense to buy a guidebook or two for the journey. 
Perhaps the best is Stephen Batchelor's comprehensive and beautifully illustrated "Tibet Guide" (Wisdom Publications, London); other useful ones include the Lonely Planet guide, "Tibet: A Travel Survival Kit," and Passport Books' "Tibet: A Complete Guide."
The Dalai Lama's autobiography, "Freedom in Exile," is fascinating, although for a more objective version of political events I would strongly recommend an essay by Melvyn C. Goldstein on Tibet in "China Briefing 1990," published by the Asia Society and Westview Press. 
-- N. D. K.
