
President Bush today killed legislation that would have allowed Chinese students to stay in the United States after their visas expired. 
He said he was taking administrative action to give equivalent protection to the students.
Mr. Bush said that the legislation, passed with overwhelming support in Congress, was ''wholly unnecessary.''
The President said he already had ''sufficient authority to provide the necessary relief'' for the 40,000 Chinese students in the United States.
Chinese student leaders immediately criticized the decision. 
''We are disappointed, surprised and very puzzled by President Bush's action,'' said Haiching Zhao, chairman of the National Committee on Chinese Student Affairs, and a postdoctoral fellow in biochemistry at Harvard University.
 
Pressure From Beijing
White House officials met today with Chinese student leaders and urged them not to criticize Mr. Bush's action.
Beijing had repeatedly urged Mr. Bush to veto the bill, warning that otherwise it would terminate all student-exchange programs with the United States.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said, ''The President should have stood up for the courageous Chinese students instead of bowing to the cruel Chinese regime.''
Representative Bruce A. Morrison of Connecticut, chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on immigration, said in an interview tonight, ''I am appalled that the President, right on the eve of his meeting with President Gorbachev, knuckled under to the demands of the Chinese Government.''
 
The Validity of the Veto
In a ''memorandum of disapproval,'' Mr. Bush said he was rejecting the bill by means of a ''pocket veto'' because Congress had adjourned for the year. 
But he said he was returning the bill to the House, because Federal court decisions raised questions about the validity of a pocket veto between two sessions of the same Congress.
Congress reconvenes Jan. 
23. It is not clear whether Congress will try to pass a similar bill or try to override the President's veto.
The House majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, said: ''Overriding the President's veto will be the first item of business on the Congressional agenda when we return in January. 
The Chinese students deserve the full protection of American law.''
The students say they would face persecution if forced to return to their homeland. 
But Mr. Bush said, ''I will always adhere to the principle that no one will be returned forcibly to a country where he or she faces persecution.''
 
Grace Period of Four Years
Mr. Zhao asked, ''If the President thinks that administrative action is just as good as a new statute, why couldn't he have signed the legislation?''
Regulations, he said, are not the same as statutes ''in terms of fully protecting Chinese students.''
Under the bill, introduced by Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, Chinese students in the United States could have stayed here and applied for new visas without going home for the two-year waiting period normally required for foreign students. 
The bill would have given the Chinese students up to four years to apply for other types of visas or to seek status as permanent residents of the United States.
Mr. Bush said he had directed Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to arrange ''effectively the same protection'' for Chinese students as they would have received under the bill.
He ordered an ''irrevocable waiver of the two-year home-country residence requirement,'' and he said that Chinese students could apply for such clemency until Jan. 
1, 1994.
 
Threatened With Reprisals
Chinese Army troops crushed the democracy movement and killed hundreds of protesters in Beijing in early June. 
Since then, students at Chinese universities have been required to attend classes on Communist Party doctrine and ideology. 
Chinese students in the United States say they have been harassed by representatives of the Beijing Government and threatened with reprisals if they express support for the democracy movement in their homeland.
In a statement tonight, Mr. Bush promised ''continued lawful immigration status'' for Chinese students who were legally in this country on June 5. 
He said that the United States would not move to deport the students and would allow them to take jobs while they were in this country.
The Pelosi bill was approved in the House of Representatives by a vote of 403 to 0 and in the Senate by voice vote.
Seventy-one senators and 105 members of the House of Representatives signed letters this week urging President Bush to approve the bill. 
The House letter said: ''The Tiananmen Square mentality persists in China. 
Although the Chinese Government claims that it will deal leniently with those who opposed it, the reality is that the crackdown continues.''
 
Offending China's Leaders
Members of Congress said that Mr. Bush, a former chief of the American mission in Beijing, was afraid of offending China's leaders. 
For his part, Mr. Bush said he hoped that China would object less to his administrative action than to the legislation, even though he asserted that the two types of protection were equivalent.
Mr. Bush said his action achieved ''the laudable objectives'' of Mrs. Pelosi's bill while preserving the President's authority over foreign affairs against encroachments by Congress.
Explaining why he rejected the bill, Mr. Bush said: ''My Administration has opposed Congressional micro-management of foreign policy. 
Such legislation puts America in a straitjacket and can render us incapable of responding to changing circumstances.''
The House and the Senate both contend that the pocket veto is not appropriate between two sessions of the same Congress.
 
'Constitutional Prerogative'
Under the Constitution, if a bill is passed by both houses of Congress in precisely the same form, it is ''presented'' to the President. 
He can sign it, making it law. 
He can veto it by returning it to Congress within 10 days. 
If the President neither returns nor signs the bill within 10 days, the Constitution says, it becomes law - ''unless the Congress by their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.''
To preserve its ''constitutional prerogative'' to reconsider vetoed legislation, Congress this year designated the clerk of the House and the secretary of the Senate to receive veto messages from the President while they are not in session.
Thus, Congress contends that its adjournment from Nov. 
22 to Jan. 
23 does not prevent the President from returning vetoed bills for reconsideration.
