
DENG XIAOPING is gambling again. 
The 85-year-old Chinese leader, who has proved an astute political oddsmaker, is betting that by ending martial law Beijing will reap economic and diplomatic benefits without risking further unrest.
Avoiding new turmoil is crucial, and the hope here is that foreigners will take the lifting of martial law, announced last week, more seriously than will the Chinese. 
It seems that the action is an effort to expunge some trappings of repression without ending the repression itself.
China's leaders had hoped for a more enthusiastic response abroad. 
True, the Bush Administration agreed - on the very day of the announcement, although it said there was no connection - to allow World Bank loans for relief after earthquakes and other calamities. 
President Bush had earlier sent his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, on two missions to Beijing, and the Administration suggested that the lifting of martial law was a dividend. 
But Japan has said that it wants to see further liberalization before resuming negotiations on a $5 billion loan package. 
In Washington, Congress may well vote for new sanctions against China after convening later this month.
China's leaders had hoped for a more enthusiastic response abroad. 
Martial law and the bloody victory over the democracy movement last June carried with it tremendous costs. 
The Bush Administration's overtures notwithstanding, the Government has become a virtual pariah in the world. 
The sharp drop in tourism and foreign investment has hurt the economy and risks sparking further unrest. 
And the military presence during martial law deepened the hostility of many Chinese toward the Government.
Army troops remain in the capital, and the police have been ordered to intervene at the first sign of trouble. 
Unauthorized demonstrations are still illegal. 
On Tiananmen Square, even speaking loudly is an offense.
Until last May, the Communist Party might have gained some popular support with political liberalization, many Chinese intellectuals and foreign scholars say. 
While in Eastern Europe, Communist parties were generally reviled as Soviet-installed instruments of oppression and stagnation, the Chinese party still had a modest reservoir of good will based on its successes in the 1950's in reorganizing society and reviving the economy, as well as on the more recent economic boom of the early 1980's.
 
The Path Not Taken
Some young party officials here believe that when the leadership came to the crossroads last May and June, it could have chosen greater pluralism over violent repression. 
They say that if China had held elections, partly free, partly rigged, as in Taiwan and many developing countries, the Communist Party could have relied upon rural support to win.
But even these party members say that the Communists have so outraged the country over the last nine months that liberalization will be far more complex and dangerous than ever before. 
A famous pop singer, Hou Dejian, who has some protection because of his fame and Taiwanese origins, put it this way: ''In Eastern Europe, the regimes sacrificed one or two persons and protected the whole party. 
China was the opposite. 
China sacrificed the whole party and government to protect one or two persons.''
Economic pressures are crucial in this respect. 
A year ago, many Chinese were upset about inflation. 
Now inflation has been tamed, but unemployment and slow growth have emerged to make people more upset than ever.
Industrial output grew by only 6.8 percent in 1989, the Government announced last week, down from 17.7 percent growth the previous year. 
More alarming, most of the growth came early in the year; in the last quarter, industrial output grew only seven-tenths of 1 percent.
Because of a tight monetary policy, rising debts and a shortage of energy and raw materials, countless factories have been closed across the country - up to 8 percent of factories in some cities, the Government spokesman acknowledged. 
The Chinese people as a whole may not have seen their real standard of living drop, but they certainly have fallen far behind their expectations of continued improvement.
By late last year, the Government seemed to realize the political risk of further austerity, and monetary policy was sharply relaxed, though this may mean a resurgence of inflation later in 1990. 
The authorities also disclosed that all workers at state-owned enterprises will get a wage increase by the Chinese New Year holiday later this month.
It is not clear that the lifting of martial law will bring many of the expected economic benefits. 
Foreign business executives interviewed last week said that the move by itself made relatively little difference, and that economic prospects and the investment climate remain inauspicious. 
Tourism will improve, but is expected to remain subdued.
Most Chinese seem to believe that the party will try to consolidate its position through economic relaxation - a move intended to improve its popularity on pocketbook issues - while maintaining political controls that remain as strict as ever. 
But Chinese officials and foreign diplomats interviewed also maintain that hostility to the leadership is so great, particularly in cities and even within the party itself, that the hard-liners will be taking considerable risks if they try to rely on anything but the barrel of a gun.
Significantly, while the end of martial law brought no immediate economic benefits, it did ignite some minor political incidents. 
In several cases reported Thursday and Friday, people were hauled away from Tiananmen Square after shouting slogans or trying to present wreaths to honor the dead.
 
'When the Overthrow Will Come'
''Everybody is talking about when the overthrow will come,'' said a Government official. 
His own prediction is that it will take 10 years, but he acknowledged that his guess is unusually conservative. 
When asked, most people say two to five years will be enough. 
They do not so much forecast the end of socialism in China as simply a shift to a more moderate set of economic and political policies, probably under new Communist leaders. 
They see the changes coming either because of new street demonstrations or from a military coup or a power struggle within the Communist Party.
As the Government tries to heal the wounds of June and win a measure of support, it is stressing ''political study'' sessions intended to show that, as a huge billboard proclaims in the center of Beijing: ''Only socialism can save China. 
Only socialism can make China develop.''
