
YU KIM LY was buried last week in his faded blue jeans. 
At his wake, near his coffin, the photograph of the winsome-looking 16-year-old and the small crowd of black-clad teen-age mourners offered few hints of the violent death he met the previous week on a street in lower Manhattan.
The boy was shot three times in the head along with two other teen-age friends, all members of the Vietnamese gang Born to Kill, a violent group that has increasingly encroached on the territory of established Chinese gangs, terrifying the Chinese, Vietnamese and Korean communities throughout New York.
Although law-enforcement officials said the three deaths were not officially gang related, the murders galvanized more than 20 Asian community groups, traditionally wary of outsiders, to meet recently with the police and protest increased gang violence and insufficient police protection.
Their protest differed from similar protests in past decades. 
Not only did it demonstrate a new pan-Asian solidarity, but it also appears to have been ignited by the changing random pattern of gang violence and the rise of the drug trade. 
The meeting also pointed up the chasm between Asian-Americans and the police department -- as well as conflicts within their own communities.
"Now is the time to fight back," Paul Mack, the executive director of the Brooklyn Chinese-American Community Association, said. 
"But without any assistance from higher up, we just can't do it. 
But also look at it this way, without cooperation from the community, there isn't much police can do."
The dramatic rise in the number of Asian immigrants over the last 20 years has been reflected by an increase in gangs. 
"The stakes are higher now," said Ko-lin Chin, a senior research analyst at the New York City Criminal Justice Agency, a private nonprofit organization, who wrote "Chinese Subculture and Criminality" (Greenwood Press, 1990). 
"More immigrants mean more business, more money, more power. 
There's more heroin trafficking. 
And when the gangs in the 90's now send a message, they kill people."
An estimated 300,000 Chinese live in New York, 150,000 in Chinatown. 
In the 1980's, as new groups from Taiwan and Hong Kong flowed in they settled in Flushing in Queens and along Eighth Avenue in Brooklyn, each area with Chinese populations of over 60,000. 
More recently, Chinatown has felt the influx of a wave of 30,000 undocumented immigrants, mostly from China's Fukien Province, according to Virgo Lee, the director of Mayor David N. Dinkins's office of Asian Affairs. 
The Vietnamese population has jumped from 5,000 to 40,000 since 1980.
A possible indication of increased gang activity is reflected in police statistics for Chinatown. 
The data for the first six months of 1990 show robberies up by 30 percent over 1989. 
In the Fifth Precinct, which patrols Chinatown, 13 people have been murdered so far, compared with 12 homicides for all of 1989. 
This month alone, five gang members were murdered in three separate incidents in lower Manhattan.
At the heart of the violence is Born to Kill and its rivalry with more traditional Chinese gangs. 
The gang, made up of young Vietnamese immigrants, is extremely unpredictable and violent and primarily involved in robbery, extortion and burglary of Chinese retail stores and restaurants.
"One merchant in Brooklyn was hit six different times in one day by gang kids who wanted money," Mr. Mack said, referring to different gangs.
The Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese gangs are linked to their community's social and economic life. 
The Chinese gangs especially rely on their relationship to certain large, established social and political associations. 
These groups use the youths to protect illegal activities like gambling, Mr. Chin said.
The leaders of the groups that have an association with the gangs "have an ambivalent and very subtle relationship with their gangs," said Mr. Chin. "They cannot dismiss them because they are the nuclear power of the adult organization. 
If they let them go, another will recruit them, and they will be left without street soldiers."
 
A Little Progress
The communication gap between the police and the community only assists the gangs. 
The police claim that Asians are easier victims because they are scared or unwilling to report crimes; the community groups say the only solution in the short term is more police on the streets and in the long term school programs to discourage children from gangs.
The language barrier and the innate distrust of authority add to the unwillingness of the Asian community to work with the police or even appear in court. 
The police say they cannot make arrests and prosecute unless the attitudes change.
"The community has to make a difference," said Sergeant Michael Collins of the Fifth Precinct's Asian Gang Intelligence Unit. 
"They have to report the crimes. 
They have to stop participating in extortion. 
They have to be willing to follow through the system."
Community leaders, like Paul Yee, president of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, a group of more than 60 community organizations, argue that the legal system quickly frees criminals, who take revenge on their victims, who lack police protection.
"We feel the system is just too ridiculous," Mr. Yee said. 
"The police blame the community people. 
They don't blame the crime."
Both law-enforcement officials and community leaders claim some progress. 
The police say they are increasing the number of uniformed patrol officers in the precinct and upgrading the gang surveillance unit.
Still, many present at the meeting were skeptical. 
To some, it recalled the old Chinese saying, "When alive don't go to authority. 
When dead don't go to hell."
