
In recent weeks Chinese have learned just how effectively the Government can keep an eye on each one of them.
For a long time, large and small cameras have been fixtures on lampposts and traffic lights in Tiananmen Square and in areas like Government and diplomatic compounds. 
And many foreigners and some Chinese presume that their telephones are tapped.
But as the Communist society in recent years seemed to embrace a greater pluralism and freedom of movement, Chinese and foreign visitors alike began to ignore the mechanical eyes in the street and went about with their ordinary relatively free-spirited activities.
Now, as the Government public security machine is propelled into motion throughout the country, ordinary Chinese are beginning to see how efficiently the authorities can maintain surveillance over them. 
#13 Arrested as Spies for Taiwan Today, for example, the television announced that the Chinese security authorities had arrested 13 Chinese as spies for Taiwan. 
It showed extensive film clips of some of them carrying out their suspected illicit activities all over China.
Some of them were trailed on Tiananmen Square conversing with workers and bystanders, the heads of the suspects barely visible in the sea of faces. 
Occasional sun spots on the film suggested that the cameraman was in a car nearby.
In another instance, the midriff of a suspect was filmed apparently with a camera from the pocket of a security agent. 
Other angles suggested the security agent, possibly posing as a photojournalist, filmed shots with a video camera on Tiananmen Square.
Of course, it is expected that security agents monitor suspected spies. 
But the television news programs have made clear that security officials have also been busy filming student leaders. 
When one student leader had a meal at a Beijing hotel recently, for instance, three video cameras were apparently used to produce secret footage that was later shown on television.
The Government also seems to have a large collection of footage of the entire democracy movement, which has enabled it to present a visual account of its version of events on June 4, when soldiers gunned down unarmed civilians.
Ordinary Chinese are discovering that even as hundreds of thousands of citizens filled the area of the square during April and May to watch pro-democracy demonstrators parade with their banners, the Government security apparatus could virtually single out a casual conversation or hearty exchange of political views.
 
Journalists Photographed
Throughout the two months of the democracy movement, many foreign journalists noticed men, presumably security agents or policemen, snapping pictures of them, scribbling notes about them or taping their conversations.
When the first posters went up at Beijing University and other schools in the capital, it was common to see people reading the texts of posters into tape recorders. 
Some were obviously students, but others looked older and would not say who they were when approached.
After students protested in front of the Communist Party headquarters, where China's leaders live and work, senior officials and their families saw videotapes of the dramatic pushing and shoving match between students and soldiers at the doorstep to the walled-in compound, said a Chinese who saw the film clips.
When outspoken citizens mounted their soap boxes on Tiananmen Square to tell the crowd of their views on democracy, it was probably clear to them that their public speeches were noted by the authorities. 
But beyond that, it seems as though those speeches were documented and filed into dossiers on each of the citizens.
Now, their words have come to haunt the speakers, as recent articles in the official press have quoted from some of those earlier speeches. 
A long article in Beijing Daily relayed parts of a speech given by Ren Wanding, an essayist and dissident, on Tiananmen Square during a long series of speeches.
 
Denunciations by Citizens
But one of the more remarkable aspects of the crackdown has been the contributions from citizens, mainly in the form of denunciations. 
The Government asserts that it has received more than a thousand letters that help to identify ''thugs.''
Newspapers have printed articles by professors and even a Beijing University student criticizing his fellow students' democracy movement.
 
Some Fugitives Turned In
Zhou Fengsuo, a 22-year-old student leader, was turned in by his sister and brother-in-law. 
One ''rumor-mongerer'' wanted by the police was turned in by two shop assistants. 
And peasants and workers in suburbs of Beijing, which are not under martial law, have turned in to the police at least two foreigners who were seen in the village asking questions.
Denunciations were characteristic of China in the Mao era, so it is not that surprising to see the activity reappear, although at a more moderate level.
