
To listen to some Chinese, one of the best-kept secrets in the world is this: Here in the land of Mao, where red banners with propaganda slogans still dangle from tall buildings, Communism has collapsed.
It's quite a state secret, but some Chinese believe that's essentially what has happened. 
Indeed, the joke making the rounds among Chinese intellectuals is this: "Under the leadership of the Communist Party, we're advancing from socialism to capitalism."
It is true that one can spend days rummaging through the free markets of cities like Guangzhou or Shanghai and find little trace of Communism. 
Yet Deng Xiaoping, the 88-year-old senior leader, has no intention of creating the kind of democratic capitalist society that exists in the West.
 
Looking for a Hybrid
Rather, there is growing evidence that his aim is to build a hybrid along the lines of capitalist totalitarianism, or free-market authoritarianism.
Mr. Deng is willing to free prices but not the press, to loosen controls over companies but not citizens. 
The Communist Party Congress, which today dismissed several leading hard-liners in choosing a new Central Committee, underscored Mr. Deng's readiness to abandon central planning in the economy but not in politics and society. 
[Page A7.]
The party congress, which closed its weeklong session tonight, called for an economic "revolution" along market lines. 
But the congress also reaffirmed the leaders' determination to crush opposition and pursue socialism -- a term that they have shorn of most economic meaning, so that today "socialism" seems to signify little more than that they retain power.
 
Party Leadership Stressed
"The core principle these days is Communist Party leadership," said Zhang Weiguo, a Shanghai journalist and dissident. 
"Preserving Communist Party rule is all that socialism means now. 
It's a game."
Socialism is such a flexible concept for the Chinese leaders that they are studying the experience of the super-capitalist "four dragons" of Asia: Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea and Hong Kong. 
The attraction of the four dragons is that for many years they experienced economic miracles without the hubbub and chaos of Western-style democracy.
The upshot is that just as Mao Zedong took the Soviet Union as a partial model for China in the 1950's, Mr. Deng seems to take the four dragons as a partial model in the 1990's.
If China succeeds over the next few decades in duplicating the successes of Taiwan and South Korea, then the economic impact on the world can scarcely be exaggerated. 
China, with nearly 1.2 billion people and a nuclear arsenal, could make Japan seem like a lightweight.
Yet the stakes of failure are equally awesome. 
Few experts rule out the possibility of civil war and tremendous upheavals, and it was only three decades ago that millions of Chinese died in the worst famine ever recorded in world history.
Already in a number of ways China is increasingly resembling Taiwan and South Korea as they existed in the 1970's: thriving economies, authoritarian governments, and societies in which rising prosperity and educational levels sow a yearning for a more open and tolerant government.
 
How Evolution Might Unfold
Most Chinese intellectuals appear to believe that the Government here will change dramatically, one way or the other. 
Many believe that one of the most hopeful prospects is an evolutionary process of change similar to that in Taiwan.
According to this script, China would continue to pretend to be a Communist country. 
But in practice it would increasingly resemble a market economy, and it would gradually ease restrictions on the press and on dissent.
Sometime after the death of Mr. Deng and the other revolutionary leaders, the Communist Party would try to recover a bit of legitimacy by expelling hard-liners and by offering voters more choice in local elections. 
It might change its name, while keeping most of the same people. 
Meanwhile, China would experience a continuing economic boom, allowing the party to "buy off" voters and win their support.
Then, like Taiwan, China would make elections more meaningful and stop torturing dissidents. 
Newspapers would become bolder, contacts would grow with the outside world, and a middle class would emerge.
After a decade or two, China would still be dominated by a single party but it would no longer talk much about ideology. 
The Communist revolution might still be part of its legacy but only in a general way, just as people in France can continue to be proud of the French Revolution without wanting to set up a guillotine in a downtown square.
The Communist Party denounces this kind of change as "peaceful evolution," supposedly a plot by Western powers to corrupt China's revolutionary virtue. 
But for many Chinese, who see the alternative as catastrophic turmoil, such a course of events is about the best outcome they can reasonably expect.
"Socialism is ridiculous," said a Chinese economist who often advises the party. 
"Our only hope is peaceful evolution. 
Otherwise, we die."
 
Will It Work?
Hope Persists
To be sure, it is far from clear that the Chinese Communist Party can succeed in taking this path, even if it wants to. 
It may well be that the Government here, like Iran's Government under the Shah or the Soviet Union's under Mikhail S. Gorbachev, has antagonized so many people that it cannot survive any opening up of the system.
But whether or not it works, many Chinese and foreigners believe that the strategy at least has some chance of succeeding. 
And for now they believe that it is the direction in which China is going.
"I believe the Communist Party is going to concentrate on the things it thinks it can do best -- presumably political control, media, education -- and allow the economy to function by some of its own logic," said Thomas B. Gold, a sociologist and China specialist at the University of California at Berkeley.
"As the society becomes increasingly complex, and as a new type of person moves into the party hierarchy, there has to be some kind of a loosening," he said. 
"One question is the degree to which they can guide it and avoid an explosion."
It may sound odd that the Government should still fill the airwaves with tributes to socialism while plodding step by step toward a market economy. 
But ideology in China has declined to little more than a decorative art, a way of arranging banners and beautifying whatever the Government wants to do.
The emptiness of the slogans was evident when a couple of foreigners visited Mao's hometown in central China and interviewed Wen Huikang, the vice president of the Mao Zedong Thought Society. 
Mr. Wen spoke glowingly about the continuing relevance of Mao's writings, and finally a visitor asked a softball question: Which was his favorite essay by Mao?
Mr. Wen paused. 
He searched for a way to answer the question, and he began to look panicky. 
It became clear that he could not name a single work by Mao.
 
Few Believers In Communism
It is difficult to find any Chinese official or Communist Party member who believes in Communism or socialism. 
A few years ago, When an American graduate student met his Chinese girlfriend, an economics graduate from Beijing University, he discovered that she and her classmates were fervent believers in laissez-faire.
They were so alienated by the Chinese experience with central planning that it was left to him, a product of American universities, to suggest that governments could occasionally play a useful role in the economy.
The son of a prominent Central Committee member was asked recently if his father believed in Marxism. 
He looked surprised by the question.
"Oh, Dad used to believe in that stuff," he said. 
"But that was a long time ago."
Some of the octogenarian leaders apparently still keep the faith. 
But in 1976, when Mr. Deng was last purged, People's Daily quoted Mao as saying Mr. Deng "knows nothing of Marxism-Leninism."
That appears to have been unfair, for Mr. Deng still shows a profound understanding at least of Leninism. 
While he pays little attention to Marxist economics, he appears deeply committed to Lenin's teachings about one-party rule.
In that sense, China may gradually move away from Marxism while trying to remain a Leninist state.
 
Defining Socialism Is a Stumper
Of course, the Government insists that it is perfecting socialism, not abandoning it. 
But nobody here seems to know just how to define socialism -- particularly in an age of stock markets, private millionaires and horse racing.
"We've been practicing socialism for several decades, and yet nobody can figure out just what it is," Zhao Ziyang, the former Communist Party leader, acknowledged shortly before he was purged in 1989. 
The remark was used against him, but these days some reformist officials offer exceedingly vague definitions of socialism.
Mr. Deng's view, the official New China News Agency reported on Saturday, is that "the essence of socialism is to liberate and expand the productive forces, eliminate poverty, avoid polarization in wealth distribution and finally acquire common prosperity."
The advantage of that definition is that China can do virtually anything and remain socialist. 
The drawback is that by that standard, Taiwan -- which is both wealthy and egalitarian -- is more socialist than mainland China.
"It seems to be a very elastic concept," said Nicholas R. Lardy, an economist at the University of Washington.
Foreigners often find it disconcerting that the airwaves should be so full of Communist slogans while the streets are so full of entrepreneurs. 
But China's officials have been mouthing empty slogans for so long that they rarely let them interfere with daily life.
Before the 1949 revolution, Mao reportedly once gave a speech in which he used a phrase meaning "from masses win respect."
The party's press agency transmitted the speech to other Communist-held areas, but the phrase was garbled and came out "from fog win treasure."
This was meaningless, but no one noticed. 
A party newspaper dutifully published an editorial about the importance of the treasure in the fog.
 
State Economy Is Dwindling
In the same way, few Chinese pay much attention to the party's insistence that it is following the socialist road. 
Indeed, the economic restructuring since the end of the Maoist era 14 years ago has already left the economy not very Marxist.
The state sector now accounts for only about one-third of economic output, according to Mr. Lardy. Farming is now mostly quasi-private, and retailing and other services are increasingly outside the state sector as well. 
Even in the industrial sector, state-owned companies accounted for only 53 percent of output last year, compared with about 36 percent for collectives and 11 percent for private businesses.
Since Mr. Deng opened China to the outside world in 1978 and began what is sometimes called the nation's "second revolution," gross national product has soared at an annual rate of 8.7 percent. 
At that pace, incomes double in a bit more than nine years.
To be sure, about 70 percent of all Chinese live in villages, but for them the stakes of economic growth are greater than for anybody else. 
For the first time in hundreds of generations, some families have been able to send children to school, to build a brick house, to eat meat regularly, to have a doctor present for childbirth.
Yet for all the economic changes under way, China is not necessarily adopting the vision of Adam Smith.
The true private sector is very small, with the bulk of the economy falling in a hazy zone that defies easy labels. 
Agriculture, for instance, is not quite private, since peasants must contract with the state to get farmland.
Likewise, the collective sector is an ambiguous catch-all category that includes some genuine private businesses but also many factories run by township governments. 
And all companies, public or private, run into constant interference from government officials and tax collectors. 
No matter what happens, the Government is likely to continue to play a substantial role in the economy.
 
Growing Corruption Feeds Discontent
Another major challenge for private businesses is the growing corruption, especially demands for payoffs from local officials. 
This is not only an impediment to economic efficiency, but also a major reason for public discontent.
Thus some skeptics fear that China, instead of blossoming into an oversized Taiwan, will become bogged down by inefficiency and corruption and will rather resemble something like Mexico or Nigeria. 
Many Chinese note parallels with the end of the Qing Dynasty at the beginning of this century and other past epochs and believe that Communism is a dynasty about to collapse.
"Parts of China, like the coastal areas, can take the road of free-market authoritarianism," said Antonio Chiang, a Taiwan magazine publisher now visiting China. 
"But I don't see it happening in the entire country."
If the economic boom can be sustained, a crucial question is whether Chinese can be "bought off" by their economic prosperity so they have a stake in the system and do not challenge the Government. 
That is in part what happened in Taiwan, where the ruling Kuomintang massacred thousands of Taiwanese in 1947 and subsequently governed with considerable brutality until it eased restrictions in the 1980's.
Because the Kuomintang engineered the economic miracle -- and because it eventually responded to the middle class and eased the repression -- it has survived the transition to free elections. 
Today it remains in power.
The challenge will be much greater for China. 
Memories of Communist brutalities -- like the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown -- are still fresh. 
And while incomes are growing rapidly, many Chinese remain dissatisfied because they now realize that people in Taiwan and Hong Kong are even wealthier.
 
How to Release Political Steam
Most importantly, the Chinese authorities seem unwilling to follow the Taiwanese example and ease restrictions in response to growing aspirations for political freedom and participation. 
Some Chinese and foreigners worry that if there is no mechanism for releasing political steam, eventually the pressure cooker may explode.
"You simply cannot postpone political reform and assuage political demands through economic prosperity alone," said Michel Oksenberg, the president of the East-West Center in Honolulu. 
"You have the beginnings in China of an urban middle class, and we see no movement in the political sphere to cope with the increasing occupational differentiation, the changing locus of where people live."
The obvious explanation for why Mr. Deng and his octogenarian colleagues do not want political change is that they are afraid of it. 
But there is another, more charitable explanation.
They grew up in a China that was torn apart by warlords, famine and foreign invasion, and perhaps as a consequence they are passionately concerned with maintaining order. 
They find democracy not only personally threatening but also divisive and unstable, and prone to the kind of weakness and chaos that wracked China in the decades before the Communist revolution of 1949.
Yet while Mr. Deng apparently believes that resisting political change will preserve the order, few others see it that way.
"The problem is that at the highest level, the old politicians are still clinging to power," said Chen Yizi, a former economic official who fled to the United States after the Tiananmen crackdown. 
"That fundamental problem can't be solved, and so I think the road they're taking now is a dead end."
