
The traditional, if vanishing, role of the book publisher as bookseller has been further eroded by an established company's decision to close its three stores and concentrate on publishing.
China Books and Periodicals, the largest American retailer of publications about China, closed its bookstores in New York and San Francisco on Oct. 
7 and will close its Chicago store on Dec. 
1.
But the company, founded as a bookseller in 1960, plans to expand its activities as book publisher, a direction it first took in 1984 with one book. 
It hopes to publish to 20 in the current publishing year.
A Business Decision
The about-face from full-time retailer to full-time publisher was a business decision that was not related to the change in China's social climate since the political crackdown in June.
''Bookstores are not usually great sources of revenue,'' said Vicki Chabra, the book division's marketing director. 
''We have been keeping them open as a service.''
''When we started, there were no other distributors of books about China,'' she said. 
''Now you'll find them in many bookstores.''
China Books was founded by Henry Noyes, the son of missionaries in China, and it is now headed by his son, Chris Noyes. 
In the beginning, it specialized in books of fiction, history and scholarly research, mostly in English, that were imported from China.
The company in time expanded to a complete line of language and travel guides and art books from China. 
It attracted much attention and wide sales in 1967 when it imported the English version of ''The Little Red Book'' of quotations by Chairman Mao Zedong.
 
Company's First Publication
In 1984, the company's first publication, ''Two Years in the Melting Pot,'' received good reviews. 
It was an account, in English, of American life as perceived by Liu Zongren, who had been sent here to study English and journalism. 
China Books has just published a fiction work by Mr. Liu, ''6 Tanyin Alley,'' about life in a Beijing courtyard.
Nancy Ippilito, the head of the book division, said China Books would publish ''Crisis at Tian'anmen,'' a compilation by a Chinese journalist, Yi Mu, in November.
Only a few publishers still operate bookstores in the United States. 
At one time Charles Scribner's Sons operated several bookstores, including the highly regarded store on Fifth Avenue near 48th Street in Manhattan. 
The store was bought by Rizzoli International Bookstores Inc. in 1984 and closed last January.
Last December, Harper & Row discontinued its New York store, which sold publications of its own and associated imprints. 
''It has never been a financially viable operation,'' said William Shinker, senior vice president and publisher of the adult trade division.
McGraw-Hill Inc. still has a bookstore at its headquarters at Rockefeller Center, and its books are part of the stock of 18,000 titles by several different publishers.
 
Doubleday's Stores
The Doubleday Book Shops and the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group are both owned by a West German concern, Bertelsmann, but their operations are separate. 
''There is no problem in maintaining our independence,'' said Gary Del Vecchio, president and chief executive of the bookstore operation. 
''Actually, no one publisher has enough books to keep a store going by itself.''
