
THE term multicultural has been deployed with such abandon lately that Joseph Ben-Moha, the owner of the Roxy Deli, began to take a more philosophical view of dumplings.
"I look at my kreplach and I say, 'What makes you different from my pirogi?'
" he said. 
"And then I must think, 'What makes a wonton not a kreplach, a kreplach not a pirogi, a pirogi not a wonton?'
"
He decided to pursue these questions by sponsoring a dumpling derby in his deli on Broadway at 47th Street. 
Last Thursday, nine cooks and four judges met to cook and compete and appraise. 
They also debated whether a dumpling is a dumpling is a dumpling.
"They're all dough," Mr. Ben-Moha reasoned. 
"The only difference is the insides."
Greeting the wonton contingent, he said, "If people ask me what is a kreplach, I tell them it's like a wonton."
Janny Leung, a pharmacist who lives in Flushing, Queens, smiled politely. 
She didn't recall ever having used the term kreplach. 
Tony Yep, a dim sum chef at Shun Lee West in Manhattan, crinkled his brow until it resembled the top of a steamed dumpling. 
"Wonton are spicy," he said. 
"Sichuan wonton are very spicy."
"Small, wrapped food is a universal concept," said Dan Lenchner, who owns Manna, a kosher catering company in TriBeCa. 
His wonton stuffed with Mexican fried beef and chili was a beacon of pluralism. 
"I tend to stay away from traditional kosher forms," he said.
His decision resonated with one judge, Michael Klenfner, a record industry executive. 
"I grew up in Brighton Beach, Little Odessa on the Atlantic, where every restaurant had pirogi, which they called vareniki, and they all had kreplach," he said. 
"But everybody went to the New Deal Chinese restaurant to eat dumplings."
The wonton contingent quietly chalked this preference up to the paper-thin dough that is sold in packages of 100 and used to wrap wontons. 
In China, wontons are considered noodles, not dumplings. 
Stuffed with pork, chicken or shrimp, the triangular packets can be fried, steamed or boiled and are generally served with noodles in broth.
In New York, however, the line between wontons (of which there are Peking, Cantonese, Shanghai and Sichuan versions) and Cantonese dumplings has been blurred. 
Dumplings are shaped like fat Hershey's Kisses, stuffed in a manner similar to wontons, steamed or fried, and served as dim sum. 
There is some speculation that in New York, wontons slipped into the dumpling category before wonton skins were available here, when local Chinese cooks used the heavier egg roll skins to wrap their dumplings.
Both Ms. Leung and Mr. Yep waved aside the semantics. 
They consider themselves dumpling makers.
Kreplach competitors, on the other hand, are shy of the dumpling nomenclature. 
To most, kreplach is kreplach: heavy dumplings shaped like lumpy round pillows, stuffed with meat and onions, boiled and usually served in chicken soup.
"Kreplach is religious, symbolic," said Olga Gurwitz, a 70-year-old retired businesswoman who lives on the East Side. 
The dough enveloping her amorphous beef pillows is thicker than a wonton skin. 
"It is handmade," she said. 
"The dough symbolizes the protection we have from a harsh world. 
We eat it on religious holidays."
Considering the paucity of cross-cultural influence in kreplach as compared to the abundant variations on wontons, she said, "It's easier to improvise when you don't feel you are meddling with something sacred."
Beatrice Kusnetz of Far Rockaway, Queens, concurred that changes in the kreplach form are rarely whimsical, though she conceded that health concerns have modified her recipe.
"I don't fry my onions in chicken fat anymore," said the 78-year-old retired nurse, another competitor.
"No, that was a hundred years ago," Mrs. Gurwitz agreed. 
"Who can eat like that anymore?
But you need a stronger soup for the flavor."
"I never noticed the soup," said Ms. Leung, who said that her family eats wontons with noodles in a subtle chicken broth. 
"I taste the scallion, and the cilantro," she said.
"Spicy," Mr. Yep said, smiling.
But Ms. Leung said the communal tradition surrounding her family's dumplings remains intact among her, her parents, and her brother and sister. 
"On Saturdays it takes the five of us two hours to make 100 dumplings," she said. 
Family dumpling-making seems to remain stable across shifting ethnic lines. 
"This is the way you maintain your past," said Bea Lewis, another judge who said she is a kreplach expert by dint of having recently become a grandmother. 
"A Jewish grandmother has to know everything about kreplach so she can teach her grandchildren," she said. 
"This is the way your past becomes your future."
Bozenna Mcaward, a 37-year-old pirogi contestant who was born in Poland and moved to Brooklyn two weeks ago, agreed. 
Her cousins encouraged her to enter the contest. 
"I need my family to make pirogi," she said.
Faina Merzlyak, a contestant who lives in Brooklyn, said Polish pirogi are generally shaped like a half moon and stuffed with meat, potatoes, mushrooms or farmers' cheese. 
They can be boiled and served in soup, or served with sour cream, caramelized onion or applesauce as a first course. 
Pirogi can also be fried. 
The Russian vareniki is shaped the same and can be filled with anything from sauerkraut to sour cherries.
Ms. Mcaward registered, in shy and recently acquired English, her amazement at finding pirogi-making a competitive activity on Broadway. 
She expressed amusement at the presence of wontons in the derby. 
"In this country anything can be pirogi," she surmised.
She nodded approval of the flavor of the wonton, but expressed reservations about incorporating soy or ginger, scallion or cilantro in her pirogi. 
"In potato pirogi?" she said dubiously.
Gus Kavis, another pirogi contestant who is the manager of the Odessa Restaurant on Avenue A in Manhattan, told Ms. Mcaward that few American pirogi-philes still make their own. 
"They come to me in cars from New Jersey and Connecticut and buy them," he said. 
"They take the pirogi home and cook it."
Miss Mcaward shook her head. 
The purity of pirogi, she suggested, can only be preserved by making one's own. 
This opinion seemed to be shared by all contestants.
When asked whether he could envision using kreplach dough to wrap a Hong Kong-style dumpling, Mr. Yep replied that this would be tantamount to placing a hamburger in a hot-dog roll. 
Improvisation, like Mr. Lenchner's Mexican wonton for kosher audiences, seemed ephemeral rather than enduring. 
"Interesting to taste," said Ms. Mcaward, in a tone that said "not destined for the heirloom recipe file."
Considering their dumplings, the contestants voiced a separate-but-equal point of view. 
Actual dumpling-making, they said, is a time-honored tradition whose essence is repetition: the grandchild who best mimics the matriarch's version stands to become the next dumpling queen. 
And, as with architectural icons, it is no small undertaking to change these little bits of culinary ballast.
Nevertheless, the dumpling duelers found common ground. 
No matter what its ethnic persuasion, they said, dumpling-making is a deliberate thing, complicated and time consuming. 
Despite this, the little swaddled nuggets are forever adjuncts -- pillows floating in soup, soft pyramids steamed in bamboo for an appetizer -- rarely a main course.
The dignity of any dumpling is difficult to capture in a recipe. 
"It's a touch," Mrs. Gurwitz said. 
"It is something you are born with."
The other contestants vigorously agreed. 
Which may explain why, when she was awarded first prize in the kreplach category, Mrs. Gurwitz cried.
Ms. Leung, who took the wonton prize, wasn't as visibly moved, nor was the city's pirogi king, Mr. Kavis. But both seemed to empathize with Mrs. Gurwitz. Like a latter day Miss America, she accepted her prize of $100 and a dozen roses, waved to the audience and said, "I've waited my whole life for this moment."
Mr. Ben-Moya got a little misty-eyed, too. 
But his dumpling musings weren't abated. 
"We must address the ravioli issue," he said.
 
3 Doughs, 3 Fillings
 
Potato and Mushroom Pirogi
(Adapted from Faina Merzlyak)
 
Total time: 1 1/2 hours, plus 2 hours for sitting
 
For the dumplings:
 
16 ounces fresh yogurt, preferably homemade, or one with a high-fat content, like Brown Cow
1 egg, lightly beaten
1 teaspoon salt
2 1/4 cups flour.
 
For the filling:
 
1 large potato, about 1/2 to 3/4 pound
4 tablespoons unsalted butter
1 medium-size onion, chopped
16 ounces mushrooms, trimmed and minced (2 cups)
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste.
1. To make the dumplings, lightly beat the yogurt, egg, and salt together in a mixer. 
Slowly add the flour, beating until smooth. 
Knead the dough on a floured surface until smooth. 
Add water only if needed. 
Form into a ball, wrap in a kitchen towel and set aside in a cool place for 2 hours.
2. For the filling, peel and quarter the potato. 
Cover with cold water, bring to a boil, lower heat and simmer 15 to 20 minutes until it offers no resistance when pricked with a fork. 
Drain and set aside. 
Slowly melt 2 tablespoons of the butter. 
Whip the potato with the butter until it is fluffy and creamy. 
Set aside.
3. Heat the remaining butter in a pan. 
Add the onions and saute until they are translucent. 
Add the mushrooms, salt and pepper and continue to saute until the mushrooms are tender and the moisture has evaporated, about 5 minutes. 
Remove from pan and let cool slightly.
4. Mix the mashed potatoes with the mushroom mixture.
5. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. 
Roll out the dough until it is 1/8-inch thick, then cut it into 3-inch rounds with a cookie cutter or the top of a glass. 
Put 1 heaping teaspoon of filling on one side of the circle of dough. 
Fold the other side over the filling so the pirogi looks like a half moon. 
Press the edges together and seal with thumb and index finger.
6. Lower heat until water gently simmers. 
Carefully place pirogis in the water one at a time, in batches of 4 to 6, for 5 to 7 minutes. 
Remove with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towels in a warm place. 
Serve with fried onions or sour cream.
Yield: 30 pierogis.
 
Kreplach
(Adapted from Olga Gurwitz)
 
Total time: 2 1/2 hours
 
For the dumplings:
 
3 eggs
1/2 cup safflower oil
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 3/4 cups flour
1/2 cup water.
 
For the filling:
 
1/2 cooked chicken, 1 1/2 to 2 pounds
1 egg
1/2 onion
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. To make the dumplings, gently beat the eggs, oil and salt together in a large bowl. 
Slowly add the flour and water as needed. 
Transfer to a floured board and knead until smooth and loose. 
Cover with kitchen towel and set aside for 2 hours.
2. To make the filling, remove chicken meat from bones, remove skin and grind meat with the egg, onion, salt and pepper. 
Taste to correct seasoning.
4. Roll out dough, a portion at a time, to between 1/8- and 1/4-inch thick. 
Cut it into rounds 3 inches across. 
Place a heaping teaspoon of filling in center of dough rounds and fold edges over to make a half moon. 
Press to seal. 
Refrigerate until ready to cook.
5. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. 
Lower to a simmer. 
Gently place kreplach in the water, one at a time, in batches of 6 to 8 and cook for 20 to 25 minutes, or until the dough is cooked through. 
Drain and serve in chicken soup or plain.
Yield: About 30 kreplach.
 
Wontons
(Adapted from Janny Leung)
 
Total time: 1 1/2 hours
 
75 wonton skins, fresh or frozen
1 1/4 pound fresh medium-size shrimp
1 egg, separated
2 scallions, washed, chopped
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 tablespoon salt
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper
3/4 pound ground beef
5 dried shiitake mushrooms or 1/4 ounce Black Forest mushrooms, soaked for 20 minutes, drained and minced
4 stalks fresh cilantro, washed, leaves chopped.
1. If using frozen wonton wrappers, defrost them unwrapped in the open air for about 1 hour. 
Carefully peel them off, one by one, and refrigerate until ready to use them. 
It is best to defrost in a colander so air can circulate around them. 
Discard any that are waterlogged.
2. Peel the shrimp. 
Make sure entire shell is removed, including the tail. 
Chop them coarsely by hand.
3. In a large bowl, lightly beat the egg yolk. 
Add scallions, sesame oil, salt and pepper. 
Mix well. 
Add the shrimp, beef, mushrooms and cilantro and mix well with hands.
4. Lay out a wonton skin and lightly brush the edges with the egg white. 
Place about 1 tablespoon of the filling in the middle. 
Fold into a triangle. 
Seal edges with the tip of a fork, pressing down around the border. 
Brush with a little more egg white and refrigerate. 
Continue until all the wontons are stuffed.
5. When it is time to serve the wontons, bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. 
Lower heat to simmer and gently place a few wontons in the water so they are not touching. 
Cook 5 to 7 minutes. 
Drain on paper towels.
Yield: 75 wontons.
