
CHINA'S six-decade civil war may be ending. 
The bearer of the olive branch was Shirley Kuo, Finance Minister in the Taiwan Government, who last week became the first Nationalist official to return to China since the Communist victory in 1949.
But the visit by Miss Kuo, who was in Beijing to attend the annual meeting of the Asian Development Bank, was only a symbol of a peace process that has been unfolding for two years.
Not everyone thinks reunification will occur, but it is no longer out of the question. 
And even if the two societies do not merge politically, they are likely to have peaceful relations and maintain a close economic and cultural relationship. 
In any event, the final result appears likely to be peace and a close relationship.
It was in 1927 that the Nationalists under Chiang Kai-shek ended an uneasy association with the Communists by slaughtering every leftist they could find. 
The ensuing civil war, briefly suspended during the cooperative battle against the Japanese invaders, was marked by enormous bitterness and brutality. 
The enmities smoldered after the Communists sent the Nationalists fleeing to their bastion on Taiwan 40 years ago. 
Many on Taiwan are still appalled by the brutalities of the anti-rightist campaigns and the Cultural Revolution in the 1950's and 1960's. 
And the two sides shelled each other as recently as a decade ago.
A Communist leader like Mao could not forget that the Nationalist forces tortured to death one of his wives and executed both his brother and adopted sister. 
Nor could the Nationalists who fled to Taiwan forget that many relatives who had stayed behind were executed or driven to suicide on the mainland. 
The vehemence and distrust is still sharp in the minds of older Chinese, especially in Taiwan, but younger people on both sides worry less about historical sins than about present opportunities.
For now the opportunities are largely economic. 
Trade through Hong Kong surged 80 percent last year, to $2.8 billion, and more and more Taiwan manufacturers are moving entire assembly lines to China. 
The economic partnership and cultural ties seem almost certain to grow. 
People from Taiwan already are the second most numerous tourists in China, slightly trailing the Japanese.
The fundamental question, therefore, is whether the economic and cultural ties will lead to political integration. 
No one dares to respond to the question flatly, but most people are increasingly skeptical.
''There's not much advantage in reunification for Taiwan,'' said Byron S. J. Weng, a China scholar at Chinese University in Hong Kong. 
''It can reap the advantages without reunification.''
Taiwan officials are blunt on this point. 
Maps printed in Taiwan still depict the Nationalists' dream of a Republic of China encompassing Taiwan, China and Mongolia, but the hope seems to be dying. 
The humiliation of having been sent fleeing to a tiny island four decades ago has been replaced by the self-confidence of having engineered an economic miracle and, in the last two years, an incipient democracy.
 
Long-Lost Relatives
A Taiwan businessman who was born on the mainland compared the island's situation to that of a prosperous family that suddenly discovers long-lost relatives in nearby slums. 
The family feels attachment and responsibility, but is not ready to ask the relatives to move into the same house. 
Nevertheless, few Taiwanese seem interested in creating an independent country that they would call Taiwan. 
They prefer to continue calling their island the Republic of China. 
Most seem prepared to wait for a resolution. 
In China, most people also seem prepared to wait - so long as Taiwan does not declare its independence from the mainland. 
That is the one eventuality that might lead China to attack Taiwan. 
Aside from such remote possibilities, most people in China simply regard Taiwan as a rich island whose economic success and political liberalization they want to replicate. 
For all the changes in China in the last decade and for all the hopes raised by the pro-democracy demonstrations of recent weeks, a deep self-doubt exists in the intellectual psyche about whether Chinese culture is even capable of sustaining a democratic society. 
Now, as people learn more about Taiwan, they are beginning to look to the East as well as the West for political inspiration.
 
Politics and Pride
In the meantime, the two sides are edging toward dialogue. 
Jaw Shau-kong, a Taiwan legislator, said in a telephone interview that the next step may be for unofficial representatives of both sides - telecommunications technicians, maybe - to meet. 
Later, perhaps, the two societies' leaders will sit down together. 
More distant moves toward harmony seem vaguely possible. 
Some Communist officials have suggested that China might even be willing to change its name, constitution and ideology - and to share power with the Nationalists - as part of a deal to merge with Taiwan.
This would be difficult now, as long as old revolutionaries are still around. 
But in a decade or two, younger leaders may be more interested in recovering Taiwan than in maintaining their public faith in Communism. 
''Before, the nation was defined by the party in power,'' said a young Communist Party official who favors sharing power with the Nationalists. 
''But national pride transcends politics. 
First we are Chinese, and only second are we Communist or Nationalist.''
So much has changed that it is difficult to forecast what might happen after the old revolutionaries are gone. 
Perhaps nothing will happen politically. 
But there is at least the possibility that what for so many decades has been a great regional quandary could be resolved in one way or another.
''What is fascinating is that you cannot safely predict the limits of what might happen,'' said Kenneth G. Lieberthal, director of the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan. 
''Almost anything is possible.''
A symbol of change: Taiwan's Finance Minister, Shirley Kuo, arriving in Beijing last week to attend a meeting of the Asian Development Bank (Agence France-Presse)
