
IN an odd way, the only people who have done about as much as the Dalai Lama in the last few years to galvanize support for Tibetans are Deng Xiaoping and the other octogenarians who rule China.
Not intentionally, of course. 
But the leadership's crackdown on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June 4, 1989, and the repressive measures taken since then, while raising the issue of human rights in China generally, have also given a thrust to concern over abuses in Tibet. 
And it has helped to land Tibet, a sparsely populated plateau region north of the Himalayas, firmly on the international agenda.
"Tibet has come out of nowhere," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"There were always a small number of people interested in Tibet. 
But before June 4, they were drowned out by the rest of the people with their love affair for China."
The authorities in Beijing insist that Tibet has been a part of China for many centuries, but Tibetans dispute this and point out that the region was left alone by the Chinese early this century. 
That changed in 1950, when the new Communist Government invaded Tibet, and even more so after the Chinese crushed an abortive rebellion in 1959 and imposed much tighter control.
The United States and other Western governments regard Tibet as a part of China. 
But these days, animosity in the West for the hard-line regime in Beijing has translated into mounting support for the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled leader and foremost advocate. 
Some believe that irritation at China was a factor in the awarding of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama.
The Dalai Lama's status was further bolstered by his meeting with President Bush earlier this year, intended as a symbol of the Administration's distaste for Chinese repression. 
Likewise, Western ambassadors in Beijing seem much more interested than before in making trips to Tibet, and their No. 1 destination there these days is Drapchi Prison in Lhasa, the capital, where some political offenders are housed.
Potentially the most significant recent move was the launching in the spring of a Tibetan-language service of Voice of America. 
Visitors to Tibet say that the 15-minute daily broadcast has an enormous audience. 
The broadcasts not only provide news and information, but are also apparently taken -- or mistaken -- as a symbol of American support for Tibetan independence.
"The strong feeling in Lhasa is that more and more the U.S. is supporting Tibet," said a foreigner in Tibet. 
He added that the policy may contain a pitfall: the Tibetans may come to believe, as the Kurds did in Iraq, that if they rise up and demand independence then the United States will back them. 
While Western governments are pushing for human rights for Tibetans, there is no indication that they favor Tibetan independence.
Within Tibet, the Chinese authorities had a relatively conciliatory policy from the early 1980's through 1987. 
But for the last four years they have taken a much tougher line in Tibet and on several occasions troops have fired on protesters. 
The violence appears to have radicalized the population of Lhasa and strengthened the yearning for independence.
Diplomats and scholars often regard as exaggerated propaganda the assertions of Tibetan exiles that China is practicing genocide or a policy of forced sterilization and abortion to curb the number of Tibetans. 
But almost no one doubts the Tibetans' desire for independence. 
And human rights abuses -- torture of monks and nuns, killings of protesters, and long spells of imprisonment for advocates of independence -- are well documented by rights monitors like Asia Watch and Tibet Information Network.
The crackdown in Beijing's Tiananmen Square came three months after clashes in Lhasa between Chinese troops and anti-Government demonstrators in which at least 12 and perhaps more than 100 people died. 
By extension, the scenes from Beijing seemed to crystallize what had been for many people little more than just a notion of the tensions in Tibet.
"People had heard about what had happened in Tibet, but they didn't quite believe it until it became so real on TV and they realized, 'My God, this is also what's happening in Tibet,' " said John L. Ackerly, the legal counsel for the International Campaign for Tibet. 
The organization, which is based in Washington, has with the London-based Tibet Information Network played a major role in placing Tibet on the international agenda.
 
A Proprietary Feeling
Few people these days seem optimistic about a reconciliation between China and the Tibetan government-in-exile. 
Partly because they now see their movement gaining ground, the Tibetans have little incentive to compromise with Beijing. 
And the Chinese have now so embittered the Tibetans that -- rather like the Shah of Iran in his later years -- they would risk new upheavals and protests if they relaxed their repression.
Moreover, to a degree perhaps unappreciated in the West, suppression of the Tibetan independence movement is one of the few policies of Beijing's hard-liners that appears to draw broad support from Chinese. 
Even young intellectuals in Beijing, who disdain Communism and yearn for human rights for themselves, often say that Tibet is Chinese and should remain so. 
The reasons have much to do with Chinese nationalism, and with a grim resolve that the nation must never again endure the humiliation of a century ago, when China was carved up by more powerful countries and lost territory at its extremities.
"You might have a relatively democratic government" in China in the future, said Guocang Huan, a China scholar at Columbia University, "but such a government probably would not compromise much on Tibetan independence."
