
THE People's Republic of China prepared to mark its 40th anniversary today with splendid dragon dances and fireworks, but with little joy.
The brooding Chinese public appreciates the sea slugs and other delicacies doled out by employers for the birthday party, but the atmosphere is tense. 
The Communist Party displayed a clenched-teeth determination to celebrate the occasion, but under security so tight that people without proper residency permits were ejected from Beijing, and many residents of the city were ordered to stay indoors today.
Most telling, the leadership's suspicion of the common people is such that only a carefully screened elite was to be allowed into Tiananmen Square to hail ''People's China.''
To many Chinese, the need for rigid security is simply the latest evidence of the party's dissipation of its 40-year-old mandate and its crisis of legitimacy.
It was very different on Oct. 
1, 1949, when Mao Zedong mounted the rostrum of Tiananmen Gate and before a crowd of hundreds of thousands of supporters proclaimed in ringing tones the formation of the People's Republic. 
''From this moment,'' he declared, ''the Chinese people have stood up!''
Since then, Communist China's achievements and errors have been colossal, etched in history on a truly Chinese scale. 
The party emancipated hundreds of millions of peasants from the hopeless misery in which they had eked out an existence for hundreds of generations. 
It provided opportunities for women. 
The country won respect in the world, and the last decade of economic change created a new prosperity for much of the population.
Yet the gains were achieved at a staggering price. 
In redistributing land and consolidating control, Mao later admitted, 700,000 people were killed. 
The Great Leap Forward, a catastrophic attempt at rapid industrialization, combined with bad harvests to produce tens of millions of deaths in the early 1960's. 
Political upheavals like the anti-rightist campaign of 1957, the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976, and the crackdown now under way against supporters of this spring's democracy movement have cost the lives or ruined the careers of unknown numbers of Chinese who dared seek change.
With each violent oscillation, with each purge, the party has lost some of the good will with which it began its rule. 
At first, the regime was widely regarded as a genuine people's government, fundamentally different from the warlords and emperors of the past. 
Now, ordinary people seem to regard the party as an adversary. 
Intellectuals are even more bitter; they recall what the Chinese writer Lu Xun had to say about the first Chinese revolution that in 1911-12 toppled the Qing Dynasty. 
''Before the revolution, we were slaves,'' Lu Xun wrote. 
''Now we are slaves of former slaves.''
The Communists began with tremendous popular support. 
Opium was eradicated, brothels were closed, land was distributed, roads and railroads were built, literacy campaigns were launched, health care was expanded and an industrial base was developed.
Older people sometimes still express appreciation for the revolution and the improvements it brought in their lives. 
But now, half the population of China is 23 or younger, and 74 percent were born after the revolution. 
Young people have been deluged with statistics in the last few weeks purporting to show how much Communism has helped China, but many seem to resist to the extent that they do not even acknowledge the regime's real accomplishments.
Per capita incomes have multiplied 5 to 10 times in the last 40 years, depending on who does the calculating, to about $350 a year. 
Life expectancy has nearly doubled, from about 35 years to 69 years. 
China exploded a nuclear bomb in 1965 and launched a satellite in 1970, showing remarkable technical skill for so poor a country.
''There have been tremendous accomplishments,'' said Kenneth G. Lieberthal, director of the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan, ''but they have not kept up with the even more tremendous accomplishments elsewhere in Asia.''
 
Open-Door Policy
Therein lies the problem for the Communists. 
The majority of the population is less interested in contrasts with conditions 40 years ago than in the contrasts with life in neighboring countries today. 
The open-door policy of the last decade has increased the well-being and opportunities for most Chinese, inspiring a certain gratitude, but this has probably been outweighed by the destabilizing influence of allowing people to learn how much better off Taiwan and Hong Kong are than China.
Many Chinese feel they enjoyed the gains of the Communist revolution long ago, but are still paying the price in terms of despotism, economic inefficiency and corruption. 
They complain that the revolution has degenerated into cycles of too brief liberalization and longer repression, of some hope and greater hopelessness.
The last great emotional trough came in 1976 after the death of the beloved Prime Minister, Zhou Enlai, the leader credited with steering China away from the excesses of the Cultural Revolution. 
Demonstrations of mourning followed Zhou's death, an outpouring that in fact was meant as a show of support for Zhou's protege, Deng Xiaoping. 
The demonstrations were crushed, and Mr. Deng was purged - a parallel with the present repression and purges engineered by Mr. Deng.
But after an interregnum of two years, Mr. Deng returned to power and introduced sweeping changes. 
The nation once more was on the move, and seemed to be growing less repressive. 
Mr. Deng and the party were at the peak of their popularity five years ago, in the 35th anniversary celebration, when university students hailed their favorite leader with a large banner: ''How are you, Xiaoping!''
Yet the successes and exposure to the world created rising expectations that Mr. Deng could not meet and political demands that he would not meet. 
The economic changes ran into difficulties, as the Government and party bureaucrats seemed unwilling to cede more of their power and privilege. 
Inflation soared, corruption spread and income inequalities widened. 
Most important, Mr. Deng proved no less able than Mao to plan a smooth succession. 
Both of Mr. Deng's heirs apparent, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, were dismissed in disgrace.
The party's decision to use force to crush this spring's democracy movement was a catastrophe for the country and for the party's legitimacy. 
Hundreds of people were massacred and the country's educated young people were humiliated by requirements that they work at the ''grass roots'' and by political study sessions in which they were forced to profess their faith in the party. 
The reformist wing of the party was gutted, but Mr. Deng is still in command and there are mixed signals about who is rising and falling. 
For now, however, the accent is on central planning and political repression, worsening the crisis of confidence in which ''People's China'' finds itself during its birthday celebration.
In secret documents now circulating among officials, Mr. Deng seems to acknowledge the difficulties, and he says he chose Jiang Zemin to be the new party chief partly to provide a fresh image. 
But few find in Mr. Jiang a sign of broad vision or new initiative. 
Indeed, in a press conference on Tuesday, Mr. Jiang seemed to go out of his way to appear rigid, declaring that the shootings on June 4 were not a tragedy.
The alienation is much lower in the countryside and in provincial cities than in Beijing, and if the Government can keep people happy economically - an uncertain prospect - it may be able to avert a further crisis in the immediate future. 
Dwight H. Perkins, a Harvard economist, suggests that if the peasantry is kept happy, it can supply the army recruits to keep the regime in power.
Yet many Chinese and foreigners believe the present leadership is precarious, and will be more so after Mr. Deng's death. 
They say that the new relationship of antipathy and even contempt between the people and the leaders at some time will produce change. 
Once more, they cite the words of the writer Lu Xun early in this century: ''Lies written in ink cannot obscure a truth written in blood.''
 
LIFE OF A REVOLUTION
Early euphoria: 1949-1955.  Communists seize power, driving Chiang Kai-shek and his Nationalists to Taiwan. 
Land is redistributed, inflation is controlled, and the economy seems to improve. 
But the Korean War cuts China's links with the West and leads to more radical policies. 
By Mao's count, 700,000 ''counter-revolutionaries'' are killed.
Catastrophes and consolidation: 1956-1965.  In 1956 and 1957, intellectuals are urged to speak out and ''let a hundred flowers bloom.''
Soon afterward, an anti-rightist campaign punishes those who did speak freely.
Impatient with economic performance, Mao launches the Great Leap Forward in 1958. 
The result is a deep depression that combined with natural disasters leads to tens of millions of deaths between 1960 and 1962. 
Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping reintroduce incentives to repair the economy.
Cultural Revolution and Mao's death: 1966-76.  Mao unleashes Red Guards to attack his rivals. 
Many party leaders are ousted and sometimes tortured and killed. 
Mao calls on the army to restore order. 
In 1976, both Mao and Prime Minister Zhou Enlai die, and the extremist Gang of Four tries to consolidate power. 
They are overthrown, and power formally lies in the hands of Mao's weak successor, Hua Guofeng.
Deng era: 1977-89.  Hua loses influence, and Deng Xiaoping maneuvers his way back to power. 
Mr. Deng allows decollectivization of agriculture and private businesses. 
Tens of thousands of Chinese go abroad for higher education. 
Mr. Deng chooses as his heirs Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, but he purges Mr. Hu in 1987 and Mr. Zhao in May 1989.
Hundreds of protesters are killed June 3-4, 1989, after Mr. Deng orders troops to crush the democracy movement. 
Mr. Deng indicates that his heir will be the new party leader, Jiang Zemin, but the leadership seems paralyzed by uncertainty and conflict.
Oct. 1, 1949: Mao declares founding of People's Republic (Magnum/New China Pictures); June 4, 1989: crackdown on pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square (Sygma/Jacques Langevin)
