
When Robert M. Gates talks, people listen. 
But it can be risky for the nation's top spymaster to go public.
Since he took over as Director of Central Intelligence four months ago, Mr. Gates has made five public appearances before Congressional committees, lacing his bleak world view with tantalizing bits of secret information -- intelligence with the bark off, as he likes to call it.
A complicating factor is that by having his independent say in public rather than in closed sessions, Mr. Gates has sometimes offered views that appear to run counter to Administration policy.
For example, when he told the House Foreign Affairs Committee last month that North Korea could possess a nuclear weapon from within a few months to "a couple" of years, Mr. Gates irritated much of the State Department bureaucracy, which felt more time would be needed for the North Koreans to develop a bomb and that Mr. Gates's assessment undermined the sensitive diplomatic effort to open North Korean facilities to inspection.
When he told the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee in January that there were "a thousand or two" designers of nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union, he puzzled much of the Administration's non-proliferation establishment, which scrambled to figure out where he got the figures and then concluded they were probably meaningless.
On the other hand, if Mr. Gates too closely echoes the views of the Bush Administration, he opens himself to criticism that he is slanting intelligence to serve the agenda of policymakers. 
When he suggested to the House Foreign Affairs Committee last month that China was complying with the Missile Technology Control Regime, the international accord that bans the sale of missiles and related technology, he incurred the wrath of Senator Joseph R. Biden, the Delaware Democrat whose bete noire is Chinese proliferation. 
"We have no indication that I'm aware of that they are selling technologies now that would be a violation of the agreements they've signed up to," Mr. Gates said.
On the same day that Mr. Gates was testifying, Mr. Biden was briefing the Senate, in a rare closed session, on China's recent sales of missile technology to the Middle East -- sales, he suggested, that clearly violated the spirit if not the letter of the accord. 
He got his information in part from private briefings provided just days before by Gordon Oehler, Mr. Gates' chief aide on proliferation. 
(The Senate voted 59-39 on Feb. 
25 to deny favored-nation status, but failed to override the Presidential veto.)
 
A Question of Propriety
The apparent discrepancy between the testimony of Mr. Gates and the view provided by Mr. Oehler prompted Mr. Biden to send Mr. Gates a classified letter that raised the issue of politicization. 
In an angry speech on the Senate floor on March 18, the Senator said: "On the same day that we in the Senate were convened in closed session to discuss the disturbing implications of intelligence reports about Chinese arms sales, Director Gates was over in the House giving China a clean bill of health. 
His testimony that day raises questions of both propriety and accuracy."
After a meeting to iron out their differences, the Senator said in a statement that he was convinced that there was no effort by Mr. Gates to "distort the intelligence," but they agreed that part of his testimony on Chinese arms proliferation practices could have been misinterpreted. 
Other senators noted that as an intelligence official, Mr. Gates was supposed to leave to policymakers the issue of compliance with international agreements.
Sensitive to charges during his confirmation hearings that he tailored intelligence as a senior official in the 1980's, Mr. Gates has accepted the recommendations of a C.I.A. task force on polticization. 
On March 16 he told analysts, "We must engage in a candid discussion of the issue, devise effective measures to prevent it from occurring, and resolve to deal decisively with any circumstances that may foster distortions."
C.I.A. officials insist that they would be happier if Mr. Gates's testimony could take place in private. 
"We like to think of ourselves as the Administration's ultimate think tank, but not its ultimate spokesperson," said Gary E. Foster, the C.I.A.'s new chief spokesman. 
"We try to keep intelligence pure and straight. 
We are uncomfortable with open sessions because we don't know where they're going to go."
In a speech last month, Mr. Gates said that he and the agency's senior officials will be making more speeches, more public appearances before Congress and, most likely, more news. 
But perhaps more alert to the pitfalls of going public, Mr. Gates in testimony before a House panel last week delivered a cautious prepared statement about regional threats around the world. 
All he would say about the timing of North Korea's becoming a nuclear power was that it's "close, very close."
In fact, the testimony included little new information and committee staff members said Mr. Gates declined to answer lawmakers' questions except behind closed doors.
