
As if trading in the saxophone of the election season for a cello, Bill Clinton seems to be modulating the direct and even brassy oratory of his campaign into a Presidential tune.
As a candidate, Mr. Clinton's task was to distinguish himself as sharply as possible from President Bush. 
Listening to him this week on his first trip to Washington as President-elect, it was clear that as President, his aim will be to prevent conflict abroad and build consensus at home so he can concentrate on the economy.
After meeting with Congressional leaders he played down his campaign demand that Congress slash the size of its staff and that he be given new powers to veto spending, which Congress complains would diminish its authority. 
He offered to negotiate on his plan to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military in the face of opposition from Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
And after a session on foreign policy in the Oval Office with Mr. Bush, he sounded a less aggressive note about getting tough with China.
John Brummett, editor of The Arkansas Times Magazine, said Mr. Clinton seems to be adapting his style in the Governor's Mansion for the Oval Office.
"He does have a tendency to promise as a candidate and then once elected, suddenly become very realistic," Mr. Brummett said. 
"It is bravado versus realism, and it is a pretty clear pattern we have seen before. 
It is just the difference between getting elected and governing."
 
Room for Compromise
This style has its obvious risks: it could simply reinforce Mr. Clinton's image as a politician who has a tendency to dance around sensitive issues to get the support of all sides. 
But it could also allow him to stake out a far-reaching position while leaving room for a compromise down the road.
During the campaign, for instance, Mr. Clinton lacerated President Bush for "coddling" the "tyrants" in Beijing and promised he would never do that. 
On Thursday, when he had to speak about China as President-elect instead of Presidential wannabe, Mr. Clinton chose his words carefully. 
He repeated his support for human rights, but gave Mr. Bush credit for making progress with Beijing when he got "tough" on the Chinese and said he did not want to "isolate" China, the very formulation Mr. Bush has often used.
Mr. Clinton may have been signaling that he took too absolute a position in this area as he was fighting to get elected and is now using the grace period of his transition to retreat a bit. 
The last thing he wants during his first days in office, after all, is a fight with China or with Congress over his China policy.
In a similar manner, and perhaps for a similar purpose, Mr. Clinton has lowered his voice about Congress cutting Congressional staffs and cutting middle-class taxes. 
He is on the record for both, but can push them loudly or quietly depending on what tradeoffs he needs later.
 
Feeling His New Role
Beyond political calculations, there may be something unconscious going on. 
The American public is watching as Mr. Clinton absorbs the weighty reality of the office he is about to inherit. 
When he arrived to meet Mr. Bush at the White House this week, he seemed intent on striking a Presidential stance, rather than giving in to the natural instinct to crane his neck and look around at his new house.
Mr. Clinton spent almost two hours with President Bush in the Oval Office on Thursday. 
According to a Clinton aide, Mr. Bush gave the President-elect a tour of each problem spot in the world. 
Mr. Clinton then asked Mr. Bush how he would respond if events spun out of control in each area. 
It may have been no accident that after this conversation, Mr. Clinton found a softer voice on China.
Similarly, Mr. Clinton began his transition period with a strong statement of his intent to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military. 
As Democrats in Congress and generals in the Pentagon protested, Mr. Clinton backed off just a bit, saying he still intended to carry out his campaign promise on the issue, but was prepared to discuss it and find common ground. 
Last week, Mr. Clinton met with General Powell and said wryly that the nation's highest-ranking uniformed officer did not hold back on any subject.
 
A One-Man Polling Operation
In both cases, Mr. Clinton seems to have been displaying one of his particular managerial traits. 
Clinton aides during the campaign often complained about his democratic style of decision-making -- how he would ask the opinion of everyone from his top strategists to the flight attendant on his campaign aircraft before making up his mind.
Mr. Brummett said, "Sometimes he is just too prone to agree with the last person he talked with."
Several years ago in Arkansas, the Arkansas legislature was considering a bill granting tax credits for private donations to Arkansas's badly underfinanced colleges and universities. 
Mr. Clinton was torn between wanting to support higher education and not wanting to drain his budget of tax revenues.
The bill was passed and he had five days to decide whether to veto it. 
He agonized for five days, consulting with all sides, and on the evening of the fifth day he finally decided to veto the bill, stamping on it in big black letters: "DISAPPROVED."
A Clinton aide was sent over to file the veto with the House clerk and slipped it under the door of her office. 
Mr. Clinton then and telephoned Arkansas college presidents to explain what he had done. 
Instead, they persuaded him to change his mind.
So the Governor summoned a state trooper in his security detail and asked him to go back to the clerk's office and retrieve the vetoed bill. 
The trooper could see through the locked glass door that the bill was lying on the floor. 
He took a coat hanger, slipped it under the door and slid the bill out. 
He brought it back to Governor Clinton, who simply crossed out a few letters and sent it back as "APPROVED."
"The most unnerving thing about Clinton," said a long-time friend, "is knowing when he's made a decision. 
He'll look you in the eye to get your advice and for that moment, it seems like you're the only person in the world whose opinion he cares about. 
And then a second later, he'll turn to the waiter here and ask him his opinion."
