
ALMOST A REVOLUTION
By Shen Tong with Marianne Yen.
Illustrated. 342 pp. 
Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
$19.95.
THIS account by the Beijing student leader Shen Tong is one of the first of an expected flood of memoirs about China's democracy movement in the spring of 1989. 
This deluge marks a major setback for the Chinese Government's longstanding attempt to erase the Chinese people's historical memory. 
It is clear that Chinese intellectuals are no longer so willing to participate in a conspiracy of silence to save face for the motherland they love so painfully. 
For this reason alone, the appearance of "Almost a Revolution," written with the help of Marianne Yen, a former Washington Post reporter, is cause for celebration.
While the book is frustratingly thin on description and analysis of the movement itself, it does make three contributions: it is one of the first portrayals of the political shaping of a member of the post-Red Guard generation of activists; it provides an insider's record of the day-to-day events of the spring of 1989 (Mr. Shen was an organizer of the "dialogue delegation" whose goal was to negotiate with the Government); and it describes the slaughter at Changan Avenue and Xidan, the site of one of the worst blood baths of the June 4 crackdown, which also happened to be the doorstep of Mr. Shen's home.
The first half of the book, "Beginnings," provides a rebuttal to those who are concerned that members of China's new generation want to surrender themselves to materialism, self-interest and indifference to their country's pain. 
True, compared with the tumultuous, bitter childhoods of the members of China's Red Guard, the so-called lost generation, who sacrificed everything for a revolution that betrayed them, Shen Tong's youth in China's well-supplied capital was easy. 
It consisted of a happy progression of girlfriends, adventure and comparatively free access to information. 
Indeed, he describes himself as a popular and precocious youngster who short-circuited the neighborhood's electrical lines with his science experiments and renounced "women" at the age of 10 for all the trouble they caused him.
Yet because Shen Tong grew up a stone's throw from Tiananmen Square, China's symbolic political center, and was the child of thoughtful intellectuals, he could not help being exposed to deeper concerns. 
He reports clear memories of the 1976 Tiananmen incident, a brutal suppression of an antitotalitarian demonstration, which occurred when he was in first grade: his parents, to avoid being caught with the notebooks in which they had laboriously copied democratic poems and appeals posted in the square, dissolved the pages in water. 
In the winter of 1978-79, Shen Tong remembers, his father often took him to visit Democracy Wall, which was a five-minute walk from home. 
He recalls, "I watched in amazement as people stood before sheets of white paper pasted on the wall, biting their index fingers to write and, whenever the blood ran dry, biting their fingers again so they could continue writing."
In high school, Shen Tong became involved in the sale of the iconoclastic experimental writings of the lost generation's "misty poets," and began to read banned Hong Kong magazines, in which he found the transcripts of the defense of the famous dissident Wei Jingsheng. 
He was fortunate to attend the prestigious Beijing University during the 1980's, "probably the years when the Chinese people enjoyed the most intellectual freedom they had had since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949."
It is clear from his book that Shen Tong and his fellow students absorbed many of the lessons of the recent tragic past, particularly the idea that blind obedience is dangerous. 
But unlike their parents, they were arrogant and rebellious: "We thought of ourselves as the smartest students in the country and believed there was nothing we couldn't do. 
. . . We were brash, willful, and dared to have our own thoughts and to speak our own minds."
However, the students' motivations for their activism in the spring of 1989 are as fuzzy in Mr. Shen's account as they were in life; nowhere does he mention the ghastly dormitory and study conditions, now widely believed to have been a primary source of student discontent, nor does he recognize the irony that, despite their cries for democracy, one of the student movement's primary demands was to gain recognition from the very Government it was criticizing.
The second half of the book, "Movement," is an inside view of meetings, speeches, demands, strategies, factionalism, euphoria and defeat. 
Unlike the engaging account of Mr. Shen's youth, this section is often tedious. 
Nevertheless, his recital of the now-familiar events of that dramatic spring is poignant: the April 15 death of the scapegoated party leader Hu Yaobang; the intoxicating early marches; the April 26 editorial in The People's Daily denouncing the demonstrations; the euphoric rally of May 4 and the reform-minded party leader Zhao Ziyang's sympathetic speech to the Asian Development Bank; Mikhail Gorbachev's visit on May 15; Mr. Zhao's apologetic visit to the hunger strikers on May 19; the May 20 declaration of martial law; the emotionally charged waiting time before the clearing of the square; and the massacre itself.
IT has been China's fate to swing back and forth between near-total repression and an outpouring of energy and expression that ends in chaos and blood. 
In 1989, the pattern recurred. 
"I felt that we had started a car that was now driving off in a dangerous direction," writes Mr. Shen. "We all felt powerless to do anything."
The "dialogue delegation" he led failed to produce meaningful negotiations. 
Despite repeated attempts by some student leaders and older intellectuals to rein in the movement, the more radical approach of the hunger strikers came to dominate the protest. 
The student leadership became ridden with factions. 
And a desire for self-immolation seemed to be in the air. 
That this "dare to die" student movement led to the downfall of Zhao Ziyang's reformers makes the deaths of the protesters particularly tragic.
Throughout his account of the democracy movement, Shen Tong follows a subtheme, his parents' quandary: although they had an even deeper understanding of the price a country pays for totalitarianism than he did, their fear for their son's safety outweighed their wishes to support him in his protests. 
Mr. Shen recalls his sister begging him to withdraw from the movement and reminding him to pick up his passport and apply for a United States visa. 
And in the final days of the demonstrations, Mr. Shen writes, he was too busy with politics to spend time at his dying father's bedside.
Finally comes the description of Bloody Sunday. 
Leaving the university, Mr. Shen headed toward Tiananmen Square and then took refuge at home as the violence unfolded. 
In the doorway, a man bled to death before his eyes. 
As the tanks rolled forward, Mr. Shen records flatly, "it was odd to see people picking up anything, even a little pebble, and throwing it at the metal monsters coming toward us."
He went into the streets and pleaded with soldiers not to fire; the face of a young woman standing next to him was blown off. 
A soldier was stoned to death. 
A young man was shot to pieces against a white fence, and "a piece of his skull landed on the gold metal ball on top of the railing."
Shen Tong makes no attempt here to participate in the debate on casualty figures. 
Rather, his earnest record is an important, if inconclusive, contribution to China's newly discovered historical memory.
