
On a balmy summer day, the Columbia University campus seems as remote from Tiananmen Square psychically as it is geographically. 
But in the office of Professor R. Randle Edwards of Columbia Law School, the recent tremors in China have registered clearly and profoundly.
Professor Edwards is chairman of the Committee on Legal Education Exchange with China, a six-year-old group dedicated to bringing Chinese lawyers, law students and legal scholars to American law schools, and sending Americans to China. 
Through such cross-pollination, the committee hopes to ease China's painful evolution from renzhi to fazhi - that is, from the rule of man to the rule of law.
In the past decade, China's legal system, largely shut down during the Cultural Revolution, has experienced a Great Leap Forward. 
The number of law students has grown from 50 to more than 15,000, with commensurate growth among professors, judges and practitioners. 
The committee, which is based at Columbia, has made its own small but important contribution: since 1983, it has sponsored 127 Chinese scholars at 32 different American universities.
When the tanks of the 27th Army rolled into Tiananmen Square on June 3, did they flatten China's incipient legal institutions as surely as they crushed the Goddess of Democracy?
Last Saturday, committee members from U.C.L.A., Berkeley, Georgetown, the universities of Michigan and Minnesota and CUNY Law School at Queens College joined Professor Edwards in considering that question, along with the future of their own program.
The group has already canceled its annual summer session in Beijing, in which Justice Antonin Scalia of the United States Supreme Court was among those to have taught. 
More broadly, the committee now has to re-examine the wisdom and morality of its mission: whether, essentially, continued exchanges help legitimize the forces of reaction and lawlessness now in control.
For Professor Edwards, the massacre in Beijing had a more personal dimension: His two sons, Lee and Jon, were in the city at the time; Lee was on the edge of Tiananmen Square when the troops entered. 
He plans to enroll in Columbia Law School this fall, a resolve undoubtedly strengthened by what he witnessed, and experienced, there.
The most immediate concern of Professor Edwards and his colleagues was the status of Chinese scholars now in United States. 
Then they had to consider the Chinese scheduled to arrive for the coming academic year, and whether it was still safe for them to come.
The committee resolved to help those Chinese already here to extend their stays. 
It also decided to move forward with next year's exchanges, but with greater caution. 
This fall, for instance, three or four professors from the group will travel to China to see whether any of their alumni have suffered because of their participation in the program.
To Professor Edwards, the wisdom of continued exchanges is obvious. 
''Should we quit because we're collaborating with the enemy?'' he asks. 
''Or should we continue because most of the beneficiaries are people whose hearts are in the right place, who will help give China the chance to develop the rule of law over the next decade?''
If anything, his resolve is heightened by what happened on Tiananmen Square - not on June 3 but before. 
In the actions, the oratory, the banners of the demonstrators lay proof of how quickly notions of due process had seeped into the Chinese consciousness. 
Professor Edwards noted placards like ''Patriotism cannot be illegal'' and the banners carried by Beijing law students stating clauses from the Chinese constitution.
Many of these banners were photographed by Lee Edwards, who had spent the past two years living and working in Beijing, part of that for an English-language sports magazine. 
Fearful that it could provoke shooting, Professor Edwards's son, who is half Chinese, tried to stop a crowd from beating a fleeing soldier. 
Mistaken for an informer, he was beaten by the crowd with a shovel and club and hospitalized for three days.
Professor Edwards is reluctant to speak about his son's ordeal, partly to protect his privacy, partly because he remains in Beijing, partly because he thinks it detracts from the significance of what happened on Tiananmen Square - a process, he submits, in which the committee should continue to play its part.
''The real story is that the people in the world's oldest continual civilization have demanded control over their own lives,'' he said. 
''They've been evolving for 3,000 years, and in the last 10 years have made incredible progress. 
What they did in April and May eclipses all of the evil and viciousness done to them in June.''
