
'WE'RE tired of being second-class citizens,'' declared a large poster erected illegally last week by Chinese students at the Beijing Languages Institute. 
In a sense, that seemed to be what China's racial unrest of the last two weeks has been about.
The confrontations between Chinese and black African students reflect the deep-seated contradictions in Chinese feelings toward foreigners and the historical indignation at preferential treatment for foreigners. 
It was this indignation that helped carry the Communist Party to power 40 years ago, and the authorities' cautious approach acknowledged its continued potency.
Decades ago, foreigners dominated key areas of China and enforced special privileges for themselves. 
Now, it is the Chinese Government itself that enforces special treatment for foreigners, and resentment is rising. 
On trains, for example, the Chinese passengers obliged to travel ''hard class'' stare through the windows at the ''soft class'' cars reserved for foreigners and high officials.
And on university campuses, Chinese students seethe when they see their government providing special dormitories, cafeterias and scholarships to African students - particularly when the Chinese students feel they should be looking down on the Africans.
The latest troubles started when two African men brought Chinese dates to a Christmas Eve dance in the eastern city of Nanjing, touching off a brawl that has led to racial confrontations in at least four cities.
Initially the unrest seemed to be motivated largely by sheer racism, for there are few other ways to interpret such slogans as ''beat the blacks,'' which thousands of demonstrators in Nanjing shouted in the aftermath of the initial brawl. 
Racial stereotypes of blacks are very openly expressed in China.
While the latest unrest has focused on Africans, in a larger sense it spotlights the growing resentment in China of special treatment accorded to foreigners in general. 
Particularly for white Americans or Europeans, a foreign face has been magic in China in the last 10 years.
The civility was sometimes embarrassing: Chinese women would give up a seat on a crowded bus to a young white man. 
Longtime foreign residents say they think that attitude has changed, perhaps because of generally rising tensions arising from the rapid changes in society and the economy. 
Now when a foreign driver sideswipes a Chinese bicyclist, the bicyclist will not apologize as in the past but is likely to cling to the hood of the car and scream until a suitable payment is arranged.
An electronics student at Beijing University remembered that when the open-door policy was inaugurated a decade ago, Chinese marveled at the wealth and technology that foreigners enjoyed.
The Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976 had destroyed the self-confidence of many Chinese, and they were awed by the inscrutable Occidentals who rode in taxis and snapped photographs of each other in front of Mao Zedong's mausoleum.
''Now this is changing,'' the student said. 
''we have more contact with foreigners, and we see that they aren't all such wonderful people after all.''
This question of relations with foreigners resonates in Chinese history like no other.
China's psyche is still raw from the way one Western country after another humiliated China in the last 150 years, defeating it, seizing chunks of Chinese territory, overturning Chinese customs and grinding China's dignity into the dust under its heel.
The European arrogance still engraved on China's soul was typically expressed in a letter that an Englishman wrote home in 1842: ''It seems quite useless to kill the Chinese. 
It is like killing flies in July.''
The historical sense of humiliation is what makes the current resentment against the favoring of foreigners so political. 
The 1,500 African students in China are particularly resented, partly because of simple racism and partly because they receive special scholarships and living quarters from the Chinese Government.
Americans are more likely to be excused when they live lavishly in China, perhaps because they are likely to pay their own way and partly because it is felt that they live lavishly at home as well.
Higher stipends for foreign students or other signs of preferential treatment increasingly seem to touch a raw nerve.
The Communist Party is clearly concerned about such sentiments. 
The authorities in Nanjing have openly sympathized with the students, perhaps partly to placate them. 
Indeed, the authorities in some cases have seemed scarcely more restrained than the racist demonstrators. 
While the government denied the charge, the Africans reported being beaten and tortured by the police.
''Throughout the ages, the Chinese have had only one way of looking at foreigners,'' the famous Chinese social critic Lu Xun wrote more than 50 years ago. 
''We either look up to them as gods or down on them as wild animals.''
It was an exaggeration, but to many Africans in China at least the latter alternative rang true this week. 
For other foreigners, the tensions are not so volatile nor attitudes so extreme. 
But the lesson of China's recent demonstrations may be that preferential treatment of foreigners has become a political issue, and that many Chinese are fed up with seeing foreigners in their own land treated as gods.
