
IN the 1950's Chairman Mao declared: "The Soviet Union's today is China's tomorrow."
Now it would be a counter-revolutionary offense to say that in public. 
But in searching for a country to emulate, Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old senior leader, has come up with a partial model, one that in many respects runs counter to China's original revolutionary principles.
That model is Singapore.
When Mr. Deng traveled to southern China early this year to squeeze the hard-liners and campaign for faster economic liberalization, he mentioned only three countries by name: Japan, South Korea and Singapore, all cited for their sound development. 
One of the most illuminating statements he made was this:
"Singapore's social order is rather good. 
Its leaders exercise strict management. 
We should learn from their experience, and we should do a better job than they do."
While it may seem odd for a Communist government to take as its model a monument to free enterprise, Mr. Deng's comment reflects a fascination with the practical accomplishments of Asia's "four dragons": Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Korea.
Mr. Deng explicitly called upon Guangdong Province to catch up with the "four dragons" over the next two decades, "not only catching up with them in terms of economic prosperity but also in terms of social order and public conduct."
Mr. Deng has also called for China to build "several Hong Kongs" along its coast, and Wu Bangguo, the Communist Party leader in Shanghai, was recently even more explicit. 
Mr. Wu reportedly told a visitor that China aimed to learn from the policies of South Korea and Singapore in developing their economies.
The emulation of Singapore, an island-state whose population of 2.7 million is 77 percent ethnic Chinese, reflects a growing consensus among China's leaders that prosperity and order are more important than Marxist ideology. 
Singapore is attractive in that it has enjoyed an economic miracle with political stability in a system dominated by a single political party that the voters regularly return to power by overwhelming margins.
"The talk about Singapore says a lot about what Deng wants," said a Chinese economist. 
"He would like to free up the economy, but he wants tight political control."
 
Clean and Orderly
Singapore not only has very few street protests; it has a cleanliness and orderliness that critics find dreary and antiseptic but that Mr. Deng regards as inspiring. 
There is no pornography, no extreme poverty, little corruption and not much spitting or littering in public. 
Bubble gum is prohibited, and critical foreign publications are sometimes banned.
"Of course old Deng likes Singapore," said a young Chinese Government official. 
"It's run by Chinese, it's efficient, it's rich, and no one jabbers about human rights."
The point is that Mr. Deng increasingly seems to regard Communist economic dogma -- state ownership and central planning -- as details that can be fudged. 
On the other hand, the bedrock of Chinese Communism, on which no compromise is allowed, is continued political control and maintenance of social order. 
This conception of government rests less on Marx than on Confucius. 
The sense of continuity from earlier Chinese dynasties, less visible in the Maoist era, has become more apparent in the last decade. 
The core convictions of "Emperor Deng" seem to have little to do with economic ideology. 
Instead, what Mr. Deng is passionate about is the Communist dynasty's right to rule and the need for a strong central government.
The redesign of the Communist road is evident when officials are asked what kind of a country they are trying to build. 
Officials sometimes describe their work as "mozhe shitou guo he" -- crossing the river by feeling with one's feet for the stones to step on. 
But there tend to be long silences when they are asked what is on the other side of the river.
Lei Yu, a prominent reformist who is now vice chairman of the Guangxi region in southern China, ventured an answer to that question in an interview earlier this year. 
Whatever changes, he said, the fundamental aim of Chinese socialism is collective prosperity and the absence of large income gaps between the rich and poor.
"If people live better, without big income gaps, that's the important thing," Mr. Lei said.
By that definition, however, bastions of free enterprise like Taiwan are more socialist than mainland China. 
Taiwan is far more prosperous than the mainland and by some calculations enjoys a more egalitarian distribution of wealth.
By standard measures, China's economy already has veered off the Communist road. 
The state sector now accounts for only half of industrial output, and its share is dropping steadily. 
A report prepared by China's National Information Center predicted a few weeks ago that by the year 2000 the state sector would account for only 27 percent of industrial output, with collectives making up 48 percent and private enterprise producing 25 percent. 
The economic flexibility -- which is almost certain to accelerate after the death of Mr. Deng and the other first-generation revolutionaries -- will not necessarily lead to democracy and greater respect for the human rights associated with it, however.
China's leaders seem much more envious of Singaporean wealth than of its voting system, and some of the "four dragons" in the past combined bustling markets with brutal repression. 
That deft combination may be what China's leaders hope to adopt for themselves.
