
AKIHIDE YONEHAMA has eaten a bowl of noodles every day since he was 3 years old. 
He is now 49. 
Mr. Yonehama, the owner of Menchanko-Tei, a Manhattan restaurant whose name translates as "a house of mixed noodles," is not alone in his passion. 
In fact, noodles may become Japan's next great food export, after sushi.
Slinky, slippery noodles are popular for two reasons: versatility and cost, said Elizabeth Andoh, author of "An Ocean of Flavor: The Japanese Way with Fish and Seafood" (William Morrow, 1988).
The noodles -- made from eggs, wheat or buckwheat -- can be served hot or cold, in broths that are steaming or chilled. 
In summer a bowl of chilled noodles, topped with a bit of meat or seafood and fresh vegetables, is a perfect one-dish meal. 
Cold beer or sake are the perfect accompaniments.
Ms. Andoh says the Japanese have probably been eating noodles for more than 1,500 years.
Toshiko Takahara, a staff member of the Japan Information Center in Manhattan, said: "Some Japanese eat noodles for lunch once a day, sometimes for dinner every few days. 
And men -- after they have dinner and go out and drink, they eat noodles late at night."
In Manhattan, a number of noodle restaurants serve delicious cold noodles through September; others serve them all year. 
Three in particular are continuing a history of Japanese noodle-making. 
They are Mr. Yonehama's Menchanko-Tei, at 39 West 55th Street; Omen, at 113 Thompson Street (near Prince Street), and Honmura An, 170 Mercer Street (near Houston Street).
What distinguishes one place from the other are the secret flavors of the noodles and their broths. 
The restaurateurs are not unlike the Japanese heroine of "Tampopo," Juzo Itami's movie, who is obsessed with making the perfect broth for noodles.
The newest noodle restaurant, Honmura An, specializes in soba, a noodle made from buckwheat. 
When the noodles are served cold and dipped swiftly into a hot broth, they remain firm, but when they arrive submerged in the broth, "you have to slurp the noodles quickly," said Koichi Jun Kobari, the restaurant's owner. 
"Soba soaks up water, losing texture. 
The cold noodles are the best."
With an etched memory of soba-making and three generations of recipes, Mr. Kobari opened Honmura An in February. 
Its namesake original was founded in Tokyo 65 years ago by his grandfather Yoshizo Kobari.
The 30-year-old Mr. Kobari imports shelled buckwheat kernels from Japan and has them stone-ground at his restaurant.
Each day, a noodle-maker makes the soba by hand, mixing the dough in a lacquered bowl. 
He spreads sheets of dough on a wooden board and cleaves it into fine pale beige noodles. 
They are then ready to be boiled and chilled, to be served cold or immersed in a hot broth.
The restaurants use the same basic ingredients in their broths -- bonito (dried flakes of young tuna), mirin (sweet, rice-based cooking wine) and soy sauce, but the owners are shy about disclosing names, measurements or cooking times of other ingredients.
At Honmura An, kamo seiro is cold soba served with a rich chicken broth flavored with duck. 
But Mr. Kobari would say only that the duck is added "briefly" to the broth.
For a quick lunch, Japanese might eat only a bowl of noodles. 
At dinner, appetizers precede the noodles. 
One Honmura An appetizer is tataki, fillets cut from a steak that has been marinated in soy sauce and stock.
Like Mr. Kobari, Mikio Shinagawa, the 36-year-old owner of the restaurant Omen, is also a descendant of noodle fanciers. 
His mother is from Kyoto and his father is from Gunma, near Tokyo. 
There, Mr. Shinagawa said, "people have the custom of eating noodles once a day; if they have it for lunch one day, they will have it for dinner the next."
Twenty-five years ago, his parents opened the first of three Omen noodle restaurants in Kyoto. 
In 1979, when Mr. Shinagawa's parents came to visit him in Manhattan, he didn't know where to take them to eat.
"As a joke," he recalled, "my friends said: 'Why don't you open a restaurant here in New York?
We have no place to go.'
"
So, in 1981, he opened Omen, named for a thick, wheat-based noodle. 
At this time of year, he also offers somen, a very thin noodle imported dried from Japan. 
"In the summer, people come here just to eat the somen," he said.
Somen is cooked for a few minutes in boiling water and placed in a chilled broth. 
It arrives in a round ceramic bowl topped with boiled shrimp sliced lengthwise, slivers of shiitake mushrooms, scallions and julienned strips of scrambled egg.
The broth, Mr. Shinagawa said, is made of seaweed, mirin, bonito and ginger juice and is light with just a hint of sweetness.
Year-round the signature dish of Omen, is, appropriately, omen. 
Served on a tray, the noodles are accompanied by a hot broth, a bowl of toasted sesame seeds and a ceramic plate of vegetables that are boiled, shredded and served cold. 
They may include white radish, carrots, scallions or Chinese cabbage.
The noodles are preceded by peanut-ae (pronounced peanut-EYE) a dish of cooked spniach and tiny scallops moistened with a peanut-sesame sauce. 
In tribute to his Buddhist training, Mr. Shinagawa serves a smooth, silken black tofu, a vegetarian dish served at Zen Buddhist temples in Japan. 
The color is from black sesame seed; to eat the tofu is an experience newer to the eyes than to the tongue: It tastes like bean curd but doesn't look like it.
On some days, a crowd representative of Manhattan's Japanese community fills Menchanko-Tei, waiting to enter the 42-seat restaurant. 
Chauffeurs polish windows; in line areexecutives, Buddhist monks and crews from TV Nippon. 
On a hot, humid day, many customers eat hiyashi chuka, chilled Japanese noodles in a broth topped with slivers of cucumber, egg, Chinese-style roast pork and tomato.
Ms. Andoh calls the dish a chef's salad over noodles. 
The noodles, which are made in San Jose, Calif., are wheat-based but are bound with egg, like those that Japanese cuisine borrowed from China.
Hiyashi chuka is one of four noodle dishes that Mr. Yonehama offers at Menchanko-Tei, his "house of mixed noodles."
His favorite is menchanko topped with fresh shrimp, rice cakes, bean curd and Chinese cabbage. 
To the chicken-based broth, he has added some seafood and a mysterious shellfish.
"We do not know the name," Mr. Yonehama said through an interpreter, smiling. 
It is "some sort of clam."
Then, smiling more broadly, Mr. Yonehama said, "In Japan, for every family and every restaurant, the soup is a secret recipe."
To precede the noodles, there is oden, geometrically shaped food that has been simmered in broth: triangular wedges of fried bean curd; round fluffy fish cakes; circles of white radish.
In Japan, oden is served outdoors on pushcarts, as the chestnut vendors do in the streets of Manhattan. 
At night, appetizers like yaki-zakana (broiled fish) are served. 
Pods of soybeans boiled in salted water arrive in a small bowl. 
The pods are peeled and popped into the mouth.
Menchanko-Tei is the happy result of Mr. Yonehama's miserable early experiences as a restaurateur. 
From 1970 to 1975, he and his four brothers opened 29 different restaurants in Kyushu, southern Japan. 
"The only one that succeeded was noodles," Mr. Yonehama said.
He now has two restaurants in Kyushu and one in Manhattan, an office in Tokyo and a 20,000-square-foot factory in Kyushu where his soup bases are made. 
The soup concentrates are used in his three restaurants and sold to supermarkets in Japan.
Mr. Yonehama is planning to open other Menchanko-Tei restaurants for homesick Japanese in Honolulu in 1992, and eventually in London and Paris. 
"I try to make people from Japan feel at home," he said.
