
WHEN a truck from China pulled into the neighboring Portuguese enclave of Macao late last year, American officials happened to be on hand to take a peek at the cargo. 
They were surprised to find Chinese-manufactured ski jackets bearing labels reading "Made in Macao."
Business executives in both China and Macao were clearly trying to evade the limits imposed by China's quota of garment exports to the United States. 
American officials say that it was one incident in a pattern of unfair trading by China, and that in 1990, such practices brought China $2.5 billion in extra sales to the United States that were not counted in the bilateral trade statistics. 
"They got away with this for years and no one did anything about it," said an American official. 
"They thought they could continue getting away with it."
While all nations cheat on free trade to some degree, China is a socialist country that has put up barriers to imports so brazenly that it hardly makes a pretense at advocating free trade. 
One theory has it that China may be displaying a passion for building up net exports to accumulate foreign exchange -- what economists call a mercantilist streak. 
From missiles to textiles, exports have become a top priority. 
The pressure has led many companies to evade international rules, and the result is likely to be a protracted struggle between Washington and Beijing over China's trade behavior.
Last year, the United States's trade deficit with China was $10.4 billion -- the third largest, behind only Japan, with which the United States had a $41.1 billion deficit, and Taiwan, with which the deficit was $11.3 billion. 
China, whose exports have more than tripled in the last decade, is the only non-market economy that has become a major exporter to the United States.
And while most Western countries say they would like China to abandon more of its Government control of the economy, they are finding that China is maintaining socialism while also learning some of the ways that exporters like Japan and Taiwan cause headaches for foreign industrial countries.
In many ways, China is a picture-perfect unfair trader. 
Just ask anyone who wants to sell cars here. 
Not only must a foreign auto company pay stiff duties; it must also give two cars of each model to the Government, pay $40,000 for "testing" and finance a Chinese delegation's trip to "inspect" the factories overseas.
While the United States has had disputes with Japan over rice and with Taiwan over turkeys, the barriers in China are in many respects more comprehensive and fundamental. 
The exchange rate here is fixed, most big companies are state-owned, Government permission is needed for most imports, and in many cases tariffs have been raised and barriers added in the last few years.
 
Export Promotion
A big export promotion effort, coupled with curbs on imports, has pushed China's overall trade balance from a deficit of $6.6 billion in 1989 to a surplus of $8.7 billion last year. 
And trade is likely to continue to do well -- unless Congress cuts off most-favored-nation trade status for China, against President Bush's wishes -- partly because China is gradually devaluing its currency.
While they admit that Chinese enterprises often engage in illicit practices, some Chinese economists disagree that China's trade machine is basically unfair. 
They say the central Government has tried hard to curb some unfair practices, but that decentralization and the boom in capitalist enterprises in southern China -- just the kind of things Westerners want to see -- are thwarting the effort. 
"China is a developing country, and there is a cost to free trade," said a Chinese economist. 
"It must protect some of its industries. 
Is that unfair?"
American businessmen are much less sympathetic. 
To many, China's economy is a giant maze, with dead ends at every corner and booby traps that lead to dense tangles of bureaucracy and high costs. 
For instance, beyond extensive tariffs, quotas and other restrictions, China has a set of secret regulations that foreigners cannot even see. 
Often companies learn about them only through trial and error: sometimes a shipment is allowed into the country, sometimes it is not.
Nicholas Lardy, a specialist on the Chinese economy at the University of Washington, said that while China has curbed imports and boosted exports in the last two years, it is not clear that it will sustain its apparent passion for accumulating foreign exchange through the unbridled sale of exports. 
He noted that for most of the 1980's, China imported more than it exported, and he suggested that last year's trade surplus was an anomaly -- explainable partly because China faced economic uncertainties and restricted access to foreign capital and loans.
Prudence and caution, some Western economists say, thus may be enough to explain China's recent trade surplus. 
China is getting rid of export subsidies, and allowing imports to rise again. 
Its domestic economy is also rebounding and this may increase demand for imports. 
Still, in the first four months of this year, its overall trade surplus rose to $2.34 billion, up from $1.31 billion for the same period last year. 
Similarly, the United States deficit with China expanded to $2.19 billion in the first quarter, compared to $1.88 billion in the same period last year.
"I think it comes from a very deep-rooted ambivalence toward opening to the West and distrust of foreigners and capitalism," said another American economist who specializes in China. 
"Maybe some of those dirty tactics are engaged in because everyone is under so much pressure to generate revenues."
