
THERE wasn't much publicity. 
The subject was not at the top of the news. 
But when a distinguished Soviet academician on a diplomatic mission was persuaded recently to give an informal talk on Central Asia, there was standing room only in the hotel banquet hall that a local scholar booked.
Central Asia is an old idea taking on new life, not only in Pakistan but also in the Asian Muslim world beyond the Middle East - as far east as China's Xinjiang region. 
As fissures appear in the Soviet Union, and the superpowers seem ready to pull back from Afghanistan, a region that for more than a century had been pulled apart by outsiders - Russians, British and Chinese among them - is beginning to stitch back together its common history.
The search for roots has been made possible by the evaporation of East-West tensions, in much the same way that other parts of the world also feel freer these days to define themselves in terms other than pro-Moscow, pro-Washington or non-aligned.
No one expects a new Central Asian empire to stir the ghost of Tamerlane, certainly not in an age when nationalisms are fragmenting rather than enlarging geographical domains. 
But a process, however tenuous and exploratory, of rediscovering old cultural, historical, religious and commercial bonds is under way, perhaps most of all in Pakistan, the nation in the middle that looks both east and west. 
The Lahore Museum, the country's most distinguished repository of archeologly and art, has put on a show about Central Asia with exhibits from a Moscow collection, and a new institute has sprung up to publish bulletins on the region.
Enter the bemused Soviet scholar, Yuri Gankovsky. 
After taking the lectern in Islamabad, he was peppered with questions by an audience hungry for information. 
He was also buffeted by accusations that Moscow was turning its harshest face south to subdue its Islamic republics -''Flowers for Estonia and tanks for Azerbaijan'' is how one questioner phrased it. 
Hands were still waving when question time came to an end.
''Tashkent is far closer to Islamabad than Islamabad is to Karachi,'' said Ijaz S. Gilani, director of the Center for Asian Studies in Islamabad, referring to the Soviet city 500 miles away and Pakistan's capital more than 650 miles south.
Before the colonial British came, before first Russian and then Soviet might intervened to close the borders, and long before Islamabad cast its lot decisively with the West, large areas of Pakistan inhabited the world of the silk roads, where Orient and Occident collided in the bazaars and sometimes on the battlefields.
Throughout the region, as urges from the past stir from Xinjiang to the Soviet Central Asian republics, news travels quickly across the mountains and plains. 
Pakistanis discuss rumors of the desecration of Chinese mosques. 
Analysts speculate on whether a revolutionary situation is developing in the Soviet south.
Pakistanis who visit Soviet Asia say they are met with warmth and curiosity. 
''My mother and I just wanted to see these places we had heard so much about,'' said Abida Hussain, a member of Parliament. 
''People first thought we must be Indians, and treated us with reserve. 
But when we told them we were Pakistanis, they were delighted, and welcomed us as one of them.''
A close relationship with the Muslim-majority nations of West Asia - Afghanistan, Iran and Turkey - has always been part of Pakistani policy. 
It is a theme Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto stresses, just as her Government looks forward to the prospect of increased cultural ties with Soviet Central Asia once there is an Afghan settlement. 
Soviet diplomats in Islamabad are keenly aware of this potential, both as a source of opportunity and as a source of concern.
 
Reasons to Worry
Not all the interest in Central Asia is benign or cultural. 
William Maley of the Australian Defense Force Academy, who has toured the Pakistan-Afghanistan border area, says some Pakistani generals would like to extend their strategic borders into Soviet territory through Afghanistan. 
For this reason, some Pakistanis were pursuing secondary aims in the Afghan war, hoping to weaken the Soviet underbelly. 
And thoughts of a new community of interests unsettle India, which fears it may one day confront a bloc of conservative Islamic lands from its western borders to the horizons of Europe.
To some extent, Kashmiri nationalists battling to separate their largely Muslim valley from India are encouraged by what they see as an inevitable coalescing of Islamic Central Asia. 
At this point, it is convenient for them to overlook the deep divisions of the Islamic world. 
Shiites, Sunnis, Sufis and Ahmadis cannot live in peace even within Pakistan. 
Ethnic rivalries could break out among Soviet Tadzhiks, Uzbeks, Kazakhs and Turkic people as easily as they have among warring Afghan communities.
But for now, Kashmiris want nothing more than to break down the border that separates them from brothers across the mountains. 
With the wider region in flux, anything can seem possible.
''Our old Central Asian trade routes were active right up until 1926, when the Soviet state closed the borders,'' Mr. Gilani said, adding that cultures as well as commodities traveled these caravan trails. 
''Some routes are still there, and we have new ones. 
Four busloads of Pakistanis cross the border on the Karakoram highway into China every day as traders.''
Coming the other way at this time of year are groups of Chinese Muslim pilgrims with bundles, heading for Mecca. 
For them, the Haj - the pilgrimage each Muslim is expected to make at least once - begins in Pakistan.
