
CHINA is glorifying manual labor again, this time as a way to deal with troublesome young intellectuals. 
Last weekend, the Government announced that college graduates who want to enter graduate school - useful for getting good jobs and especially for arranging an opportunity to study abroad -should work first for one or two years. 
A separate and so far unpublished requirement will oblige those who have graduated from college since 1985 to work at the ''grass roots,'' typically at a factory or farm, for a year before taking white-collar jobs in the city, say Chinese with access to official information.
More significant, the plan also calls for college freshmen to go through full-time military training - a few weeks at most institutions but perhaps a full year at Beijing University, the vanguard of the democracy movement this spring.
In some ways, the new campaigns are reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution, when 17 million Red Guards were sent to the countryside to learn from peasants.
But there is an important difference. 
Early in the Cultural Revolution, when Mao urged students to go to the villages, many went because they thought it was the right thing to do. 
Today's students are antagonists of the leadership, and they are certain to do everything they can to avoid the yoke of military service or manual labor.
Talk about a national public service requirement was heard well before the June 4 massacre at Tiananmen Square. 
For several years, many adults were saying that such service might acquaint university students with the hard work and deprivation that for most Chinese are a way of life.
But coming now, the new programs inevitably are seen as punishment and propaganda. 
The most worrying aspect, for many, is that the work in the countryside or factories will involve the transfer of residency permits, and that many students will be left in fear that if they make political mistakes they will lose forever the right to live in Beijing or any other city.
In fact, many people doubt that the current programs will be carried out, because of resistance from an unenthusiastic bureaucracy. 
But if they are implemented, they could create logistical nightmares and aggravate the surplus of labor in the countryside as well as the sense of unfairness among intellectuals.
Perhaps most significant, compulsory manual labor or military service for this generation of students could well prove counterproductive. 
Instead of persuading young people to abandon their dreams of democracy, it could confirm their bitterness toward the regime and their belief that Western-style changes are needed all the more urgently.
Students working on a farm during the Cultural Revolution (Magnum/Marc Riboud)
