
EVERY time President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d have spoken with the press in the last two weeks, they have been badgered with the same question, ''Why aren't you saying and doing more about China?''
Each time, with increasing exasperation, they have answered, ''Look at all we have said and done.''
Mr. Baker himself said: ''We think a measured response is just that. 
It calls for a response which clearly expresses our outrage, but does not resort to an overly emotional response which involves inflammatory rhetoric.''
But one person's inflammatory rhetoric is another person's poetry, and because the Administration's declarations on Tianamen Square have contained no poetry, no memorable language, nothing seems to have stuck in the public's mind.
While the President seemed to find the perfect combination of words and deeds to express the nation's desire for progress with Moscow on arms control on his recent swing through Europe, his attempts to strike a similar balance in relation to Beijing have left many unsatisfied.
The Administration has been criticized as being neither forceful enough in its condemnation of what happened in Tiananmen Square nor convincing enough in its articulation of what it calls the ''countervailing geopolitical considerations,'' which require a maintenance of ties with Beijing.
As a result, Congress put forth its own sanctions and declarations last week, which the Administration rejected as superfluous.
Presidents shape their policy environment through their words. 
''We often think of political rhetoric as a bad word, as pandering, as mere talk - it's action that counts,'' said Michel J. Sandel, a political theorist at Harvard University. 
''But that is a mistaken idea and one that the President seems to share. 
At the level of the Presidency, there is no sharp distinction between words and deeds. 
Talk is action. 
Words are deeds.''
He added, ''The President's measured policy response on China was very reasonable, but because he did not at the same time articulate the importance of the moment, give clear expression to the principles and ideals at stake, his deeds were lost.''
Ronald Reagan's ''genius,'' argued Mr. Sandel, was his ability to articulate a clear moral message vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. 
As a result, Mr. Sandel said, people were confident that they knew where he stood and therefore they were ready to accept a nuanced policy toward Moscow, including sweeping arms control agreements.
 
The Larger Themes
While Mr. Bush has a policy on China full of nuances, he has not managed to gain much support for it because he has failed to sound the larger themes.
''No one would have paid much attention to the details had the President given broad thematic expression to public feelings,'' Mr. Sandel said.
It was Mr. Reagan, in a speech in London last month, who voiced what was on many Americans' minds about China. 
''You cannot massacre an idea,'' he said. 
''You cannot run tanks over hope. 
You cannot riddle a people's yearnings with bullets.''
Some experts theorized that Mr. Bush's seeming reluctance to use such language may be connected to his stint in Beijing as ambassador. 
It is difficult to summon a poetic outrage against people whom you basically liked and once considered friends.
''President Bush, like most people who have dealt with the Chinese over the last decade, was captivated by them,'' said Charles William Maynes, editor of the journal Foreign Policy.
Administration officials, though, have been equally reserved when it has come to explaining all the ''countervailing'' strategic considerations that they say require them to react to the killings in China in a way that will not totally alienate Beijing.
There is a logic to this, said Robert W. Tucker, professor of diplomacy at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
To go into detail on such matters, he said, ''They would have to admit that the cold war with Moscow really isn't over, and because it isn't over we still need a strong relationship with China to counterbalance the Soviet Union.''
After having been battered for the first four months of his Administration for not being responsive enough to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the last thing Mr. Bush wants to do now is start making speeches about why the Soviet Union remains a fundamental threat.
Again, though, something more compelling than ''countervailing considerations'' might have bought the Administration more room to maneuver. 
Maybe something along the lines expressed by the man who sent Mr. Bush to China as Ambassador in the 1970's.
As Richard M. Nixon wrote in an article last week: ''China has a limitless capacity to fascinate. 
But it is not Disneyland. 
It is, as it has been since 1949, a Communist dictatorship held together by brute force. 
Those who insist on romanticizing relations between nations will always be disappointed when the realities of national interest and survival inevitably intrude.''
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d defending the Administration's China policy before a House committee last month (The New York Times/Jose R. Lopez)
