
JUST 10 years ago, a group of American Congressmen touring the Soviet Union were startled when a provincial politician launched into a remarkably candid and seemingly heartfelt tirade about the menace of China.
''Today they are attacking Vietnam, tomorrow it will be India, then the Soviet Union, and maybe even the United States,'' the official reportedly warned, reflecting a phobia not uncommon then in the Soviet Union.
The provincial official was Eduard A. Shevardnadze, now the Foreign Minister and chief executor of the new pragmatism that, on Monday, brings Mikhail S. Gorbachev to the first Chinese-Soviet summit meeting in 30 years.
Mr. Gorbachev's visit will ratify a process of normalization that is already well under way, marked by an expansion of trade and lessening of tension along the 4,600-mile border, by Soviet concessions on several issues of mutual discomfort, and by a respectful fascination among Soviet intellectuals with China's more advanced economic reforms.
Vladimir A. Myasnikov, a leading Soviet expert on China, says that with this summit, ''We are closing a page of the cold war, the last page of the volume: Asia.''
A few years ago, such a reconciliation would have been seen by the United States and its allies as an alarming development. 
Since President Nixon's visit to China in 1972, the West has regarded the triangular relationship of Washington, Beijing and Moscow as the stable foundation of superpower relations. 
Now, it seems generally accepted that whatever military resources are freed up by rapprochement between the Chinese and Soviets will not be turned against the West, but against domestic impoverishment.
For one thing, no one believes that this meeting will mean a return to the Communist fraternity of the 1950's. 
Where Stalin saw China as a potential ally against the imperialists, Mr. Gorbachev sees normalization as a prerequisite for economic cooperation with the other Asian countries that have so far resisted his charm. 
Soviet and Chinese economists both talk of development schemes that would pool Soviet natural resources, Chinese labor and Japanese and South Korean capital. 
Moreover, the Soviet Union remains the principal arms supplier to two of China's rivals, Vietnam and India, while China continues to finance guerrillas warring against the Soviet-backed regime in Afghanistan.
Still, Mr. Gorbachev is eager to lay aside a legacy of tensions because China is the linchpin of a broader Asia strategy. 
Rapprochement means the demobilizing of border garrisons, the advance of his disarmament campaign in Asia and the Pacific, and a climate of good will that the Soviets hope will let a thousand joint ventures bloom. 
In Beijing, the Soviet leader will be playing to an audience that includes Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and other up-and-coming Asian nations whose capital and technology the Soviet leader hopes can be wooed to the assistance of his anemic economy. 
Chinese-Soviet detente should also give Moscow more flexibility in its dealings with North Korea and such wary Southeast Asian nations as Thailand.
China, for its part, relishes the prospect of increasing border trade and the chance to relax the standoff along its northern border. 
Chinese leaders welcome a chance to decrease the strategic influence of the Soviet Union and its ally, Vietnam, in Asia. 
Some Chinese, including the restive students, hope that Mr. Gorbachev's visit will inspire broader democratization of their society, although that prospect seems to cause considerable ambivalence in the leadership.
As Mr. Shevardnadze's remarks 10 years ago demonstrated, the two neighbors have a history of mistrust, ancient and contemporary, bloody and ideological, mutual and deeply ingrained.
Russian children learn from school days of the Mongol hordes that swept across the border from China in the 13th century. 
Chinese children are taught that more than a million square miles of what is now the Soviet Union was hornswoggled from the Chinese empire by Russian rulers centuries ago. 
Since their respective revolutions, the two countries have also stockpiled resentments, beginning with Stalin's alliance of convenience with Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists before and during World War II. 
Even in the 1950's, when Stalin and Mao huddled together against the capitalist world, the relationship was out of balance, with the Soviets unabashedly condescending to ''our little brothers.''
The Chinese endured their role as junior sibling until 1956, when Nikita S. Khrushchev's destalinization campaign collided with the growth of Mao's own Stalinist cult. 
When Khrushchev arrived in Beijing for the last Chinese-Soviet summit conference in 1959, there was already an unmistakeable chill in the air. 
The Chinese public took their indignation out on Soviet advisers and technicians until Khrushchev abruptly withdrew them, leaving hundreds of joint projects half-built.
 
Relaxing Old Dogma
In 1969, Soviet and Chinese troops engaged in a series of bloody border skirmishes. 
Chinese children in Beijing pelted the cars of Soviet diplomats with stones and shouted ''Down with the Soviet revisionists,'' while in Moscow an actor brought down the house at the Taganka Theater by interrupting a play about Soviet village life to cry: ''Something must be done about China!''
Now, with the ascent of Mr. Gorbachev, China and the Soviet Union have found themselves, for once, moving in the same direction - away from the failed Stalinist model of Communism toward a more pragmatic socialism. 
In both countries the grip of old dogma has been relaxed.
Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese eminence, has made Mr. Gorbachev work for his meeting. 
The Soviet leader has withdrawn Soviet troops from Afghanistan, and Mr. Gorbachev's pledge last December at the United Nations to cut half a million troops from the Soviet armed forces included 200,000 soldiers in Moscow's vast Asian domain. 
The withdrawal of three-fourths of the Soviet contingent in Mongolia is scheduled to begin the day Mr. Gorbachev arrives in Beijing.
In Beijing in February, Mr. Shevardnadze proposed that the Soviet Union and China both reduce ''offensive components'' of their forces along the border, limit military exercises and exchange monitoring teams to build confidence. 
Moscow has also prevailed on Vietnam to promise the removal of its forces from Cambodia by September, while hinting flexibility on a formula for the future of Cambodia, one issue awaiting the leaders in Beijing.
Through all of this, the Chinese have been careful to assure that the meeting does not spook Japan or the United States, both now far more important trading partners with Beijing than the Soviet Union. 
About the time Mr. Gorbachev heads for home after a stopover in Shanghai, a flotilla of American warships is due to steam into Shanghai harbor.
The Soviets, for their part, disavow any attempt to alienate China's affections toward the West. 
''The policy of the triangle belongs to the 20th century,'' said Mr. Myasnikov, ''and it exits with this century.''
 
A CYCLE OF TRUST AND DISTRUST
Since China came under Communist rule in 1949, Chinese-Soviet relations have gone through a cycle of friendship, growing mistrust, border fighting and, now, renewed warmth. 
Here is a history.
 
1949-1954: Close cooperation.  China takes the Soviet Union as the model for reorganizing its society, with aid and advice from Moscow. 
The first meeting between Khrushchev and Mao, in 1954, is a high point. 
But the Soviets' condescending attitude toward the Chinese plants seeds of resentment.
 
1956-1966: Growing rift.  Khrushchev's de-Stalinization collides with Mao's personality cult. 
They clash over Moscow's claim of pre-eminence in world Communism, and later Mao derides Brezhnev's quest for detente with the United States. 
Mao and Khrushchev meet for the last time in 1959. 
In 1963, talks on Chinese-Soviet relations break off, and Soviet aid is halted.
 
1967-1979: Open estrangement.  In 1967, ambassadors are withdrawn. 
In 1968, China condemns the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia. 
In 1969, Soviet and Chinese troops clash along the border. 
In 1972, China invites President Nixon visit and reopens ties to Japan. 
In 1979, China fights a border war with Vietnam, a Soviet ally.
 
1982-1989: Efforts to reconcile.  In the early 1980's, Soviet peace overtures run up against China's declaration of three obstacles: the Soviet Union's presence in Afghanistan, its troops along the Chinese border and its support for the Vietnamese in Cambodia. 
But gradually, steps are taken toward warmer relations: two trade agreements; Chinese acceptance of a Soviet proposal for a summit meeting if Moscow helped end the Cambodian conflict, and talks on the border dispute. 
In February 1989, they agree to the summit meeting in Beijing.
