
A UNIVERSAL joke in socialist countries is that employment in state-owned companies is a matter of make-believe: "We pretend to work, and they pretend to pay us."
In China, this game is carried to extremes. 
Employees in state-owned companies receive only about $30 a month, and some quip that they don't even deserve that much, what with late arrivals, tea breaks, lunch breaks and early departures.
But these days the situation is becoming less humorous: The state sector is losing ever-increasing amounts of money, to the consternation of the hard-liners who run the country.
One-third of state-owned companies are losing money, another third earn negligible profits, and only a third earn any money for the state. 
The total losses in the state sector doubled in the first nine months of this year, compared with the same period of last year.
This is helping to provoke a fiscal crisis, both because there are fewer profitable enterprises to hand over earnings to the state and because there are more failing enterprises to subsidize. 
In China, inefficient companies are subsidized because of the fear that if they closed, disgruntled workers would foment unrest.
"We should waste no time or effort in boosting the economy," Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader, said early this month. 
"Without economic growth it would be difficult to maintain political stabilityI."
The crisis in the state sector is, paradoxically, perhaps one of the most important forces left for reform here. 
The hard-liners, fearful that they will be blamed for the economic slump, already have eased up on their initially tough economic policy. 
The leadership has relaxed its retrenchment policy and ended attacks on collective and private businesses.
"They are terrified of a recession," said a Chinese businessman. 
"They are becoming a lot more flexible than they used to be, because they want practical measures to get the economy going. 
They know that's the only way they'll get popular support and survive in office."
Provincial leaders, showing unusual gumption, are said to be rebelling against the central government's plans to make them hand over more money. 
And the shortage of money has driven the leadership to a course of action it had long shied away from: raising prices for necessities such as coal, sugar and even bus fares.
Ordinary people are muttering, but so far there have been no major protests.
"Everybody's angry about the price increases," said a middle-age woman as she returned from the market. 
"But there's nothing we can do but complain to each other."
Some Chinese intellectuals chuckle that such price rises are terrific. 
On the one hand, they make the economy a bit more rational by bringing price levels closer to the market. 
On the other hand, they cause widespread indignation at the central planners who now dominate the Government. 
When change comes, these Chinese say, it will be all the faster because central planning is being so thoroughly discredited.
Over all, the economy is showing signs of recovery. 
Industrial production in October was 12.7 percent higher than it was in October 1989 -- the best performance in more than 18 months.
But most of this resurgence is coming not from the state sector but from other parts of the economy. 
In September, the last full month for which figures are available, the state sector enjoyed a growth rate of only 3 percent, while collectives (mostly in rural areas) grew at 9.4 percent and private companies and joint ventures soared at a 57.7 percent growth rate.
"The most interesting thing about the economy is that for all the favoritism shown to the state sector, it's been greatly outperformed by rural enterprises," said a Western economist in Beijing.
That leads to what may be the lesson of the Chinese experiment that is most relevant to other socialist countries. 
China's economic restructuring has lasted much longer and in most cases gone further than the economic changes in Eastern Europe, and it has achieved breathtaking results -- per capita incomes have approximately doubled since the process began at the end of 1978.
But the most glittering parts of this massive accomplishment were supplied by the non-state sector: in private agriculture, private business, and especially in rural collective enterprises. 
All the experiments and changes have not enabled state companies to become more profitable.
"China has made virtually no progress toward systematically putting the state sector on some kind of legal, independent basis, as they had intended to," said Barry Naughton, a specialist in the Chinese economy at the University of California at San Diego. 
But he added that he was not as critical of China's state sector as many Chinese economists are, and that part of their difficulties are simply the natural result of a cyclical downturn.
The Government is hoping to save its state sector through what it bills as a "reform" program. 
Among the elements are the merger of failing companies into healthy ones to create enormous conglomerates, and a more rigorous tax system, so that tax obligations would be a matter of law and not of negotiation.
The southern city of Shenzhen is pioneering the auction of Government enterprises to anyone with the cash and inclination to take them over. 
And both Shenzhen and Shanghai are competing to be the first to open a modernized stock exchange, in the hope that stock in state enterprises can be sold to shareholders.
A couple of years ago, some Chinese officials hoped to get rid of most of the state sector. 
They never used the term privatization, but rather a variety of euphemisms that amounted to much the same thing. 
These days, however, "ownership reform" is ideologically impossible on any large scale, and even share ownership is now intended to supplement rather than supplant state ownership.
That is the nub of the problem, many Chinese officials complain. 
They say that tinkering with state ownership will not succeed, so the Government should scrap the system altogether. 
Their advice to Eastern European countries now considering what to do with inefficient state sectors is not to copy Chinese experiments, but to try to dump the companies on anyone who will take them.
"Most people know that state ownership is the root of the problem," said a Chinese economist, "but for now, it's ideologically impossible to do anything about it."
