
DENG XIAOPING gave up his last office in the Communist Party last week, but it remains to be seen whether he will give up power. 
Mr. Deng's authority has come not from his titles, but from his eminence and from the Confucian-style respect that other leaders give him. 
The 85-year-old Mr. Deng has not surrendered this status with his job as chairman of the party's Central Military Commission.
Power in China has never been so dependent on titles as in the West. 
The Empress Dowager Ci Xi ruled China at the turn of the century, even though the Emperor should have been in charge. 
When the Emperor made a move, Ci Xi had him imprisoned and his followers executed.
''Imagine what it would be like if every time George Bush wanted to make a decision, he had to consult and get approval from Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon,'' a Chinese intellectual said recently. 
''That's the problem in China today.''
Yet these shackles on leaders, binding them to consult their elders, are cultural ones, and they constrain all sides.
Even if Mr. Deng wanted to withdraw from all decision-making once and for all, it would be difficult. 
Inevitably, he will be consulted, for he is China's patriarch. 
Officials unhappy with the leadership are likely to pass on their complaints to Mr. Deng, in the knowledge that so long as he lives he remains the ultimate arbiter of disputes. 
And if Mr. Deng disagrees with the way the country is being run, he will probably speak out, and his successors will probably feel an obligation to obey.
Mr. Deng's departure from the party's commission is only the latest step in his gradual retirement. 
The major move came in 1987, when he left the Politburo and Central Committee. 
Now he has only one post -chairman of the Government's Central Military Commission, essentially the same as the party commission. 
He said that he would resign from that job next spring.
The retirement from the Politburo was a calculated one, intended to force the resignation of other elderly colleagues of his generation. 
The resignation from the commission was equally calculated. 
It enabled Mr. Deng to install Jiang Zemin, his intended heir as paramount leader, as the top military leader. 
This was a major accomplishment, for Mr. Jiang had no army experience.
Thus the shuffle may have more meaning for Mr. Jiang than for Mr. Deng. Mr. Jiang will be in a better position to build a national base, which he lacks, having become the national party leader only in June. 
Previously, the 63-year-old Mr. Jiang was the party boss of Shanghai.
Mr. Jiang will have to tread carefully. 
One possible source of rivalry, particularly after Mr. Deng dies, is President Yang Shangkun and his family. 
Mr. Yang was promoted to first vice chairman of the military commission, and his brother, Yang Baibing, was installed as the commission's secretary general as well as elevated to the Central Committee's secretariat. 
So long as Mr. Deng lives, he can protect Mr. Jiang, but after that anything might happen.
Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, with his intended heir, Jiang Zemin, at a Central Committee session last week (Associated Press)
