
In East Asia no less than anywhere else, the collapse of the Soviet Union and Communism was supposed to lead to vast new influence for Japan, the region's economic superpower. 
But recent months have shown, instead, just how deeply Japan remains mired in the debates and anxieties of the past.
At least to its neighbors, the new Japan looks suspiciously like the old Japan. 
And in Japanese eyes, Asia is still a place for caution, if not paralysis. 
"The cold war is at an end, but Japanese don't really know how to disengage from it," said Terumasa Nakanishi, professor of international relations at the University of Shizuoka. 
"We lack any kind of national consensus on how to act."
Some of Japan's self-confidence has been deflated, in any case, by its poor economic performance recently. 
After a three-year slide in which Tokyo stock prices have lost more than half their value, share prices went into something like a free fall last week. 
Despite a rebound Friday, fears persist that the current mild recession could deepen and drag down the world economy. 
Privately, Japanese leaders say this may be a bad time for bold actions, especially costly ones.
Toward Russia, for example, financial concerns are an impediment to direct Japanese participation in an economic bailout. 
But the main concern here is still political. 
The same dispute over four tiny islands in the Kurile chain that has blocked improvement of relations since the end of World War II, when the Soviet Union seized them, has resisted all recent attempts at a settlement. 
Though negligible in strategic value, the islands are a powerful symbol of past unresolved grievances.
Japanese politicians, especially nationalists, say the final chapter of the country's climb back to legitimacy after defeat cannot be written until the islands are returned. 
But diplomats have begun reluctantly to conclude that with Russian nationalism flaring anew in Siberia, President Boris N. Yeltsin may find it more difficult to give up the islands than even Mikhail S. Gorbachev did.
The practical effect is that Japan continues to be a reluctant partner in the Western scramble to assemble a package of assistance to help Mr. Yeltsin out of his economic problems. 
The $24 billion aid package announced 10 days ago by the United States and Germany made Japan decidedly uncomfortable. 
Japanese diplomats said it was inappropriate to announce the package because all the details had not been worked out, and because a premature announcement might send the wrong signal to the Russians: that they had the money in hand and could ease up on austerity.
 
'Political Constraints'
Japanese leaders said that although Tokyo would join multilateral efforts to stabilize the ruble, Japan would not increase its own aid beyond what it announced last year after the failed coup against Mr. Gorbachev. "We face political constraints," said Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata.
There has also long been talk here of investing in the exploration of natural gas and oil in eastern Russia or other parts of what was the Soviet Union. 
But it remains just talk. 
Japanese industrialists, cautious in normal times, are not about to invest during the current recession in a resource for which there may not be a need until well into the 21st century. 
They also look to the Government for insurance or guarantees, and Japanese leaders are not ready to cooperate until the territorial issues are resolved.
But Russia is not the only place over which Japan is showing caution. 
Many people had expected Tokyo to play a role in rebuilding Cambodia. 
Indeed, Yasushi Akashi, a United Nations diplomat who heads the peacekeeping efforts there, expects his country to pay for at least one-third of the cost of stationing troops. 
But for now it looks as if Japan will not send its own troops, despite the best efforts of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa. 
As in the Persian Gulf war last year, Japan will help foot the bill without putting its people on the line.
The Cambodians say they would like Japanese troops, if only in a logistical role, but other Asian nations are less sure. 
Last week, Jiang Zemin, the Chinese Communist Party General Secretary, visited Japan and, in diplomatic language, recommended caution. 
The idea of Japanese troops going overseas for the first time since World War II was a "sensitive" issue for "well-known reasons," he said.
If Japanese officials were disappointed that Mr. Jiang was not warmer to Japan's playing a more robust role in the region, Japanese relations with other Asian countries are also troubled. 
A growing trade imbalance with South Korea is rankling President Roh Tae Woo and other leaders in Seoul. 
And three years of intensive efforts to improve ties with South Korea have resulted in more tensions than ever, this time over Japan's dismissal of claims for compensation by South Korean women who say they were kidnapped from their communities and forced to become sex slaves for Japanese front-line troops during the war.
Because it continues to be dogged by the past, Japan has had a hard time implementing its pledge to join a "global partnership" with Washington to combat poverty and tyranny in the world. 
Not only does Japan refuse to criticize China on human rights, but it has also looked the other way when Burma and Thailand suppressed their democratic stirrings.
Japan had pinned a lot of its hopes for a new order in Asia on a long-planned visit by Emperor Akihito to China later this year. 
But because of lingering Korean and Chinese resentments, the visit is now uncertain. 
What was to have been a symbol of the progress Tokyo had made in being accepted has thus instead become a victim of the lingering doubts in Japan's own backyard.
