
The Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, said today that the army's suppression of the democracy movement in early June, in which hundreds of people were killed, was not a ''tragedy,'' and he refused to rule out more death sentences for the movement's leaders.
In a news conference broadcast live on the national television, Mr. Jiang sounded a hard line. 
A 63-year-old technocrat who has been named by Deng Xiaoping to succeed Mr. Deng as senior leader, Mr. Jiang was formally designated General Secretary of the party in late June, and this was his first meeting with reporters since then.
When an Italian reporter asked Mr. Jiang whether the ''the Tiananmen tragedy'' could have been avoided, the party leader responded: ''First, I'd like to correct you in your use of the word tragedy. 
We do not believe that there was any tragedy in Tiananmen Square. 
What actually happened was a counterrevolutionary rebellion aimed at opposing the leadership of the Communist Party and overthrowing the socialist system.''
'Motivated by Discontent'
Mr. Jiang refused to say how many people were arrested or executed in the crackdown after the suppression of the democracy movement, and he said he could not rule out further death sentences because that would be political intervention in the judicial process. 
He said all cases would be handled according to law.
Asked for details of arrests and executions, Mr. Jiang said that aside from a small number of leaders, ''The great majority of students who took part in demonstrations or hunger strikes were motivated by discontent or by concern about corruption, and we can understand that.
''Our policy toward the students is to try to educate them and unite them,'' he added. 
''I have said on many occasions recently that youth are the future and the hope of the country.''
Among the Chinese who listened on radios and watched on television, the question that seemed to resonate most deeply came from a French journalist who told Mr. Jiang of a Chinese friend, a woman who was wounded in Tiananmen Square and then arrested and sent to a prison farm where she was raped three times in her first week. 
Was this the way to educate and unite the hope of the country, the journalist asked.
 
Belittles 'Fairy Tales'
Mr. Jiang emphasized again that the party had dealt leniently with most students, and he warned against believing ''fairy tales from the Arabian Nights.''
A former Mayor and party leader from Shanghai, Mr. Jiang reasserted that China would not change its open-door and economic reform policies.
By televising the full news conference, the leadership risked embarrassing itself and exposing the Chinese audience to foreign skepticism about the official account of the repression. 
But most of the 19 questions were tame, and the moderator called on few Western journalists. 
Only one American was allowed to raise a question.
 
Zhao's Fate Still Unknown
The Politburo members criticized the former party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, several times. 
They said he committed the mistake of supporting the student and worker turmoil and splitting the party. 
Mr. Jiang said that investigations of Mr. Zhao are continuing but that the party was taking a ''down to earth'' attitude toward its former leader. 
That wording, and the announcement that Mr. Zhao was being paid his salary and leading a comfortable life, seemed to suggest that Mr. Zhao would not face criminal charges of trying to overthrow the Government.
Mr. Jiang confirmed that the party Central Committee was planning a session soon to discuss economic issues in coming years, but he did not say whether Mr. Zhao's fate would be decided at the meeting, as has been expected. 
He said the leadership had not decided on when to convene the Central Committee.
In what may be a signal that Mr. Deng will retire from his last remaining official position, chairman of the Central Military Commission, Mr. Jiang said that Mr. Deng was eager to withdraw but that it would be up to party and Government organizations to decide when he could retire.
