
A leader of the Chinese student movement that was crushed in Tiananmen Square in June said here today that she was able to avoid arrest for 10 months thanks to the help, protection and encouragement of ordinary Chinese citizens.
The student, Chai Ling, a 23-year-old psychology major who played a central role in the democracy movement, and her 24-year-old husband, Feng Congde, who is also on the Beijing Government's list of 21 ''most wanted,'' said they were finally able to slip out of China two weeks ago.
In their first interview since arriving in France, where they have requested political asylum, the couple called on the West to adopt tougher sanctions against China. 
They said it was also important to keep the Chinese people informed about events abroad.
Miss Chai said a ship that will soon be used for broadcasting news into China from off-shore international waters would bring great encouragement. 
The ship, the Goddess of Democracy, set sail from the French port of La Rochelle on March 17 with several exiled Chinese dissidents on board.
 
Secret Groups Aid Dissidents
Beijing was rebuffed this week when it asked France to outlaw A Boat For Democracy, the foundation that is financing the broadcast ship. 
China also formally protested the French Government's decision to allow Miss Chai and her husband into this country. 
Their request for asylum is under consideration.
Miss Chai said she went into hiding immediately after the Tiananmen Square movement was crushed, staying first in Beijing and then moving to places she refused to identify. 
''All this time, I had the support of lots of people,'' she said. 
''People who had their own problems of family and work to worry about, but who helped and protected us with their own resources.''
She said secret organizations sprung up after June to help the dissidents, while those who hid her always knew her identity and assumed the risks. 
She said the same people helped her and Mr. Feng to leave the country, although she would not disclose how they escaped or where they first arrived.
Speaking in Chinese through a French interpreter, Miss Chai said her worst moment was when she thought her husband had been captured. 
''My friends said I had to move places, but I felt very bad,'' she said. 
''I thought I would never see him again. 
If at that moment someone from security had found me, I would not have had the strength to react. 
I saw the limit of my will.''
 
'We Did Not Go Far Enough'
After one week, she said, she learned that Mr. Feng was safe, but she did not see him again for four months. 
She said that occasionally she was accompanied by other fugitive students and dissidents, but that ''most of the time I was hidden alone and I had lots of time to reflect on what happened in Tiananmen Square.''
''Today my feeling is that I am not 100 percent satisfied with what we did,'' she said. 
''We did not go far enough, take our actions far enough. 
For example, we were not in contact with people abroad and had little understanding of the impact we had. 
But I think that, after 40 years of repression, this was the most pacific and reasonable revolt imaginable.''
She is believed to have been in charge of protests in Tiananmen Square during the final days of the movement, but she was unable to cast much light on the continuing debate over how many people died when the army tanks and troops moved in shortly before dawn on June 4.
''I was in the center of the square, but all around I heard shots being fired and ambulance sirens,'' she said in response to a question noting that the Chinese authorities assert no one died in the square. 
''We sent out observers and some came back with blood stains on their clothes.''
 
Darkness of Tiananmen Square
Mr. Feng said that since all lights were switched off in the square, it was difficult to know what was happening. 
''Those who were in the square can only testify to what they saw around them,'' he said. 
''I don't think even the army or the Communist Party know how many people died.''
It is now generally accepted that most of the killings in the crackdown took place not in the square but on the north side, along the Avenue of Eternal Peace, and in other parts of the city.
Miss Chai said that she would continue the fight to emancipate China, but that first she needed time to adjust. 
''I feel very disturbed,'' she said. 
''Every time I close my eyes, I see nightmarish scenes that prevent me from sleeping. 
I feel the souls of the dead are seeking my help. 
I need time to recover.''
She said she was helped by ordinary Chinese citizens. 
(The New York Times/Alan Riding)
