
Five months after martial law was lifted here, a sullen calm has returned to the narrow lanes of this holy city. 
But Chinese marksmen are still perched on the roofs of buildings overlooking the central square, and many Tibetans suspect that their guns have not been silenced for long.
Here among the snow-swept peaks and glacier-fed rivers to the north of Mount Everest, nationalism is forging a significant challenge to the Communist leaders 1,600 miles away in Beijing. 
This is Deng Xiaoping's Lithuania, and some fear it will become his Beirut - except that Tibet is more vast, amounting to two-thirds the size of Western Europe. 
If China ever crumbles, Tibet is likely to be the first piece to break off, with reverberations across Asia.
A weeklong visit to Tibet - one of the first permitted by a foreign journalist since martial law was lifted May 1 -found no evidence of widespread or serious unrest in the majority rural population, for most peasants and nomads absorb themselves not in politics but in the practical matters of their barley and yaks.
Yet in Lhasa, the discontent and repression seem pervasive in the wake of martial law, which was declared after widespread protests in 1987. 
The mood suggests a dangerous cascade of bitterness that threatens to overwhelm the land that inspired the notion of Shangri-La.
 
'We Hate China'
''Everybody wants independence and the return of the Dalai Lama,'' a well-educated Tibetan in his 30's whispered late one evening, after ducking into a building near Jokhang Temple to take refuge from police spies. 
''We hate China and what it has done.''
He spoke in a mixture of terror and fury, and he extended his arms as if handcuffed to suggest what he thought would happen if he were caught. 
A moment later he fled in fright when a jeep pulled up outside and someone shined a flashlight through the window.
While the man was more outspoken than most, he seemed to represent the antagonisms and distrust that are nearly overflowing in Lhasa. 
While the police and troop presence has been reduced since the end of martial law, anti-Chinese protests continue on a small scale and the authorities acknowledge that they face a long-term struggle to subdue what they describe as ''a tiny handful of separatists.''
 
Violent Suppression And Rising Distrust
Tibet, now an autonomous region, was ''invaded'' or ''liberated'' by Chinese troops in 1950 - the term depends on the speaker. 
The Dalai Lama was the supreme figure in a theocratic Government, and even though he fled to India in 1959 after an abortive uprising, his influence is everywhere. 
After his flight China consolidated its hold on Tibet, which had been claimed by all Chinese governments since the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, although the western two-thirds of Tibet had been effectively independent since 1912.
In the early and mid-1980's, a conciliatory policy by the Chinese authorities seemed to be winning results, and tensions eased in Tibet. 
But protests beginning in 1987 were violently suppressed, with the police firing on crowds of demonstrators around the Jokhang Temple, and many Tibetans say that since then discontent has risen dangerously.
The Chinese authorities will face a test next Thursday, the third anniversary of the beginning of the recent wave of unrest. 
Posters already have gone up on brick walls around town, calling for demonstrations on that day or on Oct. 
1, China's national day.
Word about the proposed protests is whispered from ear to ear among Tibetans who mingle in the narrow lanes around the Jokhang Temple, but no one knows if people will take the risk and respond.
There have been a few minor incidents in recent months. 
About a dozen monks and nuns were arrested last month during a peaceful protest at the Dalai Lama's old summer residence near Lhasa, and about six more were seized on Sept. 
14 when they marched around the Jokhang Temple and chanted pro-independence slogans.
 
Harsher Policies After Martial Law
''Those who try to split the motherland will, if they dare to violate the Constitution and laws, surely be opposed by the broad masses,'' said Mao Rubai, the vice chairman of Tibet's Government. 
He is a member of the Han race, which accounts for 93 percent of all Chinese, while the Tibetan people are of Mongolian stock.
There are some signs of a tougher policy since the end of martial law, including the appointment on May 31 of a new chairman of Tibet's Government, Gyaincain Norbu, a law-and-order man with long experience in the courts and prosecutors' offices.
By official count, there are a few more than 100 people now imprisoned for engaging in illegal separatist activities. 
But most independent estimates are higher.
Officials deny that those imprisoned have been tortured, but most Tibetans say that physical abuse is routine. 
The six people arrested on Sept. 
14 were briefly taken into a police station near the Jokhang Temple, and when they were led out 10 minutes later to be bused away, they were already said to have been beaten.
A comprehensive report earlier this year by Asia Watch, an American human-rights organization, detailed treatment of prisoners that included attacks by trained dogs, assaults with electric cattle prods, suspension by ropes, scalding with boiling water and rapes of nuns.
 
Tibetans Express Views on China
Official Chinese publications have occasionally written about Tibetan prisons - describing them as so idyllic that offenders are almost sad to leave - but the authorities refused repeated requests to visit a prison on this trip.
But Gong Liefu, the deputy director of Tibet's Foreign Affairs Office, said that it was illegal for a foreign journalist to ask people whether they favored independence, and that it might be illegal for Tibetans to respond in the affirmative.
Nevertheless, Tibetans made their views known. 
At dusk, as shops closed and most Chinese police withdrew from the streets, they sometimes approached a foreign reporter to speak their mind. 
And even in officially arranged interviews, Tibetans sometimes refused to go along with the official line.
In the heart of the Jokhang Temple, as pilgrims kowtowed in the dust not far away, a senior monk named Tudeng Renqing criticized the expulsion from the temple of eight monks who had taken part in a protest. 
In the presence of about 10 people, including Han Chinese officials, he was then asked for his views about independence, and a silence settled over the room as he paused and thought for several minutes.
''From a religious point of view,'' he finally responded delicately, ''I'd like all believers as well as the general population to act peacefully.''
A reporter suggested that in the circumstances, that sounded like an endorsement of peaceful efforts for independence. 
The lama laughed and beamed.
 
Beijing's Backers Offer Reasons
A yearning for independence is common in Lhasa, but it is not universal. 
Some Tibetans insist that independence would be a disaster for the region's development and assert that only a tiny fraction of young people oppose links with the ''motherland.''
Most of the top positions in the Government administration are held by such Tibetans, who point to improved health care and rising prosperity under Chinese rule.
In addition, there seems to be a broad stratum of urban Tibetans who recognize the improvements but are also resentful of Chinese domination. 
They are moderately discontented, but see little alternative to Chinese rule and in any case are afraid of getting in trouble if they oppose the regime.
''We don't thnk about politics,'' said a Tibetan university student over a beer in a privately owned bar. 
''We don't dare. 
We just study.''
Darchi, a 40-year-old peasant interviewed at random as he harvested his barley in a mud-brick village near the city of Shigatse, said: ''We don't want independence. 
Before we had a difficult time and now life is getting better. 
I want to buy a television, and then I can sit back and drink barley beer and watch TV.''
Yet even those, like Mr. Darchi, who are wary of independence adore the Dalai Lama. 
Most homes and temples have photos of the Dalai Lama on the wall, and ordinary people are moved nearly to tears as they touch a Dalai Lama photo to their head when it is given to them.
 
Failing Economy Under China's Rule
As China's leaders try to win over the Tibetan population and earn the appreciation of local residents, their challenge is compounded by economic difficulties. 
Despite enormous subsidies from Beijing - some of which go to pay the salaries of Han Chinese officials rather than to benefit local Tibetans - industry in Tibet has grown by only about 6 percent per year over the last decade, compared with about 12 percent annually in the rest of the country.
Officials concede that the economic gap between Tibet and coastal China is growing, not diminishing, and that adds to the perception that the Chinese authorities are mismanaging the local economy.
Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader, visited Tibet in July and pledged even greater subsidies over the next decade to build the local economic base. 
But the region's greatest economic resource, tourism, may not be exploited to the full because of fears that large numbers of individual tourists could help provoke further unrest. 
Ngaphu Rinchen, the director of tourism in Tibet, said that while visits by tour groups would be expanded, it would be ''difficult'' to allow individual tourists to return within the next two or three years.
In Tibet all those problems tend to overlay and reinforce the main gulf in the society: that which separates Tibetans and Han Chinese. 
While Chinese complain that Tibetans are lazy and ungrateful, and more likely to show hospitality to a foreigner on the street than to a longtime Chinese colleague, the Tibetans resent what they regard as a superior attitude and colonial policy on the part of the Chinese.
''Life has settled a bit since the lifting of martial law, but it's still tense,'' said a Tibetan in his 20's who has spent the last dozen years in Lhasa. 
''This is a volcano, and someday it will explode.''
