
Tibetan exiles in Nepal, fearful that their country of refuge will grow more dependent on China because of an Indian economic blockade, say they are worried about their future in this land, where they are prohibited from taking part in anti-Chinese activities.
Some Tibetans are also concerned that their role in revitalizing Buddhism in Nepal, the world's only Hindu kingdom, may come in for unwelcome scrutiny. 
There are thought to be about 14,000 Tibetan refugees in Nepal, most of them the families of people who fled here from Lhasa in 1959, when the Chinese suppressed a revolt.
A refugee who works with newcomers arriving in Katmandu from Nepal's border with Tibet said immigration officials have been tightening controls as the country begins to feel the effects of India's closing of most of Nepal's southern trade routes.
This aid worker, who asked not to be named, said that Tibetans who reached a Nepali-Chinese border town, Kodari, were given visas for 12 months until about a year ago, when the validity was reduced to three months.
Recently, he said, Tibetans were being told they could stay only 30 days. 
Most Tibetans, who now travel legally on Chinese exit permits and passports, want to visit the Indian town of Dharmsala, where their exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, is based. 
The 30-day limit poses problems for these visitors, who travel a circuitous overland route to India and back.
Radhe Bista, a spokesman for the Nepalese Government, said in an interview that there was no blanket 30-day regulation covering visas for Tibetans, who are regarded as Chinese citizens. 
He said that the immigration officials at Kodari, the only land border crossing, have discretion in granting entry.
Mr. Bista said there was no intention of curbing the activities of Tibetan refugees, who have enjoyed wide freedoms to move about and engage in business. 
Tibetans are credited with starting and building an export trade in woolen and cotton carpets, which is earning much-needed hard currency for Katmandu. 
They also dominate the manufacture and sale of handicrafts to tourists, Nepalese say.
 
Indian Embargo
At the Tibetan refugee center of Jawalakhel, south of Katmandu, where many carpets are made for export, exiles said that their business was suffering from the inability to get raw wool and cotton because of the Indian embargo, which began on March 23. 
India says it will allow only essential supplies to enter Nepal.
Nepalese and Tibetans say that most exports are also blocked because of the trade blockade and the Indian decision to stop supplying Nepal with petroleum products needed to transport the goods to Calcutta port by trucks.
The Tibetans' role in advancing the cause of Buddhism in Nepal is just beginning to be noticed, Nepalese and Tibetans say. 
The Tibetan Buddhists do not proselytize. 
But they are devout people who give a large part of their earnings to the building of monasteries and temples, to which Nepalese also come to study and worship.
Nepal has two distinct Buddhist communities. 
The Newaris, original settlers of the Katmandu Valley, are often Buddhist or practice a combination of Hinduism and Buddhism. 
On the Nepal-Tibetan border, there are other Buddhists who follow Tibetan schools of Buddhist teachings.
