
The Dalai Lama appealed today to Deng Xiaoping, the senior Chinese leader, to use his influence to lift martial law in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa.
In a letter delivered to the Chinese Embassy by his office here, the Dalai Lama, spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhists, also renewed his call to Beijing for talks on Tibet.
Beijing declared martial law in Lhasa on Tuesday, sending in thousands of troops to restore order after three days of anti-Chinese protests described as the worst unrest since an uprising in March 1959. 
By official count, 16 people have been killed in the unrest; Tibetans say the toll is higher, according to Western travelers.
The anniversary of the 1959 uprising was observed today, but the Dalai Lama, who is in his exile headquarters in the Indian hill town of Dharmsala, did not come to New Delhi to take part in protests mounted by Tibetans. 
Beijing crushed the 1959 revolt and ultimately declared Tibet an integral part of China, leading to the Dalai Lama's flight from the country.
 
'Chinese Atrocities'
Today, several hundred exiles demonstrated at India Gate, about a mile from Parliament, carrying placards that denounced ''Chinese atrocities'' and called for Tibetan independence.
The demonstrators, many belonging to youth and women's groups impatient with the lower-keyed efforts of the Dalai Lama and his willingness to talk with Beijing, burned a Chinese flag and an effigy of Li Peng, the Chinese Prime Minister.
The Dalai Lama suggested negotiating with China in a speech last September to the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France. 
He proposed talks in Geneva in January of this year. 
The Chinese did not accept the invitation.
Tashi Wangdi, the Dalai Lama's spokesman and a member of his exile cabinet, said today that there have been several meetings here between the Chinese Embassy and the Tibetans to discuss this and other issues. 
But he added that Beijing has major objections to be overcome before formal talks can open.
Mr. Wangdi said the Chinese objected to the composition of the team the Dalai Lama had proposed sending to formal talks. 
The Chinese also say that the Dalai Lama's suggestion that Tibet become an associated state of China - it is now called an autonomous region - was unacceptable.
In his letter to Mr. Deng today, the Dalai Lama said he hoped ''the Chinese leadership will have the wisdom to realize the true feelings of the Tibetan people and the strength and courage to rectify past mistakes.''
 
REPORTS OF NEW ARRESTS
BEIJING, March 10 (AP) - Official Chinese reports said today that Tibetans peacefully celebrated the ''30th anniversary of democratic reforms in Tibet'' - Beijing's characterization of the 1959 uprising. 
But Tibetans reached by telephone spoke of large-scale roundups and pervasive fear in Lhasa.
''There are new arrests,'' a woman said. 
''There are many, but we don't know how many.''
A man came on the line and said: ''Don't talk a long time. 
There are a lot of police. 
We can't talk long.''
China's nightly news said martial law stopped a riot planned for today in the capital. 
State television said more than 30 Tibetan ''rioters'' surrendered to police and admitted to taking part in disturbances this week in Lhasa.
