
The first Tibetans to leave Lhasa for Nepal since the Chinese imposed martial law in the city a month ago say several weeks of growing public protests, culminating in attacks on Chinese residents and shops, led to Beijing's action.
In a series of demonstrations in late February and early March, Tibetan nationalist flags were unfurled and emotional crowds chanted ''Independence!
Independence!'' a monk among the 42 Tibetans said in an interview. 
Mobs set Chinese businesses on fire, he said.
The recently arrived Tibetans, including children, traveled overland on Chinese exit permits allowing them to visit relatives in Nepal. 
They left Lhasa two weeks ago and reached Katmandu last week.
Since the early 1980's, China has allowed international travel to and from Lhasa through the Nepalese border town of Kodari. 
Until the recent imposition of martial law, tourists were also able to fly between Katmandu and Lhasa. 
Travel agents here say they have been told that tourist flights may resume as early as Saturday. 
This may indicate that martial law will soon be lifted.
The Tibetan monk, who asked that his name not be used to protect his family and religious colleagues in Tibet, said public disaffection in Tibet, which China formally absorbed after the Communist revolution in 1949, entered a new phase in December.
 
A Call to Demonstrate
Other Tibetans in the group have given Tibetan exiles here similar accounts of recent events.
The monk, a follower of the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, said signs began to appear during the night in Lhasa in early December, urging Tibetans to come out on Dec. 
10, International Human Rights Day. 
When protests materialized within a few days, a 31-year-old monk who tried to parade through the streets with a Tibetan flag was intercepted by the Chinese police, who tried to wrench the flag from his hands before finally firing, killing him.
When students came out on Dec. 
18 to demand greater human rights for Tibetans, the monk said, Chinese officials made a major effort to talk with them about their grievances. 
The officials spent more than six hours with the students, lecturing them on loyalty. 
There were no arrests.
On Feb. 
7, the eve of the Tibetan New Year, posters went up overnight in Lhasa asking every family to send one member to a demonstration the next day at the Jokhang Monastery, the focal point of city life. 
The monk said as many as 10,000 people went to hang khatas, white ceremonial scarves that are a sign of honor, on a Tibetan flag that was unfurled there.
After March 1, the monk said, the protests became increasingly regular, and larger. 
In early March, Tibetans marked the anniversary of the unsuccessful 1959 revolt against the Chinese, after which the Dalai Lama went into exile in India.
 
Protesters Throw Stones
On March 5, thousands were in the streets, the monk said, and they threw stones at the police, who fired tear gas and then bullets at the crowd.
Tibetans say 104 bodies were found that day by relatives and friends.
The monk said foreign tourists -''especially backpackers,'' he added through an exile interpreter - taught Tibetans how to dip cloths in water and breathe through them to mitigate the effects of tear gas, an act that infuriated the police.
On March 6 and 7, the monk said, enraged mobs, ''their spirit at its peak,'' began to attack Chinese residents of Lhasa and set fire to their shops and other businesses. 
At 4 P.M. on March 7, announcements were read all over Lhasa ordering people to go home. 
Tibetans say the announcements warned that anyone who tried to assemble again would be shot.
At midnight that night, martial law was officially declared.
Since then, the monk said, Tibetans have been required to buy daily permits to go out, even for shopping. 
People on bicycles passing Chinese policemen or troops have to stop and produce these permits or be pulled off the cycles.
