
AT the end of the world, where the Tibetan plateau suddenly teeters off a cliff in one direction and collides against snowcapped peaks in the other, the Xinsi Monastery looms unexpectedly from the golden wheat fields to preside over the landscape. 
The red-robed monks come bustling out, the dough on their hands an indication that they have been interrupted in their chores rather than their prayers, and they break into welcoming grins as magnificent as the scenery.
It is a scene from Tibet, more Tibetan than Tibet itself. 
Here there are no Chinese troops prowling in the background or Chinese tour leaders curtailing contacts with the monks.
This is Qinghai Province in the west of China, but it used to be the northeast part of Tibet until it fell under Chinese control centuries ago. 
The Tibetans regard Qinghai as part of Tibet, but the Chinese Government's restrictions on travel to Tibet do not apply here. 
Tourists are allowed into Tibet only as part of a costly organized tour -- although this can be a one-person tour -- while foreigners are free to fly to Xining, the provincial capital, from Beijing.
Qinghai -- pronounced ching-hi -- was opened to foreigners only in 1983, and it still is among the least visited parts of China. 
Only about 1,200 Americans go to the province each year, slightly fewer than visit Tibet, and the sight of a foreigner still turns heads even in Xining.
The single greatest splendor in Qinghai is the Kumbum Monastery, better known today by its Chinese name, Taer Si. 
Fifteen miles southwest of Xining, the Kumbum is a stunning collection of temples and compounds set against a hillside, the buildings all painted red and other bright colors, with pilgrims praying and spinning the large prayer wheels and prostrating on the ground. 
The monastery is as noteworthy for the Tibetan pilgrims who come to worship as for the architecture itself. 
When I visited in August, I came across a group of four sturdy young Tibetan men in bedraggled clothing.
We chatted for a bit in Chinese and they said they had come from their homes in Sichuan Province, by way of Lhasa. 
I asked how they had traveled. 
They looked puzzled.
"By foot," said the oldest of them, about 18 years old.
"How long have you been traveling?"
"Two years," the young man said. 
"But we'll be home in another six months."
The monastery was built in the last quarter of the 16th century on the instructions of the third Dalai Lama. 
The site is the birthplace of the founder of the Gelukpa order of Buddhism, Tsongkhapa. 
This was a center of learning -- one of the Tibetan Ivy League, so to speak -- for Tibetan and Mongolian monks, and at the time of the Communist revolution there were still 3,000 Tibetan monks. 
Now the Government has set a limit of 400 monks for the Kumbum, but this is not strictly enforced and there are about 500.
The most unusual sight in the monastery is the 50-foot-long carving made of yak butter. 
The workmanship may not be at the level of the Parthenon frieze, but there are elephants, flowers and religious figures, all in brightly colored deep relief. 
The carving is newly-sculptured each year.
XINING itself is of limited interest: a traditionally Chinese city of cement blocks whose hues are all shades of gray. 
The only important sight within the city is the Dongguan Mosque, which was built in the 14th century and is one of the largest mosques in China. 
The entrance arch is elegant and the plaza-like open space inside is picturesque. 
There is a large Muslim community in Xining -- the province was even ruled by a Muslim warlord immediately prior to the Communist revolution in 1949 -- and the mosque fills to capacity on Fridays for prayers.
Few people in Qinghai speak English, but if you have an evening free you might wander over to the English Corner on Sheng Li Road. 
This is where Chinese men and women gather, particularly on Sundays, to speak English to each other in a caliber ranging from a few words to fluency, and a genuine American is richly prized and quickly surrounded.
The best part about Qinghai is the Tibetan areas, and in general any road south or west will take you to Tibetan villages. 
The current Dalai Lama's native village, Takster, meaning Roaring Tiger, is apparently only about an hour or two by car from Xining, but the authorities told me that the area was closed to foreigners and refused to allow me to visit. 
Other foreigners have gone with impunity, however, and one may well be able to make arrangements with a taxi driver for a day trip. 
Foreign tourists who are caught in closed areas and who act surprised, innocent and apologetic are normally scolded and sent away. 
Occasionally a fine is negotiated, but normally there is no punishment.
One Tibetan area that is often recommended to tourists is Qinghai Lake, an immense body of water that is China's largest salt-water lake. 
Bird Island in the lake is supposed to be particularly beautiful and full of migratory birds in April and May. 
I didn't visit Bird Island, but I found Qinghai Lake itself about as interesting as one would expect a big salt lake to be.
THE highlight of my visit was simply a few days roaming the Tibetan villages around Qiapuqia, a town of about 30,000 in Gonghe County south of Qinghai Lake. 
Most of the townspeople are Han Chinese, but many of the nearby villages are Tibetan and the people are extremely welcoming.
"Uncle, are you a foreigner?" asked an eight-year-old girl who was startled to encounter me on a dirt path near her village. 
I explained in Chinese that I was a genuine foreigner. 
Since I was the first one she had ever seen, she led me to her home. 
Her family was enormously excited at my arrival, and pressed tea and bread on me, but the town was sufficiently remote that all they knew was that I was not Tibetan.
"Are you Han Chinese?" the grandmother asked me, after peering for several minutes at my face, which does not look in the least Chinese. 
I explained that no, I was an American. 
She nodded sagely, to show that she had heard of Americans, but I'm not sure she distinguished in her mind between Americans and Martians.
The best way to make friends in such areas -- in any Chinese village for that matter -- is to take a Polaroid camera. 
Few peasants own a camera, and if you can take some instant photographs and pass them around, the entire village will cluster around and observe in amazement, and peasants will compete to invite you into their homes. 
Of course, none of the villagers speak English, but sign language can be quite eloquent when necessary. 
If a non-Chinese speaker gets somewhere where sign language is insufficient, someone will get the school's English teacher to translate.
About 10 miles from Qiapuqia is the Xinsi, a Tibetan monastery that gets only a few foreign travelers a year. 
The path is not quite wide enough for a car, but it makes a nice all-day hike, or else you may be able to get a lift on a motorcycle.
There are about 100 monks at the monastery, ranging from 7 years old to the late 70's. 
The setting is spectacular: snowy mountains in the background, and an abyss and valley in the foreground. 
It really does seem to be the end of the world. 
The monks speak no English, and not much Chinese, but they were eager to show me around the many temples as well as the kitchens and living quarters. 
There are several courtyards and temples with large carved Buddhas. 
Each of the temples is surrounded by the familiar red prayer wheels.
I hiked back to Qiapuqia from the monastery in about six hours, stopping to talk to Tibetan villagers on the way, and found it an exhilarating walk. 
But one word of caution: the local police were aghast at my activities, because I was a journalist (as I had told everyone I had talked to), and later sent policemen to retrace my steps and interrogate everyone I had chatted with.
This was probably a special case that wouldn't affect an ordinary tourist, but it is a reminder that this is a sensitive region. 
The worst that can realistically happen to you is that you'll be fined and expelled, but it is possible to get local Tibetans in deep trouble if the authorities believe they are engaging in pro-independence activities. 
So avoid meeting in places like your hotel -- where local people may be questioned about why they are talking to a foreigner -- and be discreet in your conversations with Tibetans.
 
 
 
A REMOTE, LITTLE-VISITED AREA
Getting There
Air China has flights every Friday from Beijing to Xining and back, all seats economy class, for $133 each way. 
First class trains are also available, but the journey takes 44 hours from Beijing. 
If flights are full, it is possible to fly to Lanzhou, and take a train, bus or taxi for the half-day ride to Xining.
It is possible to travel from Qinghai to Tibet, by bus or by hitching rides on trucks, but this is technically illegal unless you have a permit to enter Tibet. 
In fact, youthful Westerners do this regularly, and despite occasional crackdowns the authorities seem to tolerate it most of the time. 
The trip, by bus or truck, takes a minimum of three days from Xining to Lhasa.
Even in the summer, Qinghai can be chilly because of the elevation -- Qiapuqia, for example, is more than 9,000 feet above sea level. 
But if you forget warm clothes, yak wool sweaters are available for about $25 in Xining. 
Winters are cold but tolerable, with temperatures below freezing but little snow.
 
Accommodations
The best hotel in Xining is the Qinghai Guesthouse, $32 a day for a double, and it is reasonably good, with a working bath in the slightly musty rooms, a television, and fair restaurants. 
Phone (971) 44-888. 
Wang Bingxi of the Qinghai Tourism Bureau, 42-721, can arrange to have you picked up at the airport for a fee. 
The second best hotel in Xining is the Xining Guesthouse, $15 a night for two, 215 Qiyi Road, phone 42-701.
A taxi to Kumbum Monastery costs about $9 round trip, including a wait of up to three hours at the site. 
The entrance fee at the monastery is $1.50, including a guide, or $1 without.
 
Excursions
Mr. Wang of the tourism bureau can arrange tours of various sites including Qinghai Lake and Gonghe County. 
A two- or three-day car trip taking in Gonghe County and coming back by Qinghai Lake would cost a bit less than $200 for the vehicle, if arranged through him. 
A taxi could probably be negotiated for significantly less, and the uncomfortable bus that runs daily to Gonghe costs about $1.
In Qiapuqia, the best place to stay is the Gonghe County Communist Party Committee Guesthouse, which is perfectly tolerable, with private rooms with baths, but no telephones, and costs just $6 a night. 
Phone is 2773. 
The guesthouse restaurant offers local meals, such as tsampa -- roast barley flour kneaded into dough. 
Most restaurants in Qinghai are run by Han Chinese or Hui Muslims, and food tends to be spicy, somewhat like Sichuan food. 
Restaurants are mostly small, somewhat dirty, not particularly good and incredibly cheap.
