
The decline of ''comrade'' and the return of ''Miss'' is but one of the ways that ordinary Chinese are shedding the revolutionary trappings of the last four decades. 
While the airwaves mount a propaganda blitz for Communist values, people are each day moving more in the other direction: wearing more cosmetics and shorter skirts, studying more English, trying ever more frantically to go to the West -and, perhaps most basic of all, reverting to pre-Communist era ways of speaking and writing the Chinese language.
After the 1949 revolution, the Communists replaced forms of address like Mr., Mrs. and Miss in favor of the egalitarian ''comrade.''
Indeed, in Mao's time, a woman would have been deeply alarmed to be hailed as ''Miss,'' for it implied a sneer and meant that a young woman was putting on airs.
Age Distinctions
''Comrade'' is still used, but much less than before. 
These days, a young woman might be addressed as ''Miss,'' and an older person as ''Old Granny'' or ''Old Granddad,'' but hailing other people is a bit of a problem. 
To fill the gap, Chinese have seized upon the term ''shifu,'' which originally referred to a master worker.
Bit by bit, ''Mr.'' is making inroads. 
And the traditional way of saying wife - ''tai-tai'' - is also occasionally heard in place of ''lover,'' which was the revolutionary way to refer to a spouse.
''The language is always changing,'' a Chinese journalist said, ''but never so much as in the last five years.''
One of the most important reasons for the changes is the stream of visitors from Hong Kong and Taiwan, who use prerevolutionary ways of speaking. 
Mainland Chinese often display an immense fascination with these wealthy tourists and executives and emulate them in speech, clothing, literature and personal habits. 
Many Chinese express a deep yearning to shed backward ways, and to them Taiwan and Hong Kong represent all that is modern, fashionable and desirable.
Television ads sometimes feature sales pitches by people speaking Chinese with a Cantonese accent, suggesting that the speaker is from the prosperous region of southern China that envelops Hong Kong. 
The idea is that if a sophisticated person from the highly developed south admires the product, it must really be good.
The mainland normally uses Chinese characters that have been simplified, to make them easier to learn, but it is increasingly common to see on name cards and shop signs the traditional, complex characters that are still used in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
