
Lei Yu charges into the room, his extraordinary energy a fitting reflection of one of China's fastest-changing cities.
Mr. Lei, the Deputy Mayor of this frenetic and prosperous city, is one of a growing number of sharp and shrewd local officials who shun the Communist bureaucrat's life of long lunches and snoozes. 
Some people see him as a local hero who bucks the system; others accuse him of glaringly corrupt practices.
Guangdong province, of which Canton is the capital, is famous both for bucking the system and for its corruption, so it is not surprising that after being removed from a senior post for violating regulations, Mr. Lei has been able to climb his way back into one of the most powerful and busiest jobs in town.
"Compared with us, the life of New York's Mayor is light and easy," said Mr. Lei, 56 years old, who typically leaves home at 7 A.M. and returns about midnight.
 
Local Booster
Mr. Lei does not campaign for election, but he lobbies for Canton's needs -- like a new stock market, foreign bank branches, greater efficiency in enterprises, higher exports and more economic restructuring. 
Leaders like him are rare in China, and he seems highly regarded and popular.
"He's very clearly a reformist, full of ideas of what he wants to do," a foreign analyst here said. 
"He's someone who is a real activist for getting things done."
It is a tribute to his ability and political skills that Mr. Lei has been able to return to power after being disgraced and dismissed from his post as administrator of Hainan Island in 1985. 
Mr. Lei and his assistant had taken advantage of the island's special privileges to import foreign cars duty-free and resell them at a high profit on the mainland. 
They ultimately approved the import of nearly 80,000 cars, in what became one of the biggest scandals of China's reform era.
The scheme was widely denounced as an example of corruption at the time, but Mr. Lei apparently did not benefit personally. 
On Hainan Island, which has since split away from the rest of Guangdong and been made a province by itself, Mr. Lei is remembered as a folk hero who took advantage of every loophole to buoy the local economy and paid with his job for his dedication to his constituency.
"All men are fallible," Mr. Lei said, dismissing the incident. 
"I'm not a saint. 
When I make a mistake, I correct it."
 
A Pragmatic Decision
But early in 1988, less than three years after the car scandal, the province government decided that Mr. Lei's talent was more important than the tarnish of his recent past. 
Guangdong, which is not necessarily bothered by an official flouting the rules from the capital, welcomed him back to the fold.
"The mountain is high and the emperor is far away" goes a saying that many people say explains why Guangdong province has been able to shape a freewheeling economy -- it is simply too far from Beijing for the national Government to maintain close scrutiny. 
Guangdong is already China's economic showcase with growth of about 10 percent last year, twice the national rate.
But Mr. Lei denies that the province's leaders scurry around the guidelines set down by Beijing.
"It is not that we don't respond to the call of the party Central Committee, but that our cadres should not be the kind who blindly obey," Mr. Lei said. 
"If our cadres are not resourceful and they appear helpless in the face of something, would you call them good cadres?
If they can't do anything, would you like to have them?
I wouldnot."
Guangdong, however, still has a great deal of catching up to do if it wants to move beyond the level of a developing country. 
Although per-capita income in Guangdong was more than 40 percent higher than the national figure last year, it was only $430.
 
Progress, Not Perfection
Not everything here moves as fast as Mr. Lei and his colleagues would like, and many economic changes, for example in prices and housing, have been adopted only slowly in Canton.
Moreover, hard-liners say that negative Western influences, like pornography, prostitution and other crimes, are much more evident in Guangdong than elsewhere in China. 
Prostitutes linger at the city's best hotels looking for customers, and taxis now have gratings to protect drivers from robbers.
As problems like these irritate local leaders, Canton continues to compete with nearby cities, such as Huizhou, Shenzhen and Zhuhai, for foreign investments. 
Mr. Lei adds that the entire province is battling with Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines for consumer markets in the United States and other prosperous countries.
"There is a Chinese saying: Sailing against the current, you must forge ahead or be driven back," Mr. Lei said, his eyes dancing about. 
"The present reality is just like this. 
Aside from stopping, if you drop your speed, you will fall behind."
