
As the United States and other Western countries impose sanctions and condemn China for its crackdown on the democracy movement, Japanese officials have begun sounding a note of caution that such steps could backfire and deepen Beijing's ''isolation'' from the rest of the world.
Senior Government officials said today that as a result, a modest difference of perspective had emerged between Washington and Tokyo on how best to respond to recent actions in Beijing, including the arrest and execution of Chinese accused of taking part in protests.
''Sanctions by definition mean punishment,'' a senior Foreign Ministry official said in an interview. 
''But even if you want to punish the Chinese, you don't get the results which you wish. 
We don't think sanctions are an appropriate response for the Western democracies to make.''
The comments of Japanese officials came a day after the Bush Administration announced another round of sanctions in Washington, suspending participation in all high-level contacts with Beijing. 
The United States had earlier suspended military sales and cooperation with China.
 
Muted Criticism by Japan
Japanese officials said Foreign Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka would put forward the Japanese concerns about sanctions in talks next week in Washington with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
Since the Chinese crackdown began two weeks ago, Japan has criticized Beijing's actions but in a far more muted tone than other countries. 
In part, that was attributed by officials to Tokyo's concern about reviving anti-Japanese feelings dating from Japan's subjugation of China in the 1930's.
A senior official said today, however, that the motivation was also to avoid reinforcing ''xenophobic'' tendencies of China, causing Beijing to feel surrounded by enemies.
Japan has not withheld criticism of China, and today Prime Minister Sousuke Uno deplored China's execution of three young men who were accused of setting fire to a train during the recent turmoil, declaring the executions to be ''not acceptable.''
 
Tokyo's Aid to Beijing
Japan has also suspended new economic assistance to China. 
But Japanese officials appear to be emphasizing that that step was being taken until China ''stabilizes'' its situation, and that aid could be resumed if China's economic liberalization program is restored, even if political freedoms do not return.
Today, for example, Finance Minister Tatsuo Murayama told Parliament that ''we should bear in mind that China is unquestionably an important neighbor'' and that ''both economic and political considerations'' should be weighed as Japan decides whether to resume aid.
Japanese officials acknowledge that Tokyo's position could be criticized by some as insufficiently concerned about human freedoms and too eager to continue lucrative business relations. 
That criticism was heard when Japan maintained business relations with Iran in recent years, citing the need to avoid ''isolating'' Teheran.
Japan is the largest aid donor to China, and its assistance is widely considered crucial to China's hopes for economic growth in the years ahead. 
Japan is now at the end of a $3.3 billion seven-year aid program, and Tokyo announced last year that it would be renewed by a $6 billion program. 
Talks for that renewed program are what were suspended this month.
 
'Like a Thief at a Fire'
Japanese officials and businessmen here say that no clear picture has emerged on the future of private-sector cooperation between Japan and China. 
Japan is a major trading partner of China, with total trade at $6.6 billion last year.
By comparison, Japan's private investment in China is considered relatively small, only about $2 billion, or about 1 percent of Japan's overseas investments. 
Business officials say that current investment is likely to remain but that future investment is in doubt.
Some businessmen have begun traveling to China on tourist visas to talk about trade and investment, drawing criticism from the Tokyo Government and abroad.
Foreign Minister Mitsuzuka, noting criticism from abroad, said last week that people are saying that ''Japan is trying to make money like a thief at a fire'' and that businessmen should not be so eager to make deals in China.
But officials said today that those views were being expressed to give Japan ''credibility'' abroad, whereas its basic point of view was that Japan should try to sustain economic relations with China.
