
Yosuke Kuwabara took a taxi to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's house in a residential neighborhood of Tokyo on Tuesday morning, began shouting slogans, and then did what a dedicated rightist is supposed to when he believes the Emperor of Japan is about to be humiliated: He took out a knife and began slitting open his stomach.
Mr. Kuwabara did not get very far with his attempt at ritual suicide. 
The police say the wound was not deep and he will live. 
But his protest was vivid enough to force an embarrassing dispute into the headlines. 
The issue is whether to send Emperor Akihito for a brief visit to China, even if he is obliged to apologize before the cameras for deeds Japan committed, in the name of his father, a half-century ago.
Any time a Japanese emperor visits a neighboring country that was part of the Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere, this country's politicians and bureaucrats begin months of hand-wringing over the issue of apologies, carefully fine-tuning the wording to fit the political climate of the moment.
But a visit to China is unchartered territory. 
Japanese officials who keep track of such things say there is no evidence that any Japanese emperor visited China back to the first occupant of the job, the possibly mythic Emperor Jimmu, who is said to have acceded to the throne in 660 B.C.
 
Deliberations a Sham
Officially, Mr. Miyazawa says he has yet to make up his mind about whether the Government will accept an often-repeated Chinese invitation to send the Emperor to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the beginning of diplomatic relations between Japan and the People's Republic. 
"My basic feeling is that if Our Majesty is to visit China, it should be in an atmosphere where all our people are happy to see him off," he said the other day.
In fact, Mr. Miyazawa has been meeting wth all of the top leaders of the governing Liberal Democratic Party and today they reportedly reached a final agreement to go forward. 
Arrangements are already under way for a trip to Beijing, Xian and Shanghai in October.
But there is a critical if unwritten understanding with Beijing that if the symbol of modern, peaceful Japan is to ride through Tiananmen Square, he will do so with only minimal and vague apologies for Japan's wartime actions.
"It is a very, very delicate issue on both sides," a senior official of the Japanese Foreign Ministry said recently. 
"But I think we are finding a way to go ahead."
An announcement is expected sometime in the next two weeks, after Mr. Miyazawa is finished having polite lunches with everyone who thinks this visit may be a bad idea.
 
Some Want Visit Abandoned
For months the prospect of the visit has been the subject of considerable controversy in both Tokyo and Beijing. 
In Japan, influential right-wing politicians within the Liberal Democratic Party have insisted that no visit take place if the Emperor is forced to kowtow to the Chinese in public.
Though none of them seem willing to go to the extremes Mr. Kuwabara did, they say the day should be long past when Japanese officials had to begin toasts at state dinners with references to past aggression. 
They feel that particularly strongly in the case of China, which depends heavily on Japanese aid and investment.
But that day still seems a way off. 
So a group that calls itself the People's Council for the Protection of Japan submitted a petition to Mr. Miyazawa a few weeks ago to abandon the visit altogether.
Many Chinese, who are becoming more vocal in demanding reparations from Japan, are also upset by the trip. 
Beijing has been reluctant to silence those who are making the demands for fear of seeming to be lackeys of Japan, even though officials there seem eager for the issue to go away before it threatens economic ties.
The 1972 accord between Beijing and Tokyo, establishing relations, seemed to rule out compensation, but some Chinese now say that as individuals they can still pursue their claims. 
The movement was begun by a scholar in Beijing last year, without official backing, and it seems to have taken on a life of its own.
Some Chinese now insist that they are entitled to $200 billion or more in compensation for the suffering inflicted by Japan. 
Japan denies that they are entitled to anything at all. 
But if the Japanese Government finds a way to compensate Korean women who were forced to have sex with Japanese soldiers during the war -- which now appears likely -- it may open the way for others who suffered at Japanese hands to submit claims of their own.
 
A Welcome and a Warning
The man whose voice is missing from the debate, as always, is Emperor Akihito's. 
He is formally Japan's head of state, but under the postwar Constitution he holds virtually no political power. 
Therefore he has little voice in the question of when he goes to China or what he says there.
Nonetheless, a visit would abound in symbolism. 
Emperor Hirohito died in 1989, and the arrival of his son in China's capital, before he visits Washington, would be regarded as a critical turning point in relations between the two powers.
As word of the agreement with China has spread, even some of Japan's more conservative voices have come to support the trip, though some with all the enthusiasm of going to the dentist. 
The Mainichi Shimbun, one of the nation's largest dailies, said in an editorial the other day that with trade between the two nations exceeding $20 billion, "we cannot afford to offend the Chinese."
But it also issued a warning. 
The visit would be successful, it said, only if Beijing "guarantees that the Emperor will receive a nationwide welcome, without being subjected to problems or embarrassment."
It added, "We can safely assume that the Chinese leadership has extended the invitation in full appreciation of the Emperor's constitutional status and his position in the minds of the Japanese."
