
President Kim Il Sung of North Korea has completed a meeting with Chinese leaders, the official Chinese news organizations reported today, but there was no indication of the outcome of the talks between the two increasingly isolated Communist neighbors.
Mr. Kim, who will have spent a total of about 12 days in China by the time his special train rolls back across the Korean border, probably on Tuesday, received a spectacular welcome from his Chinese hosts.
The evening television news showed the Chinese Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, embracing Mr. Kim on Sunday at a farewell ceremony in the eastern Chinese city of Nanjing, as hundreds of children jumped up and down and waved Chinese and North Korean flags.
But it is not clear what Mr. Kim, who heads a Stalinist Government, received besides warm assurances from the Government that the two countries are "as close as lips and teeth."
 
Seeking Financial Aid
The North Korean leader is believed to have sought a commitment from China not to recognize South Korea, and some financial aid to help an economy that is short on food, oil, electricity and almost everything else. 
North Korea has depended heavily on Soviet help, which is now being withdrawn.
While there has been no official word on the nature of the talks, a foreign diplomat speculated that China might agree to delay any formal recognition of South Korea but would not offer any more economic assistance.
"China wants North Korea to take a more flexible approach to the outside world," the diplomat said. 
He said China might be hoping that North Korea's problems will force it to adopt an open-door policy and economic restructuring program similar to China's.
China has not commented on reports that Deng Xiaoping, the 87-year-old paramount leader, emerged from retirement to meet Mr. Kim.
The Chinese-Korean meeting presumably included a discussion of the collapse of Soviet Communism and of the tensions on the Korean peninsula. 
China formally endorsed Mr. Kim's call for unification of North and South Korea into a confederation, but it may also have cautioned Mr. Kim against continuing his country's efforts to develop a nuclear bomb.
