
Miles and miles from nowhere, carved into a cliff here in the arid desolation of northwestern China, are 492 caves lined with some of the finest Buddhist art in the world.
For up to 1,600 years, the dry desert air has preserved the vivid painted murals that fill the cave interiors, along with hundreds of painted statues ranging from life-size to 108 feet tall.
These days, however, the caves face a new threat: enthusiastic visitors. 
Some 150,000 people visited the grottoes in 1988 - nearly as many as in the entire four decades since the Communist revolution. 
The overwhelming majority of visitors are from other parts of China, but the number of foreigners is also soaring: from just 462 in 1979, when the Government opened the area to foreigners, to 30,000 in 1988.
''It's a wonderful thing and it's a terrible thing,'' said Duan Wenjie, the 72-year-old director of the Dunhuang Research Institute, who has lived here 44 years. 
''If people come in large numbers, then they risk hurting the treasures they have come to see.''
So Mr. Duan and his colleagues have agreed to a painful solution: they will build eight cave replicas and sharply curtail access to the originals. 
As it is now, only 30 of the caves are open to the public; after the mock-ups are completed by 1993, only a few of the originals will remain open. 
All the others will be padlocked to protect them.
 
A Familiar Dilemma
The same dilemma is faced by curators all over the world: how to allow people to enjoy artistic treasures without harming them. 
The compromises vary: putting glass over fine Rembrandts; installing a plexiglass shield in front of Michelangelo's ''Pieta'' and roping off the area in front of outstanding works.
The paleolithic caves at Lascaux, France, were closed after deterioration to the outstanding paintings there. 
And admittance to the paleolithic paintings in the Altamira Caves in Spain is restricted, although a simulation of the caves has been opened to the public in Madrid.
''Our method solves the dilemma of protecting the caves, while still allowing people to appreciate them,'' asserted Fan Jinshi, the deputy director of the Dunhuang institute. 
''The eight copies are representatives of the very best caves. 
You can't say that visitors will see less.''
The Dunhuang caves, also known as the Mogaoku Grottoes, were painstakingly carved into a cliff a mile long. 
The first caves were dug in A.D. 366, and the finest examples probably date from the Tang Dynasty, a golden age in China lasting from 618 to 907. 
In most cases the entire interior is brightly painted: portraits, geometric designs and murals depicting famous Buddhist scenes. 
The murals cover an area equivalent to more than one and a half football fields, and the caves also house some 2,000 painted sculptures.
 
'Discovered' in 1900
The artwork was paid for by wealthy Buddhists and by the imperial court, for in those days Dunhuang was a stopping point along the silk route, and a far more important city than it is today. 
But as the silk route faded, so did Dunhuang. 
The last caves here were carved during the Ming Dynasty, which lasted from 1368 to 1644.
Local monks guarded the caves continually, but the treasury was only ''discovered'' by the world in 1900, after a Taoist monk accidentally found a sealed-off cave containing 40,000 to 50,000 documents from eight dynasties. 
Foreigners made their way to the area and carried away not only the priceless manuscripts but also some outstanding examples of sculptures and murals that are now in Britain, France, India and the Soviet Union.
After the Communists took over in 1949, Prime Minister Zhou Enlai became a great patron of Dunhuang. 
He authorized money to buttress the cliff face with cement and install locked doors on all the caves, changing the site's appearance but also protecting it from erosion and earthquakes.
The opening to foreign tourists led to the construction of a small airport nearby and to growing numbers of visitors, both domestic and foreign. 
The overseas tourists, 60 percent of whom are Japanese, are particularly valued because of the money they spend. 
They have been a tremendous boon to the local economy - per capita income is about $100 a year -but unfortunately, the tourists breathe. 
The moist carbon dioxide they exhale is thought to be unsettling to murals that for centuries have been accustomed to desert air.
 
Long Trip for the Reward
A crucial question, of course, is whether foreigners will be willing to travel so far - 1,150 miles west of Beijing, approximately as far from the capital as Omaha is from New York - to see mostly reproductions, and a small but so far undetermined number of real caves. 
Local officials, who have relatively little experience with overseas tourists, are optimistic; indeed, they seem surprised even at the question.
They emphasize that conditions in the copied caves will be much better than in the real ones: not only will these be among the best examples of the artistic treasures at Dunhuang, but lighting will be better and there will be special audio-visual presentations to explain the history of the caves. 
The mock-up caves will be in an exhibition hall facing the cliff.
''There won't be much impact on tourism,'' said Ying Guangling, an official of the local tourism bureau in the modern town of Dunhuang, whose 10,000 residents live 25 miles across the desert from the caves. 
''Visitors will still see some of the real caves, so they'll be satisfied.''
