
The nation's trade deficit widened slightly in May for the second straight month, the Government said today. 
But the $4.6 billion imbalance reflected strong exports and was the third-best showing in eight years.
The gap with Japan, long the largest segment of the deficit, narrowed to $2.4 billion for the month. 
The figure was the slimmest difference with Japan since a $1.8 billion gap in February 1984. 
In May, imports of Japanese cars dropped by $302 million from the previous month.
The Commerce Department report showed that the May imbalance was up 1.5 percent from a revised April gap of $4.5 billion. 
The April figure was originally reported at $4.6 million. 
The deficit had fallen to $4.1 billion in March, the lowest since it reached $3.96 billion in June 1983.
Exports in May were off nine-tenths of 1 percent, to $35.3 billion, but still posted their second-best showing on record after April's $35.6 billion pace. 
Imports totaled $39.9 billion, down six-tenths of 1 percent from the previous month and well below the $44.5 billion record set last October.
The Bush Administration and many private analysts look to exports to help pull the economy out of recession. 
Exports account for more than 16 percent of the United States economy and represented about 40 percent of its growth in 1990.
 
Strong Trade With Europe
Some fear, however, that a weakening global economy will reduce foreigners' ability to purchase American goods. 
They also fear a stronger dollar, which makes American goods more expensive overseas.
But Jerry Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, cited the $1.3 billion surplus with Western Europe in May.
"Exports to Europe continue to lead the charge despite the recession in the United Kingdom and a slowing of European growth," he said.
Michael K. Evans, head of a Washington economic forecasting firm, agreed. 
"It's most impressive," he said. 
"Exports pretty much kept up their pace," despite the dollar and the world economy.
While the global economy may threaten exports, the weak United States economy apparently cut into American purchases of foreign-made goods. 
The sluggish economy "continues to hold imports down," Mr. Jasinowski said.
 
Under $100 Million for '91
For the first five months of 1991, the overall deficit has been running at an annual rate of $62.5 billion, better than the $90 billion forecast by the Bush Administration earlier this year.
If the forecast proves true, it would be the first annual deficit under $100 billion since 1983. 
The trade deficit peaked at $152.1 billion in 1987 and totaled $101.7 billion last year.
Contributing to the slip in exports was an $800 million drop in capital goods exports, including $400 million in aircraft. 
Exports of consumer goods also fell. 
Exports of industrial supplies, motor vehicles and grain increased.
America's foreign oil bill rose 15.3 percent in May to $4.6 billion. 
The volume of oil imports was up 13.9 percent, while the price rose 15 cents, to $16.55 a barrel.
Also contributing to the decrease in imports were drops in purchases of capital and consumer goods and of motor vehicles, which fell $280 million over all.
 
Deficits With Taiwan, China
In addition to its deficit with Japan, the United States ran an $800 million gap with Taiwan and a $700 million imbalance with China.
Some members of Congress are trying to force President Bush to remove China's most-favored-nation trade status until the country improves its human rights, trade and labor policies. 
Removing most-favored-nation status, would lift the prices of many Chinese goods, reducing United States imports. 
The trade deficit with China totals $3.6 billion so far this year.
In addition to Western Europe, the United States posted surpluses of $200 million with both Mexico and Egypt and $100 million with the Soviet Union.
