
For more than two and a half years, Bao Tong has sat alone in a cell in Qincheng Prison, his stomach troubles worsening and his white blood cell count dropping, as the nation's leadership struggled to decide what to do with him.
Now the regime is finally preparing to put Mr. Bao on trial, in a case that will be perhaps the most sensitive of any held since the crushing of the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement. 
Mr. Bao is not a student firebrand or worker organizer, but a 59-year-old member of Communist Party Central Committee who until 1989 was the political secretary to the Standing Committee of the Politburo.
A lean, bespectacled man, Mr. Bao is by far the highest official to have been jailed in connection with the 1989 upheavals. 
As the right-hand man of Zhao Ziyang, the former Communist Party leader, Mr. Bao was an ardent proponent of political change, and he had a quiet but crucial effect on the nation's domestic and international policy.
On Jan. 
15, Mr. Bao was told that he was formally arrested, a procedure that usually signifies a trial will begin within a few months. 
That same afternoon his family was also notified of the arrest, according to three Chinese familiar with the case. 
He is accused of leaking state secrets and of spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda.
The formal arrest, after Mr. Bao had been in detention for more than two years and seven months, suggests that the Government has decided how to dispose of the case. 
But while the leadership will almost certainly advise the court what sentence to impose, it is still unclear what the penalty will be.
The complication is that Mr. Bao is not behaving the way Chinese prisoners are supposed to, not even the way Chinese leaders are supposed to. 
Normally, purged leaders -- like Deng Xiaoping in the past -- issue self-criticisms to win clemency, and then try to claw their way back to power. 
But Mr. Bao is refusing to acknowledge any guilt, according to two Chinese with firsthand knowledge of the case.
"I haven't done anything wrong," one of the Chinese quoted Mr. Bao as saying. 
"I haven't violated the law nor breached party discipline. 
So what is there to include in a self-criticism?"
On Jan. 
20, his wife, Jiang Zongcao, along with his son and daughter, issued a bold and critical letter to top party, Government and judicial officials. 
They demanded an explanation for what they described as the unlawful detention of Mr. Bao, and called for an investigation into whether the authorities had abused their power.
"This whole unusual process of first detaining the person and then gathering materials and determining the crime can't help but make one suspect that this is a frame-up," the family's letter said.
Mr. Bao was summoned on May 28, 1989, supposedly to meet with the Standing Committee of the Politburo. 
Instead, on Politburo orders, he was incarcerated in a part of Qincheng Prison that was euphemistically called the "guest house."
He was fed fairly well, allowed family visits once every month or two, and could receive clothing and food. 
Still, his white blood cell count has fallen to about 2,000, well below normal levels of 5,000 to 10,000. 
But the cause of this condition was not immediately clear.
Despite rumors that he had been moved, he was never allowed out of Qincheng Prison, according to the Chinese familiar with the case. 
While in Qincheng, officials from the Organization Department repeatedly interrogated Mr. Bao about Mr. Zhao, apparently in an attempt to get evidence against the former party leader.
The case of Mr. Zhao, who still is mostly confined to his house and has not been allowed to receive guests, has been handled as a party matter rather than as a criminal investigation. 
The results of the investigation have not yet been publicized, but many Chinese believe that it is unlikely Mr. Zhao will be severely punished.
After his formal arrest last month, Mr. Bao was moved from the "guest house" to Qincheng's No. 1 Lockup for prisoners awaiting trial. 
Newly sent clothing was returned to his family, and he was refused permission to see family members during the Chinese New Year holiday a few days ago.
