
The Government put a leading democracy advocate on trial today for "conspiracy to overthrow the Government," an offense that can bring the death penalty, and barred his wife from attending the trial.
The defendant, Chen Ziming, a 38-year-old social scientist and newspaper publisher, has reportedly been on a hunger strike, and today he appeared thin and weak, said a Chinese who saw him.
"I am tired," Mr. Chen told the court several times, the witness said.
Foreigners are barred from such "public" trials and this morning were even kept from reading the announcement of the trial on a bulletin board outside the court. 
The witness said the trial was adjourned at the end of the day but is expected to reconvene.
 
Praised for 1976 Tiananmen Role
Mr. Chen's mother and sister were allowed to attend the trial, as were a number of court and security officials, but the family members were not allowed to speak to Mr. Chen and will not be allowed to attend the next session when the trial resumes, the witness said.
Mr. Chen has been actively pursuing democracy in China since the 1976 Tiananmen protests against the now-discredited "Gang of Four."
Excoriated at the time on national television for his rousing speech against the Gang of Four, Mr. Chen was later praised by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, as one of the "heroes of the Tiananmen incident," according to a report last month by Asia Watch, the human rights organization.
In the late 1980's, Mr. Chen pushed vigorously for policies that would promote political and economic liberalization, and his newspaper, Economics Weekly, became a widely read forum for intellectuals yearning for change.
 
Charged for Aiding 1989 Uprising
He backed the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement, playing a crucial role in an intellectual support group for the students, but after martial law was imposed, he called on the students to withdraw from Tiananmen Square to avoid bloodshed.
According to the trial notice, which Chinese were allowed to read, Mr. Chen is charged with both "conspiracy to overthrow the Government" and "counterrevolutionary incitement and propaganda."
The first charge is more serious and normally carries a minimum sentence of 10 years, and in severe cases it can bring the death penalty. 
No intellectual is known to have been sentenced to death for involvement in the Tiananmen movement, however, and execution is thought to be unlikely.
Mr. Chen and his wife, Wang Zhihong, fled Beijing after the crackdown but were arrested in southern China in the fall of 1989, along with a large number of Chinese from that area and from Hong Kong who had tried to help them escape. 
Ms. Wang was later released.
In trials so far, the most severe sentence announced was seven years for Ren Wanding, a human rights advocate. 
But not all sentences have been disclosed."
