
Two Chinese graduate students in the United States, one traveling with her infant son, disappeared this week while visiting China to lend support to pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing.
The husband of one of the missing students said he had learned that his wife and infant son and the second student were arrested by plainclothes police as they were about to leave Beijing International Airport on a return flight to the United States. 
The 1-year-old was born in Chicago and is an American citizen traveling with an American passport.
Word of the incident has spread among Chinese students in the United States and alarmed many who were considering returning to China. 
They expressed fear that they may be subject to retaliation for any activities here sympathetic to the demonstrators. 
There are more than 29,000 Chinese students at American colleges.
The two missing students are Yu Cheng, 30 years old, a doctoral student in education at the University of Chicago, and Tong Boning, a mathematics student at the University of California at Los Angeles. 
Ms. Cheng is 4 months pregnant and was traveling on a Chinese passport with her son, Payton Lee.
 
Joined Tiananmen Protests
Li Sanyuan, Ms. Cheng's husband, said in a telephone interview from Chicago that Ms. Cheng left for China on May 19 because she was upset by the imposition of martial law and wanted to show Chinese demonstrators ''our solidarity with them.''
During her two-week visit, she joined protests in Tiananmen Square and passed out funds collected in the United States.
When the military began a crackdown over the weekend, she decided to leave and, on Monday morning, said goodbye to her mother, three sisters and three brothers-in-law at the airport's restricted departure area.
Mr. Li, a 32-year-old political science student who met his wife in Chicago, said his wife was supposed to call him when her C.A.A.C. airplane arrived in San Francisco at 11:40 A.M. Monday. But he received no call. 
''I didn't receive the baby in the United States,'' he said, his voice breaking.
He telephoned C.A.A.C. and was told that his wife and son were not on the passenger list and had never boarded the plane in Beijing. 
An employee at the airline, he said, confided that other passengers on the flight had seen the police arrest a man, a woman and a baby in the boarding area. 
The man, he said, was Mr. Tong, who was acquainted with Ms. Cheng through an informal student network.
 
Embassy Is Asked for Help
Friends of Mr. Tong at U.C.L.A. confirmed that he too had not returned to the United States. 
He had been active in drafting pro-democracy appeals to the Chinese Government.
Mr. Li, 32, said the State Department had sent a cablegram to the American Embassy in Beijing asking the embassy to search for his family.
''This is a kidnap of an American citizen by the Chinese Government,'' Mr. Li said. 
''Now the life of my wife and son are in danger. 
If they were in the hands of soldiers who exercised the massacre, than they might already have been killed.''
Ms. Cheng's father, who died 20 years ago, was a Governor of Hunan Province, Mr. Li said.
