
Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, used to reassure nervous foreign leaders that they need not worry about China after his passing because he had installed his own successors, several veteran analysts here recalled today.
''There is nothing to fear even if heaven should fall down,'' Mr. Deng liked to say. 
For Hu Yaobang, then the Communist Party General Secretary, and Zhao Ziyang, the Prime Minister and later party chief, would be there to prop it up.
But in the last two years, the analysts note, Mr. Deng, who is 84 years old, has overseen the waning first of Mr. Hu and now Mr. Zhao, leaving him without a political heir. 
Instead, it is his onetime hard-line rivals who now have succeeded in positioning successors, with Li Peng as the Prime Minister and Qiao Shi, a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo, as a possible General Secretary of the party.
This is one of the reasons, the analysts here believe, that Mr. Deng's violent crushing of the pro-democracy movement was not so much a victory as a defeat for him.
 
A Difference in Interpretation
In their interpretation, the specialists in Hong Kong differ with some diplomats in Beijing and Washington, a difference that has surfaced frequently in critical moments in China in recent years. 
The Hong Kong-based analysts, who have pursued their craft for 20, 30 or even 40 years, tend to be more skeptical than the diplomats, less optimistic about China's condition and more prone to see continuing factional intrigue.
The major cause for the divergence is simply that the Hong Kong experts, most of them Chinese, tend to base their conclusions on a close study of Communist newspapers and radio broadcasts, the traditional tools of China watchers.
By contrast, the diplomats in Beijing, at least until the declaration of martial law, have enjoyed increasing access to Chinese officials and report back their conversations with them. 
One trouble with this approach, a Western diplomat acknowledged today, is that the Chinese officials who talk with foreigners tend to be liberals, while the conservatives shun them.
As a result, several diplomats said, they had been somewhat misled and underestimated the growing strength of the hard-liners over the last few years, power that broke into public view with the decision to use the People's Liberation Army to suppress the demonstrations in Beijing.
 
The First Sign
But the analysts here believe that the rise of the conservatives can be traced to as early as 1982 or 1983, soon after Mr. Deng maneuvered his way to the top and began his program in 1979 to return land to the peasants and allow private enterprise.
The first sign, said the Rev. Laszlo Ladany, a Roman Catholic priest who for many years published an authoritative newsletter in Hong Kong about developments in China, was when Peng Zhen became chairman of the National People's Congress, the nominal legislature.
Mr. Peng, one of the conservative elders, managed to appoint to the People's Congress several like-minded officials who had been removed by Mr. Deng from their Communist Party posts, Father Ladany said. 
More important, Mr. Peng virtually turned the People's Congress into ''his own headquarters,'' insisting that it be given greater power and the right to pass on new policies, Father Ladany said.
''It was an extraordinary defiance by Peng,'' said Father Ladany, who was a missionary in China before the Communists' triumph in 1949.
Another analyst, who long worked for the British Government here, said a further important clue to the resurgence of the hard-liners came three years ago when Chen Yun, a prominent octogenarian, revealed in a published speech that he had earlier engineered the appointment of Mr. Li as Minister of Electric Power.
In the speech, published in the third volume of Mr. Chen's collected works, he reported that initially Mr. Li, then the Deputy Minister of Electric Power, was not on the list of candidates for the Cabinet post.
 
A Protege Is Purged
But after intercession by Mr. Chen, Mr. Li was given the job. 
Mr. Li was soon to be promoted to be Prime Minister, where he announced the imposition of martial law. 
Mr. Chen's disclosure of his action, which would normally be regarded as a state secret in China, strongly suggests he wanted it known that he was behind the advancing career of Mr. Li, the analysts said.
Further signs of the conservative gains multiplied. 
In 1987, Mr. Deng had to jettison his protege and close friend, Mr. Hu, allowing him to be purged as party General Secretary after an earlier round of student demonstrations. 
(Mr. Hu's death two months ago touched off the pro-democracy demonstrations that were crushed by the military crackdown this month.) Last September, although Mr. Deng told visitors that China would soon begin the critical step of freeing prices, to move to a more market-oriented economy, the hard-liners won a victory and ordered economic initiatives frozen.
But the Chinese analyst who worked for the British Government, after insisting that the conservatives were making gains, was ordered to take early retirement last November in what some colleagues feel was an effort to silence his viewpoint.
In his view, and that of a Chinese analyst who worked for the United States Consulate General here, the rise of Mr. Qiao was still another sign of the hard-liners' gains at the expense of Mr. Deng.
 
Many Important Posts
Over the last two years, the 65-year-old Mr. Qiao, a career intelligence operative, was suddenly given a series of powerful portfolios. 
These included being head of the so-called Leading Group for Political and Legal Affairs in the Central Committee, which supervises the police and courts. 
It was a job formerly held by Mr. Peng and which Mr. Peng may have arranged for him.
Similarly, Mr. Qiao took over from Mr. Chen the post as head of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission, which investigates corruption in the party. 
In fact, Mr. Qiao was given so many important jobs that the Hong Kong analysts believed he was on the verge of replacing Mr. Zhao as party General Secretary even before the demonstrations.
The analysts here say they believe that Mr. Li and Mr. Qiao are now contending behind the scenes for the top party post. 
But whichever man emerges as the new General Secretary, he will be a follower of the conservative elders, not Mr. Deng, the analysts say.
A Western diplomat here said another problem in gauging the rise of the hard-liners was that most of them, like Mr. Peng and Mr. Chen, seemed to retire. 
''We may have been misled by their resignations,'' he said.
