
A Chinese graduate student who disappeared last week on a visit home has returned to the United States and reported that Chinese police interrogated her for five days about American organizations aiding the pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing.
Cheng Yu, a 31-year-old education student at the University of Chicago, said she was also struck by the sympathetic attitude among some of the half dozen Chinese police who questioned her. 
She said one policewoman had mocked a Government television broadcast that said Chinese citizens were enthusiastically welcoming the soldiers who cleared Tiananmen Square.
Ms. Cheng, her 1-year-old son, Payton, and a friend, Tong Boning, a graduate student at the University of California at Los Angeles, disappeared last week while on a two-week visit to China to help pro-democracy demonstrators. 
They were supposed to depart China on June 5 and were escorted to the airport departure area by relatives and friends, but they did not arrive on schedule in the United States and their worried relatives notified the State Department that they were missing.
In a telephone interview from their home in Chicago, Ms. Cheng and her husband, Li Sanyuan, gave a vivid account of her five days in captivity.
Ms. Cheng could not relate the story entirely on her own because she had to leave the telephone to console her baby, who, she said, has been upset by the ordeal. 
Mr. Tong could not be reached in Los Angeles yesterday to relate his account.
 
Under Constant Surveillance
Ms. Cheng, who is four months pregnant, her son, and Mr. Tong were arrested in the departure area of Beijing International Airport by police officers who had evidently kept track of them during the two-week visit, she said. 
They were taken to a guest house in a Beijing suburb that, Mr. Li said, is popular with Chinese officials who use the nearby golf course.
At the guest house, the two students' bodies and belongings were searched and they were interrogated for five days in separate rooms by a half dozen police women and men. 
Ms. Cheng said two policewomen accompanied her each time she went to the bathroom and remained in her room as she slept. 
Generally, Ms. Cheng indicated she was treated well but she said she broke down once because the authorities were refusing to notify her husband or her mother, a Beijing resident, of her whereabouts.
''I imagined how he must feel, and my mother, who is 70 years old, and I cried,'' she said.
Ms. Cheng said she had refused food for a day to press her demand that the police obey the law requiring notification of relatives.
Much of the interrogation, she and her husband said, centered on her knowledge of American organizations in China that may be sending money and providing other support for pro-democracy students within China. 
Ms. Cheng had brought into China more than $3,000 in donations she collected from Chinese students studying in Chicago and elsewhere. 
She distributed the money to people in Beijing who were helping the students camped in Tiananmen Square buy food and maintain sanitary conditions.
 
Questioned About Donations
''They wanted to know how the donations are collected,'' she said. 
''They think there must be an organization of some people who are in charge.''
Ms. Cheng said she told the police that she had collected the funds ''spontaneously'' and did not represent any organization.
''They wanted to find that I am the connection between some political organization in the United States and the student movement in China,'' she said. 
Her husband added, ''They wanted to know whether there was a conspiracy or any sort of organization behind her.''
Ms. Cheng has written articles for China Spring, a Chinese magazine published in the United States, and her interrogators asked her about the magazine's operations.
The police focused on a diary Ms. Cheng kept during her 15 days in China. 
In the diary, she described encounters in Tiananmen Square with the leaders of the protests there and with ordinary students. 
Ms. Cheng said she kept the diary because she wanted to let Chinese students in America know of the bravery of the protesters in Tiananmen Square. 
When she and Mr. Tong left for the airport, he warned her that it would be dangerous to try to bring the diary through passport control, but she rejected his urgings.
''She didn't take enough precaution,'' her husband said. 
''She thought she might get it through customs. 
After all it was a notebook. 
It was not a document.''
 
'The End of a Nightmare'
Ms. Cheng said that at one point policewomen guarding her watched a news program on the crackdown in Beijing and laughed when a reporter declared that Chinese citizens were welcoming the troops.
''One of them said, 'Why don't you show it to us?'
'' Ms. Cheng said. 
''There were no pictures on the screen and she said it very sarcastically.''
At another point, when pictures failed to back up the message, a policewoman scoffed, ''The TV has turned into a radio station.''
''I think they were sympathetic,'' she said. 
''They feel real concern for the baby. 
They told me: 'Don't be pessimistic. 
Things cannot be that bad.'
''
Ms. Cheng said she noticed that one policewoman was reading a book by an American author whose title she remembered as ''Tolerance.''
Ms. Cheng and her baby were released Friday night, and she promptly called her husband and alerted him that she would be returning on the next plane to San Francisco. 
She arrived in Chicago on Saturday night.
''It's the end of a nightmare,'' Mr. Li said yesterday, ''because no one knew where my wife was and what could happen to her next.''
Ms. Cheng said she had no regrets about her mission to China. 
''I have a personal mission,'' she said. 
''I want to be with my people at this historic time. 
It was worthwhile even if I had been there longer than five days.''
