
The Government issued a warrant today for the arrest of Fang Lizhi, China's best-known dissident, as official press organizations stepped up criticism of the United States.
The Beijing authorities also continued to arrest those involved in the democracy movement, as fear heightened in the capital that a a purge of students and dissidents was growing.
The warrant for Mr. Fang and his wife, Li Shuxian, was a sign of deteriorating relations with the United States because the American Embassy gave the two dissidents refuge last week. 
So long as Mr. Fang and Miss Li remain in the Embassy, the Chinese Government cannot enter to arrest them, but the warrant will make it more difficult to resolve the dispute by negotiation.
 
U.S. Discreetly Silent
The United States Embassy has refused all comment on Mr. Fang's case, apparently in fear of worsening tension with the Chinese Government, and the embassy again declined to comment tonight on the warrant for their arrest.
But in a television interview on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation'' before the warrant was made public, Ambassador James R. Lilley described the dispute over the dissidents as ''an irritant'' in Chinese-American relations, and said that he had discussed it with Chinese officials in recent days.
In Washington, a spokesman for the State Department said that there would be no immediate response on the Fang case and that the United States generally does not comment on such matters.
 
Pictures Hint at Brutality
There was no word from the Chinese authorities on how many people were arrested today in the capital, beyond the 400 who were reported on Saturday to have been seized in the last few days.
But television showed 20 newly arrested young men from Beijing, some of them bruised or cut as if they had been beaten, and many Chinese express fear that the number is in the thousands. 
A diplomat with connections in the security agencies said that the total would soon reach 1,000, if it had not already.
A week after the army cracked down on the democracy movement in Beijing, thousands of other Chinese intellectuals are in hiding in the capital or are fleeing to the provinces to avoid arrest. 
While it is not clear how those arrested will be punished, the purge is the biggest in more than a decade.
''I'm staying with friends each night because it's not safe to stay at home,'' said a young intellectual who fears arrest because he sometimes criticizes the Government even though he has not been active in the democracy movement. 
''And I'm going to leave Beijing for a while, just to be safe.''
Television news has shown a parade of the ''thugs'' and assailed them for supporting the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the democracy move-ment is now being officially described. 
The television clips show that arrests are taking place in large cities all over the nation, although apparently nowhere in such large numbers as in Beijing.
Normal activity in the capital is slowly resuming, with more people than ever on the streets, bicycling to and from work, and there sems to be less danger now of being shot on the street.
But the arrests suggest that the atmosphere of fear and the strains with the United States are intensifying. 
The nation's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and others in power seem determined to uproot the remnants of the democratic movement and to punish the United States for criticizing the violent suppression of the movement early this week.
The ''wanted circular'' for Mr. Fang and Miss Li charges them with ''committing crimes of counterrevolutionary propaganda and instigation.''
It says these crimes were committed both before and during the recent turmoil.
Mr. Fang is an internationally known astrophysicist, an ebullient 53-year-old who proclaims that Marxism is outdated and that China should move toward more democracy. 
''Teacher Fang,'' as young people call him, is enormously popular among university students, and he is relatively well-known abroad.
He was expelled from the Communist Party and transferred to Beijing from the central city of Hefei in early 1987 after the authorities accused him of inciting student pro-democracy demonstrations in December 1986. 
Miss Li, an associate professor of physics at Beijing University, remains a Communist Party member but has been outspoken in criticizing the party leadership.
 
Diplomatic Incident
Mr. Fang was at the center of an international incident in February, when the visiting President Bush invited him to a banquet that the Americans were giving for Chinese officials and citizens. 
More than 100 Chinese police officers intervened to keep Mr. Fang from attending, and the United States and China exchanged protests the next day.
Apparently fearful of being accused of misconduct, Mr. Fang and Miss Li did not participate in the demonstrations of the pro-democracy movement of the last two months. 
They avoided Tiananmen Square when it was being occupied by students.
The charge of counterrevolution made against Mr. Fang and Miss Li is an extremely serious one, equivalent virtually to treason. 
Two of China's best-known political prisoners, Wei Jingsheng and Xu Wenli, are serving 15-year prison sentences for counterrevolutionary activities, among other offenses.
Prison conditions for both are believed to be grim: Mr. Wei is widely believed to be suffering emotional problems because of solitary confinement broken only by annual visits by a younger sister. 
Until earlier this year, Mr. Xu was also in solitary confinement in a cell measuring 10 feet by 2 feet. 
Earlier this year, he was allowed his first visit from his wife and child in more than three years.
 
A Party Leader in Peril
The highest-ranking official thought to be under arrest is Bao Tong, an associate of the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, who is believed to have been stripped of power. 
Mr. Bao is himself a member of the party Central Committee. 
While there has been no announcement, knowledgable Chinese and diplomats said he has almost certainly been arrested.
There is no clear word on the whereabouts of Mr. Zhao. Various rumors have the party moderate either under house arrest, in a hospital or dead. 
An Asian diplomat said that senior Chinese officials had told him that Mr. Zhao was being forced to write confessions of misconduct.
Chinese news reports today, particularly those on television, were full of criticism of the United States, as announcers read aloud from letters and telegrams that they said had been sent by viewers. 
One telegram questioned the United States Government:
''Can you tolerate people who trample on the U.S. 
Constitution and seek to overthrow the Government by force?
Can you tolerate those who burn the White House and the President's cars?
Can you tolerate those who attack and burn shops and banks?
Can you tolerate those who cruelly injure innocent U.S. soldiers?
''Look - so much Chinese property is damaged. 
Listen - so many Chinese mothers are extremely worried about their country. 
But you in the U.S. government wilfully criticize the Chinese Government, which banned the riots. 
You supply protection to the chief criminals who incited riots. 
Is this the freedom and democracy you advertise?''
 
Voice of America Scored
Several telegrams and letters also attacked American news coverage of recent events in China. 
The attacks were particularly strong against the Voice of America, which has a large following in China for its Chinese-language radio news programs. 
The Voice of America reports, while jammed, have usually been audible and the primary source of unofficial news for most Chinese.
''It is shameful of Voice of America to spread rumors,'' declared one telegram from Henan province. 
''We Chinese should be careful not to believe the U.S. 
Voice of Rumor.''
Another telegram, from Sichuan province, reported: ''During the riots, we studied propaganda by Voice of America and our own news reports, and compared them, and we thought that our reports are more reliable.''
 
Student and Labor Leaders
Most of those arrested who were shown on television were young men whom the Government said had fought against the troops entering Beijing last weekend. 
However, some were leaders of independent student and labor organizations that had promoted the democracy movement.
In the Western city of Lanzhou, for example, 32 people were arrested for joining citizen support groups that cooperated with student demonstrators. 
And in Shanghai, Yao Yongzhan, the head of the unofficial university student union, was arrested at the airport as he tried to board a flight to Hong Kong. 
Nine leaders of an unofficial labor union had earlier been arrested for ''meeting secretly, spreading rumors, sending leaflets, starting strikes and calling on people to 'overthrow the Government.'
''
The official media reported that in the southwestern city of Guiyang, the police arrested a total of 59 ''bad elements who stopped vehicles, placed road barricades to stop traffic, and disturbed social order.''
The most prominent of those seized so far seems to be Ren Wanding, a dissident and essayist who has written articles for The New York Times and other publications. 
A decade ago, Mr. Ren was one of the first people to raise the issue of human rights in China, and he later spent four years in prison for his activites in the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement.
 
Obstacles to News Gathering
Several other prominent Chinese intellectuals were not in their homes today, but it was not clear if they had been arrested, if they had gone into hiding, or if they were simply away for personal or business reasons.
It has been difficult for foreign journalists to gauge the scope of the arrests, partly because it seems especially dangerous now for Chinese to have contacts with foreigners. 
This means that many foreign journalists are avoiding their Chinese friends and contacts, and are worried even about telephoning people to find out if they have been arrested.
As a result, journalists are relying more on official reports and on diplomats.
The Asian diplomat said that the authorities had decided to criticize and perhaps replace the top executives of major news organizations, including the People's Daily and the New China News Agency, but it was not known if any had been arrested.
