
Filling nearly a full square block of this city in the Chinese hinterlands is the burned-out rubble of collapsed roofs and melted shutters, of shattered glass and the mangled remains of bicycles and carts. 
All of it is testimony to the fact that the violence that gripped Beijing a week and a half ago was echoed in at least one major provincial city.
Foreigners and the few Chinese willing to talk to reporters these days say events in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province, closely resembled those in Beijing. 
The city saw about three weeks of intermittent, large-scale protest demonstrations at the city's main intersection. 
Students occupied the broad pedestal holding a giant statue of Mao, a spot that is a kind of symbolic city center.
Then on June 4 and 5, there was a series of angry, violent clashes between demonstrators and armed platoons of police in which several dozen people were killed, by the more conservative estimates. 
American consular officials here say that on June 5 alone at least 100 seriously wounded people were carried out of the broad intersection in front of the statue where the battle took place.
Chengdu, the only provincial city in China where violent clashes similar to those in Beijing are known to have taken place, reflects a dramatic aspect of the turmoil that was most visible to foreigners in the capital.
 
Wreckage of Recent Turmoil
These days the city wears a double aspect. 
On one hand, the pattern of everyday life has reasserted itself so fully that in most parts of the city there is little to suggest that an upheaval took place here just over a week ago.
The many small restaurants and tea houses are crowded with customers; the free markets are loaded with produce. 
Sichuan Province was the place where Zhao Ziyang, now all but deposed as China's Communist Party leader, first instituted the eco-nomic liberalization later carried out in the rest of the country, and small-scale free enterprise is much in evidence here.
But the wreckage in the center of town, a stone's throw from the Mao statue, is conspicuous evidence of the intensity of recent turmoil. 
The fire destroyed a large complex of small shops known as People's Market. 
It destroyed a medical clinic, a restaurant, a police station, a bicycle repair shop, and most of the city's largest theater.
While a scene of greater violence than most provincial cities, Chengdu demonstrates that the events of the last few weeks represented a revolt against China's Communist Government that went far beyond Beijing.
 
Rumors of Violence and Looting
Chengdu was not the only city in Sichuan, China's most populous province with more than 100 million people, to be swept up in the movement for greater democracy in this country. 
Foreign students in the city of Mianyang, about 100 miles north of Chengdu, report that for nearly a month there were demonstrations there, though there have been no reports of violence.
Moreover, the pro-democracy protests in Chengdu drew thousands of supporters from all over the province. 
People here noted delegations of students occupying the pedestal of the Mao statute from as far west as Aba, near the Tibetan border, as well as from such cities as Leshan and Chongqing in the south.
Since the crackdown in Beijing 10 days ago, reports have circulated elsewhere in China to the effect that Chengdu, whose population, including the surrounding areas, is about four million, was the scene of terrible violence and looting. 
One widespread report had it that the city's largest hotel, the Jinjiang, which houses the United States Consulate here, had been partially burned down.
In fact, a two-day visit to the city revealed no damage to the hotel, which consulate officials said was briefly invaded by looters who apparently had little or nothing to do with the student-led protest movement outside.
 
Police Patrols and Arrests
But the reports and rumors reaching other parts of China nonetheless do not seem to have done justice to the size of the confrontation that took place in this city or to the number of casualties.
Posters seen around the city call on the citizenry to turn in those who took part in what is now being called ''the counterrevolutionary disturbance'' and provides four telephone numbers for people to call to make denunciations.
At night, platoons of armed police officers can be seen drilling in the square behind the Mao statue nearby the hulks of a dozen or so trucks and buses that were set ablaze in the violent confrontation there. 
They patrol in trucks or jeeps at night, their rifle barrels extending out the windows. 
On Tuesday night, a reporter observed two details of about 150 men each running in formation through the city streets.
There have been highly credible reports of arrests here, particularly at the city's several research institutes and universities. 
On Tuesday night, two uniformed policemen were seen arriving at Sichuan University, where they were reported to be looking for a person whose name was included on a blacklist drawn up by the local public security bureau.
 
Clashes at Midnight Rally
Some people, informed by friends inside the Government that their names are on the blacklist, are reported to be expecting arrest. 
Some are said to be already in hiding.
Like most Chinese provincial cities, Chengdu seems to have taken its cue from Beijing as the protest movement unfolded. 
Foreigners living here say the first big demonstrations took place on May 16, set off by news that students in Beijing occupying Tiananmen Square had gone on hunger strikes to demand democracy.
Wanting to avoid the attention of school authorities, students at Sichuan University set out at midnight that night and marched the several miles to the center of Chengdu, picking up marchers from other institutions on the route, including the Institute of Science and Technology and the West China Medical School.
The midnight demonstrators, estimated at several thousand, broke through a line of police officers blocking the way to the Mao statue and occupied the area. 
When the police forcefully evacuated the area the next morning and wounded some students, none of them seriously, the move seemed to set off larger demonstrations the following days. 
Foreigners estimate the size of some of the crowds that filled the broad avenues in front of the Mao statue at more than 100,000.
 
Tear Gas and Truncheons
The demonstrations were so frequent that they spawned a new elocution. 
A standard greeting in Chinese is ''Have you eaten yet?''
In Chengdu during the several weeks of protest, it sometimes became ''Have you demonstrated yet?''
One visitor to the city said that citizens donated some $15,000 to help the students. 
There were demonstrations by journalists, the police, and, as in Beijing, even the army marching under banners identifying them. 
A group of mostly unemployed people who formed barriers to protect the students occupying the area of the Mao statue were dubbed ''Society University.''
Visitors to Chengdu at the time of the crackdown of June 4 and 5 - the days that it took place in Beijing - say that detachments of armed police officers appeared on the square for the first time on those days. 
The armed police are a paramilitary group under separate command from the regular public security bureau whose forces do not carry weapons.
The armed police units cleared the area around the Mao statue on the morning of June 4, but, they and the demonstrators clashed sharply several times that day and the day after, with many casualties, people who compiled first-hand reports say. 
Some witnesses to the scene on June 5 said they did not believe that the police fired their weapons, but there was large-scale use of tear gas and beatings of demonstrators with truncheons. 
Some demonstrators, nonetheless, asserted that hospitals reported at least four people dying of gunshot wounds in the two-day battle.
 
Debris Cleared From Streets
''Things went crazy,'' said one visitor to Chengdu. 
''Sidewalks got ripped up. 
Construction sites were raided for steel pipes and pieces of wood. 
There were stones everywhere. 
The police beat people savagely. 
The crowd broke all the windows in the city government building when they attacked it. 
There were hundreds of injuries of all sorts. 
Buses and truckes were set on fire all over the place, especially near the Mao statue.''
The fire that destroyed a section of the downtown area started on the night of June 4. 
Some people sympathetic to the protest movement said that merchandise was seen being carried out of the area before it broke out, which has led to widespread suspicions that the blaze was started by the police as a means of harming the credibility of the demonstrators.
In the days after the violent clashes, the city government quickly cleaned up the streets so that not a shred remained of the hundreds of posters that had been put up all over Chengdu. 
The universities canceled classes for the rest of the term and many students returned to their homes.
But more than a week after the police cleared the streets of protesters, thick crowds of people were still seen walking slowly by the great heaps of scorched debris that was once the People's Market staring inside at the few concrete walls and pillars that remained standing, or looking up at the People's Theater across the street, where the immense neon characters identifying it were melted.
