
In an effort to resolve the dispute over two Chinese dissidents who have taken refuge in the United States Embassy in Beijing, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has suggested that the couple be allowed to go to a third country for asylum, Admnistration officials said today.
The idea of suggesting to the Chinese that they permit the dissidents, Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li Shuxian, to go to an unspecified third country originated with the United States Ambassador to Beijing, James R. Lilley, the officials said.
Mr. Baker accepted the proposal, which was one of several put forward by Mr. Lilley, and formally broached it with the Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Han Xu, during their discussions over the last three days. 
Mr. Lilley did the same with his contacts at the Foreign Ministry in Beijing.
Administration officials said that the Chinese have not responded to the American suggestion, but that an answer could be forthcoming at any moment. 
Repeated requests to the Chinese Embassy in Washington for a comment on the matter went unanswered.
'Left Ball in Chinese Court'
''We left the ball in the Chinese court,'' an Administration official said. 
''We have basically told the Chinese: You write the scenario and we will sign off on it. 
We want to find a quick solution. 
Our only bottom line is that we are not going to turn the Fangs over for arrest.''
Administration officials said the logic of the third-country proposal was that it would satisfy Washington's requirements that the dissident couple not be turned over for arrest, and spare Beijing the embarrassment of the couple's coming immediately to the United States for a media extravaganza.
Administration officials said they had no illusions that it would be easy to persuade the Chinese to accept such a compromise, particularly because the Beijing authorities put out an arrest warrant for Mr. Fang and Miss Li on Sunday and accused them of ''crimes of counterrevolutionary propaganda and instigation.''
The Chinese couple, both physicists, sought refuge in the American Embassy on June 4, after the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square.
 
Protection, Not Asylum
The embassy granted them temporary sanctuary on the ground that their lives were in danger. 
The couple made it clear at the time that they came to the embassy for physical protection and not in an effort to seek political asylum, which cannot be granted by the United States on foreign soil.
They insisted that they were Chinese patriots who wanted to remain in their home country, if at all possible. 
Given the position of the Chinese authorities, however, that is apparently no longer an option, unless they want to go to jail.
Administration analysts say they believe that the Chinese leadership remains divided on a variety of issues, including how to handle the Fang affair. 
It is known that Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, and President Yang Shangkun have a personal, visceral dislike for Mr. Fang, whose persistant and public demands for greater freedom in China have made him a folk hero among Chinese university students and an inspiration for the pro-democracy movement as a whole.
In addition, Administration officials believe that some circles in the Chinese leadership would like to use the Fang affair as a tool to worsen already tense relations with the West in general and the United States in particular.
Depicting Mr. Fang and Miss Li and their supporters as part of a broader ''conspiracy'' by foreigners to interfere in Chinese affairs might also be a useful way for Chinese authorities to undermine the legitimacy of the pro-democracy movement, the officials said.
 
The Economic Incentive
At the same time, the Administration is convinced that other elements of the Chinese leadership, possibly even Mr. Deng, have a powerful economic incentive not to damage ties with the United States and its Western allies any further and, as a result, might be ready to swallow their antipathy to the couple to get the matter behind them.
The State Department, though, showed no signs today of mincing its words or restraining its response to developments in China.
In a move that could itself inject further acrimony into Chinese-American relations, the State Department signaled today that it intended to expand and speed up processing of both immigrant and non-immigrant visas to accommodate those Chinese seeking to leave their country in the wake of the current wave of repression. 
Long lines of visa applicants are reported at the American Embassy in Beijing and American consulates elsewhere in China.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said: ''We will be monitoring the requirements to assure that staffing levels are adequate to provide the full range of consular services, including visa issuances. 
We will do whatever it takes to process visas in China.''
After the June 4 shootings in Beijing, President Bush ordered a halt to all military sales to China and extended the visas of Chinese nationals now in the United States until June 1990.
An inter-agency task force charged with preparing an additional list of possible sanctions the Administration might impose on China, should the situation there deteriorate further, has completed its work and presented its ideas to Mr. Baker. Officials said the options consist primarily of a variety of economic sanctions and limits on technology transfers.
Ms. Tutwiler cautioned, however, that this list of options was not presented to Mr. Baker ''in the form of recommendations.''
She added, ''They are merely a laundry list of possible options should the need arise.''
She declined to specify what actions by the Chinese authorities would prompt imposition of these additional punitive measures.
In light of the manhunt the Chinese police have begun for 21 fugitive leaders of the pro-democracy movement, and the mass arrests that have already taken place, Ms. Tutwiler once criticized the Beijing Government.
''Chinese media have reported the arrest of hundreds of persons,'' she said. 
''These arrests are very disturbing. 
Detention or arrest of people for exercising basic human rights of freedom of expression and free association is contrary to internationally recognized standards. 
We continue to believe that the solution to the problems in China lies not in repression and arrest, but in dialogue.''
