
Plans for a series of rallies to mourn the victims of the Chinese crackdown were canceled here today after a violent confrontation between the police and a group described as provocateurs from the mainland.
But pro-democracy organizers, who canceled the rallies, continued their call for a token strike today, and many Hong Kong people shut their offices and shops or halted work to observe a moment of silence for the slain Beijing protesters. 
Schools were closed and many factories were idle.
Throughout the colony, people marked the deaths in Beijing with small personal tributes: flowers placed on Hong Kong's stone war memorial, a bit of black cloth draped along a window or tied to a car.
Violence Before Dawn
In its account of a predawn riot in the Chinese neighborhood of Mongkok, one of the most densely populated areas in the world, the Hong Kong Government said it was inspired by provocateurs from the mainland, assuring residents they were on the alert.
Several hundred police officers were called to Mongkok at 1:30 A.M. after a peaceful demonstration degenerated into a riot, with ''unruly hooligans'' hurling bottles and cans and battering storefronts with bamboo poles, the authorities said.
It was the first crowd violence since rallies and marches in support of China's pro-democracy movement began in Hong Kong several weeks ago. 
'These culprits were not those demonstrating in support of the Beijing students,'' a police official said. 
''They were criminal and nnruly elements who tried to exploit the situation.'
He added he had ''no information regarding their political motives, but I can't rule out any possibility.''
 
Organization of Crowd
Martin Lee, a legislator and a leader of the pro-democracy movement, said he believed the disruptive crowd ''was definitely organized,'' adding, ''In the beginning there may have been people having some fun, but toward the end we have witnesses who said they saw people brought in, carloads of people.'
He said there was a ''distinct possibility'' that the trouble was provoked by those wishing to discredit the demonstrations.
But the Secretary for Security, Jeffrey Barnes, said rumors that mainland agents had infiltrated the movement here, as they did in the 1960's in the Cultural Revolution, were unfounded. 
He said the Hong Kong Government was monitoring the situation closely. 
Another security official later said the riot was ''in no way political.''
A police spokesman said 'unruly hooligans in the crowd first tried to smash their way into a bank owned by China, and then turned to other shops and buildings on Nathan Road, later setting fire to a van. 
The police, wielding nightsticks, charged into the crowd, then set off tear gas to disperse the mob. 
Officials said the size of the crowd grew from 500 to about 7,000. 
The police said 15 people were arrested and 5 police officers were wounded.
 
Carnations for the Dead
Regina Lau, who was on strike from her job in a small trading company, said she was disappointed and very bitter that some people were not responsible and disrupted the demonstrations.
She had a small bunch of white carnations as a makeshift memorial for the students and citizens who died in the violence in Beijing. 
On the paper around the flowers she had written, ''We will miss you forever.''
The British colony, 98 percent ethnic Chinese, will revert to China in 1997, and the people here have been obsessed with the democratic movement in China, holding vigils, marches and demonstrations at first to express their hope and support for the cause and now, to show their anger and sorrow.
Despite the wilting heat, thousands of people stood in a line that stretched for more than a mile, waiting to sign the condolence book for China's dead that demonstrators have placed near the New China News Agency, the mainland's unofficial consulate here and the focus of many protests. 
Like Miss Lau, many brought flowers, and most wore black arm bands or head bands.
 
Many Shops Are Closed
In the business district, banks and the stock exchange remained opened but most of the fashionable boutiques like Gucci, Christian Dior and Baccarat were closed, as were beauty shops, computer and camera stores, tailor shops and dry cleaners.
Organizers had stressed that they did not want to disrupt commerce in the colony, but were simply calling for workday gestures to honor the dead.
Taxis, minibuses and limousines bore bits of black mourning cloth on their aerials, and many cars and trucks carried hand-lettered signs supporting the democratic cause in China and deploring the violence used to suppress it. 
Several thousand trucks and cars formed a caravan and paraded pass the New China News Agency.
The sleek new Bank of China tower, the tallest building in Asia and the pride of official Beijing, had two long slender black banners draped from its mirrored windows. 
The banners read: ''We are saddened for the thousands who were killed fighting for democracy,'' and ''We hate the wolves who betrayed the people.'
