
The Bush Administration protested to the Chinese Government today over its expulsion of two American journalists, saying the move would not keep ''the truth about what is going on in China from being heard.''
The Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Han Xu, was summoned to the State Department this afternoon to hear a protest from Robert M. Kimmit, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, over the expulsion of the journalists, John E. Pomfret of The Associated Press and Alan W. Pessin of the Voice of America.
In what is becoming an almost daily tit-for-tat exchange of allegations or punitive measures between Washington and Beijing, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said:
''Actions such as this, the harassment of journalists trying to do their jobs and attempts to jam Voice of America broadcasts, will not succeed in keeping the truth about what is going on in China from being heard in that troubled land or throughout the world. 
We find the quest for truth to be a process that cannot be thwarted. 
Where one voice is silenced another will take its place.''
All the Facts Are Not Known
Mr. Fitzwater said the State Department was still trying to ascertain all the facts surrounding the expulsions, and he declined to speculate whether Washington would order home some Chinese journalists in retaliation.
''In terms of any actions, we'll have to have a little more time so we are aware of the facts of each of the cases in terms of their activities, visas, permits, what can be done, and what we should ask,'' Mr. Fitzwater said. 
''The initial action is a protest to the Government.''
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, pointed out that there are 25 journalists from China in Washington, representing 10 news organizations, and 13 in New York, representing four organizations.
On Capitol Hill, 67 senators, including both the Republican and Democratic leadership, signed a letter to Prime Minister Li Peng urging him to immediately release the Chinese student leaders jailed for their participation in the recent democracy demonstrations.
At a news conference in Washington, Bruce Gelb, director of the United States Information Agency, which oversees the Voice of America, criticized the Chinese authorities for their expulsion of Mr. Pessin.
''This afternoon V.O.A. correspondent Alan Pessin was called in by the Foreign Affairs Office of the Beijing city government and given 72 hours to leave China,'' Mr. Gelb said. 
''That's old news. 
You may not know that the Chinese authorities confiscated Mr. Pessin's tape recording of the proceedings and then promptly proceeded to erase them.''
