
Top anchors from NBC News and ABC News will report from Beijing next week. 
The move provoked excitement at those networks yesterday and skepticism from their competitors, who questioned the value of sending the anchors at a time when television reports are being increasingly restricted by the Chinese Government.
Tom Brokaw, the anchor of ''The NBC Nightly News,'' flew to China yesterday, said a spokeswoman for NBC News, Peggy Hubble. 
He is to report from Beijing indefinitely.
Ted Koppel, the anchor of the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' is to fly to Beijing this weekend to complete a special report on the continuing events in China. 
In addition, he is expected to file reports for ABC's regular news broadcasts. 
A spokeswoman for ABC News said Mr. Koppel had been preparing a special report on the turmoil in China for several weeks.
 
Citizens 'Hesitant to Talk'
While expressing admiration for any attempts to bolster television news coverage, executives at CBS News and Cable News Network yesterday questioned the actions by NBC and ABC. 
In the latest move to restrict coverage, a satellite transmission dish used by CNN in Beijing was unplugged yesterday, ending one of the last live links to the events there.
There have been no transmissions of live video reports from Beijing since May 24. 
The networks have relied mostly on reports by telephone and on videotaped reports shipped out of the country and transmitted from Hong Kong.
''Gradually the vise tightens,'' said Ed Turner, the executive vice president for news gathering at CNN. 
''But we continue to be able to broadcast live over the telephone and it's astonishing they've allowed that to go on,''
Tom Bettag, the executive producer of ''The CBS Evening News,'' said that the restrictions were ''a major inhibiting factor'' in the decision by CBS not to send its anchor, Dan Rather, back to Beijing. 
''You have to pick your time very carefully,'' Mr. Bettag said. 
''The story is changing pretty fast and clearly the Government is exerting great control. 
Citizens are very hesitant to talk with foreign journalists.''
ABC and NBC did not send their evening news anchors to cover the meeting last month between Chinese and Soviet leaders, while CBS and CNN did.
Mr. Brokaw received his visa last month when the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, visited China. 
Mr. Brokaw did not cover that event. 
The visa was good for one entry over a 60-day period and is still good.
Mr. Brokaw will use the NBC crew already in China.
