
Qiao Shi, the Communist Party leader whose major role was reaffirmed by the Beijing radio early today, has had a long career in the shadowy Chinese security apparatus and is believed to be close to old-guard conservatives.
Before the crisis in Beijing, Mr. Qiao was officially listed as the third-ranking member of the standing committee of the party Politburo, following only Zhao Ziyang, the General Secretary, and Li Peng, the more orthodox Prime Minister. 
With Mr. Zhao reported to have been stripped of his post for taking too conciliatory a line toward student demonstrators and Mr. Li widely despised, Mr. Qiao could be in line for the top party or Government jobs.
Some analysts say that may have been what elderly party hard-liners had long planned as they maneuvered over the last few years to place the 65-year-old Mr. Qiao in a highly unusual combination of powerful positions.
While Mr. Qiao is little known to foreigners and had an obscure early career, his current roster of titles suggests he may have been groomed for power.
 
Top Internal Security Officer
Qiao Shi (the name is pronounced chow shur) is the Communist Party's top internal security officer, as head of what is known as the Leading Group for Political and Legal Affairs under the Central Committee. 
This agency oversees the work of the Ministry of Public Security and all the police and courts in China.
It was apparently because of this job that the Supreme People's Court sent him the message broadcast by Radio Beijing. 
This post was formerly held by Peng Zhen, one of the leading conservatives.
To some analysts, the message to Mr. Qiao also suggested the possibility that China's current leaders may be moving toward a new stage of the crackdown involving trials of some of the student demonstrators or even party leaders accused of joining with them.
Mr. Qiao, a native of Zhejiang Province near Shanghai, is also head of the Personnel Leading Group of the Central Committee, which oversees the party organization department and is responsible for making all promotions and demotions in the party.
Moreover, Mr. Qiao is secretary of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission, which investigates corruption within the party and any violations of party rules. 
He succeeded Chen Yun, another elderly conservative, in this post and may have been placed there by Mr. Chen, analysts think.
 
Underground Agent in the '40's
In addition, Mr. Qiao is president of the Central Party School, where he oversees the party's theoretical journal, Seeking Truth.
Chinese familiar with Mr. Qiao's early life say he was an intelligence agent in the Communist underground in Shanghai during the civil war against the Nationalists in the 1940's. 
His official biography says he attended college in Shanghai. 
Few senior Chinese officials have college or even high-school degrees.
In the 1960's Mr. Qiao worked in the International Liaison Department of the Central Committee, which has responsibilty among other things for foreign intelligence and subversion. 
He disappeared in the Cultural Revolution, but later was promoted to deputy director and then director of the International Liaison Department.
Little is known about Mr. Qiao's family or personal life.
