
Foreigners fleeing Beijing are returning to their homes with terrifying stories of the killings they saw and the chaos they left behind.
They flew to Tokyo, Hong Kong and other cities after several countries ordered their citizens to leave the Chinese capital, where soldiers have killed or wounded thousands of people in crushing a pro-democracy movement.
''I saw a soldier's body, burned, hanging from the bridge,'' an Australian tourist, Jimmie Reid, said in Hong Kong. 
''That made me get the hell out of there.''
He said people told him the soldier had killed children and women.
'Anything That Moved'
Yves Robert, a French tour guide who arrived in Paris with a group of 40 tourists, said: ''We were shot at by the tanks at the Beijing Hotel doorway. 
They were shooting at anything that moved,''
Another foreigner, Ryoichi Kikukawa, a Japanese businessman, said in Tokyo, ''I came out to the veranda of the Minzu Hotel to see what was happening and gunfire from a tank hit the veranda about 20 inches above my head.''
Peter White, an English teacher from Ithaca, N.Y., got up before dawn yesterday to line up for a ticket on the same Japan Airlines flight.
As he was about to enter a taxi in front of his hotel, Mr. White said, he threw himself to the ground because of gunfire from soldiers, which shattered windows on upper floors. 
''I think it was their way of telling us to get back inside,'' he said.
 
Some Left Behind
Mr. White expressed concern for 20 American friends, including a pregnant woman, who he believed were still in Beijing.
In Frankfurt, Donald Pierre-Louis said: ''There's chaos, even panic, at the airport. 
Everybody is trying to leave'' Beijing.
Mr. Pierre-Louis, a 34-year-old native of Haiti, arrived with his wife, Danielle, and their two young children. 
He said they kept up with events by watching American cable television at their hotel.
''They cut off our phones for nearly two days but for some reason they left the television on,'' he said. 
''The more we saw the more afraid we got.''
Carol Benedict, a graduate student at Stanford University who was doing research in Beijing, said in Tokyo, ''Gasoline is a problem.''
She said her taxi driver said he had only enough for one more trip ''and all the gasoline stations are closed.''
 
Killings in Dormitory
One American woman who arrived in Tokyo yesterday had been in a dormitory where soldiers entered firing guns, killing a number of students, according to her friends. 
She was too upset to talk to a reporter.
''The airline offices were just two blocks from our hotel, but with all the tanks out there and gunfire it was too long a walk to risk,'' Ms. Benedict said.
Ms. Benedict told of a group of seven American students who tried to stick together in their efforts to escape, helped by a Japanese student who found them airline tickets. 
But he could get them only three tickets, and ''we had to leave the other four behind,'' she said.
''The last we knew they were out on Changan Avenue trying to get to the airline offices, but that was where the heaviest fighting was going on,'' she said. 
''I don't know what happened to them.''
 
Information Was Scarce
She said the lack of reliable information was the main problem. 
''It was very difficult to get phone calls through,'' said Ms. Benedict, who moved around trying to find a safe spot in Beijing clutching a shortwave radio to get BBC reports on what was happening in various parts of the city. 
''People were getting hysterical.''
''There were hordes of people at the airport,'' she said. 
''It was hot and humid, kids everywhere, people near panic, thinking, 'Today I have to get out at all costs.'
'' She said she had heard loud booms that sounded like artillery fire within range of the airport.
Some embassies, under gunfire, seemed overwhelmed with the task of evacuating their citizens, leaving some feeling stranded.
''The American Embassy made it very clear that transportation arrangements were up to us,'' said Mr. White, who said he was worried as other embassies pulled out their students, leaving him at his university as the last foreigner, with no clear directions from the embassy whether to stay or leave.
The embassy sent a convoy to bring American students to safety Monday, but some students, unsure whether they were safer on campuses, where army units were rumored to be preparing to attack, or downtown where gunfire was already erupting, stayed behind.
Chinese cheered the American convoy of a half-dozen vehicles led by a limousine flying an American flag, and flashed victory signs as it wound through the city trying to find a safe route, Ms. Benedict said.
''Chinese people are clearly looking to the American Government and the American people for support, and that seems to put American citizens at risk,'' she said, because the Chinese Government ''will try to suppress that kind of thinking.''
