
With the tumult in China continuing, the separate theaters of the new Soviet candor - adventurous at home, strategically crimped abroad - have never been clearer.
As President Mikhail S. Gorbachev returned today to the international stage, arriving for a summit meeting in Bonn, he left behind the jarring, exhilarating novelty of domestic outspokenness in the name of democracy in the new national congress. 
But this only underscored his own painstakingly uncritical view of China's violent repression of its pro-democracy demonstrators.
President Gorbachev was the most talkative man on the Soviet television, day in and day out, no topics barred, for two weeks of give and take on domestic issues. 
But he shunned the same garrulousness over China, as if glasnost were not for export.
Won't Risk New Opening
''He will stick to this policy, without a doubt,'' said an experienced Asian ambassador here.
''He's worked too long and too hard to rebuild the China tie to risk it now with a critical remark,'' said the diplomat, who estimated that Mr. Gorbachev personally weighed each word in the resolution adopted last week by the Soviet congress that defended China and condemned outside critics for stirring ''passions'' over Beijing's internal affairs.
In private, some Foreign Ministry officials concede their discomfort about the repression in China, but mainly in ways as pragmatic as Mr. Gorbachev's policy. 
One ranking official said that by attracting the world's news organizations to Beijing for his mid-May summit meeting there, Mr. Gorbachev may have unintentionally increased the stakes of civil demonstration and made the problem more difficult for the Beijing regime in the early stages.
 
Cautious and Terse
Unlike some Western leaders who condemned the violence, Mr. Gorbachev has been cautious and terse, declining even to match the restrained criticism of President Bush, which was accompanied by American military sanctions.
''Let Bush speak for himself,'' Mr. Gorbachev declared. 
He has remained resolute in his policy of noninterference, whatever the outrage of other nations, as he works toward links with China that could help to resuscitate the despairing Soviet economy.
In the view of a Western expert on Chinese-Soviet relations, Gorbachev's approach seems like basic, time-tested Machiavelli. 
But it is uncharacteristic Gorbachev after all the plain-spoken and world-stunning initiatives he has made in the name of disarmament and democracy.
''He's got to know he copped out on Beijing after all his months of talking about progress on human rights,'' the expert said. 
''And it's shameful, even if his reasons can be seen.''
 
A Call for 'Dialogue'
The most Mr. Gorbachev has allowed was a mention of concern about the violence and a hope that ''dialogue'' would settle it. 
But he never acknowledged the bloodshed inflicted on civil demonstrators by Chinese troops, and neither have Government-controlled news organizations here.
Instead, Soviet newspapers and television have presented what seems, in these giddily forthright days, like an exercise in the nostalgia of Communist censorship: a 1950's-steeped sympathetic parroting of official Chinese press reports about a responsible government dealing properly with ''reactionary forces'' who were supported by the ''incitement to hatred'' of foreign voices.
Lacking the shocking television coverage of the Beijing bloodshed, the Soviet public has spared Mr. Gorbachev moral pressure at home, making it far easier for him to stand strictly by the noninterference policy that has been one of the tenets of his laborious rapprochement with the Chinese after 20 years of bad relations.
 
Sakharov Plea Ignored
He stood fast particularly in the face of withering complaint in the final moments of the new congress's inaugural session from Andrei D. Sakharov, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, who refused to be silenced and demanded in the name of humanity that the congress denounce the killings by the Beijing regime. 
''Enough, enough,'' Mr. Gorbachev said firmly, preferring the congress's resolution of support for Beijing.
''Remember that the Soviets did the most of the work to get back into China, and it was hard work,'' a Western diplomat said, speculating on Mr. Gorbachev's intensity in not seeing the new ties broken by one violent episode. 
''Still, you can question his strategy in the long run if moderates finally do gain control in China.''
Another diplomat stressed ''the glass house'' caution of Mr. Gorbachev. His full domestic realm, whatever the excitement over free-wheeling declarations in the congress, includes persistent, explosive mixes of civil demonstrations, grass-roots violence and martial-law standoffs in outlying republics and among ethnic groups.
 
Bush 'No Less Strategic'
''President Bush has been no less strategic in his approach,'' a pro-Gorbachev diplomat commented, saying that the White House criticism could have been more sweeping, considering public outrage in the United States, and that the White House also stopped short of altering commercial and ambassadorial ties to China.
''No doubt the violence took Gorbachev by surprise when he came back from Beijing,'' the diplomat said. 
''But he has to stick with his policy. 
He wants relations with China to be his model of normalization, of noninterference with other nations.''
The diplomat said the defensible denominator in both glasnost and Soviet policy in China was Mr. Gorbachev's overriding need to do anything it takes to rouse the Soviet economy.
