
Slowly, Beijing residents are peering out of their windows into the winding alleyways where they live to talk about the events of the last few days. 
But the more they look, the more they see that life is not normal, and it is not clear when it will return that way.
A high school teacher went to work this week because she knew her students were supposed to take a practice exam for entrance to college. 
As soon as they began the test, the sounds of gunfire and falling artillery shells rang throughout the classroom.
The teacher decided to send the students home and to distribute three days worth of material, including sample tests, to the students. 
''Students, please go home and take the tests by yourselves,'' she said.
 
Inaptly Named Thoroughfare
In the district of Xidan, near where much of the bloodshed took place, about 25 burned-out cars still stretch across the Avenue of Eternal Peace, or Changan Avenue, as a reminder of the unrest that overcame the capital a few days ago. 
But people have begun to emerge onto the streets, partly to buy food and partly to seek answers from their neighbors to the confusion that has reigned.
''We want to work but we can't,'' a middle-age office worker said. 
''We are petrified to go out, and besides, there is no transportation.''
Throughout Beijing, there are no buses, no subways, no newspapers, no stores, no work. 
There are watermelons, tomatoes and chopped meat, but there are long lines and the prices are rising as quickly as supplies are disappearing.
 
No Free Rides
Taxis are so hard to get that one driver demanded $1,000 from a Japanese-American passenger for a half-hour trip to the airport that normally costs $10. 
And rickshaw rides that usually cost less than $1 are now going for $8.
The broad streets are mostly deserted because without buses or trolley cars, there is no way to get around. 
People ride their bicycles, but even so, there are so many blockades that detours are inevitable. 
One large intersection was blocked by eight buses interwoven in a spiral, and others are blocked by burning cars.
Many people still do not venture farther than the alleyways where they live, and even so there are rumors that the troops are willing to chase citizens into these lanes to shoot them.
Although most of the main stores are closed, some smaller shops are open, and the smaller vendors are selling vegetables and chopped meat. 
For these, there are long lines. 
''The cucumbers and cabbage are two to three times the price they were last week,'' said a young woman waiting to buy vegetables. 
''And you can't even get salt, vinegar or soy sauce.''
 
The News Isn't Newsy
Life inside the home may be just as strange, especially if it revolves around television programs. 
Lately, there has not been much news on the main station. 
Almost the whole day is taken up with educational programs, like engineering mathematics.
In an almost eerie example of Government-orchestrated time lapse, the television news at noon today broadcast feature programs that were weeks old.
''International Children's day is approaching,'' the voice-over said. 
The holiday was on June 1. 
Another piece of footage was about an artist using an electric iron to create an artistic work. 
That, too, had been shown before.
Then after the news program ended officially at 12:30, the screen reverted to the middle of a mathematics lesson. 
Five minutes later, footage taken with Government cameras flashed across the screen, as an announcer explained that scoundrels and hoodlums were attacking tanks and armored personnel carriers.
The screen then cut back to several hours of educational programming.
