
Their pain and despair obvious, a group of young Chinese studying in the New York area spent yesterday afternoon earnestly questioning three dissidents from Eastern Europe. 
They asked how the dissidents and their colleagues had managed to bring on the erosion of Communist totalitarianism in their countries and to survive deadening terror, the kind that came when troops fired on students in central Beijing.
The East Europeans - a Pole, a Hungarian and a Russian - were brought together with the Chinese students by Helsinki Watch, an international human rights-monitoring organization, at its headquarters at 485 Fifth Avenue, near 42d Street. 
Altogether, about 25 people were present, including journalists, human rights workers and a dozen or so Chinese.
All the East Europeans, who are visiting the United States, emphasized that there were great differences in the struggles for democracy and against Communism in each of their countries, let alone with the recent upheavals in China. 
Yet they said there were some striking similarities.
 
Earlier Uses of Force
''What comes most to mind is that the crackdown in Beijing recalled earlier crackdowns by Communists,'' noted Miklos Haraszti, a Hungarian dissident who founded an independent journal, Beszelo. 
''It is like what happened in Budapest in 1956, in Prague in 1968 and in Poland in 1981,'' when the Solidarity free trade union movement was apparently crushed in martial law.
Grzegorz Boguta, a Polish biophysicist, was one of the intellectual supporters of the Solidarity movement who was arrested in December 1981 and detained for months. 
In halting English, he told the Chinese students that as he was put into prison with thousands of others, he despaired. 
''But the Polish people have had a tradition of conspiracy,'' he said, ''and we were able to work to remove the monopoly of information from the full control of the Government.''
Mr. Boguta, a slight 34-year-old, did not go on at length about his own experience, apparently for fear of seeming immodest. 
But in fact, immediately after his release, he played a key role in organizing Nowa, the largest of more than 100 underground publishing houses bringing out the works of prominent writers and creating a network of illicit print shops and clandestine newspapers.
''With newspapers and books we were able to challenge the Government control over information and propaganda,'' said Mr. Boguta, stopping just short of urging Chinese students to do the same. 
The publishing house he founded is now fully accepted, if not legal, and since Solidarity's return to legal status this year, it has helped publish the union's new daily in editions of more than 500,000.
 
Not Just a Tactical Matter
Mr. Boguta was prepared to tell how his colleagues had gained the confidence and knowledge under martial law to begin acquiring newsprint and hiding duplicating machines and making contacts with foreign benefactors. 
But his Chinese questioners seemed more concerned with broader issues.
''In China, propaganda is the most important instrument of control,'' said one of the young Chinese, adding that he could not see how the Government's stranglehold on information could be loosened all over the country. 
He noted that in Poland, as he understood it, the Roman Catholic Church had provided sanctuaries for dissidents. 
''I know that when you provide some democracy, the people will want more, and that gives strength,'' he said. 
''But what can you do when there is no democracy at all?''
Another Chinese student emphasized what he thought to be a substantial difference. 
''You know our Communist leaders are different,'' he said. 
In China, it is still the generation of the revolution that is in charge, he said, while in Eastern Europe the Communist parties have passed into the hands of ''technocrats and bureaucrats,'' who were perhaps less ideological and more pragmatic.
Mr. Haraszti, who is returning to Budapest this week to attend the ceremony at which the unmarked grave of Imre Nagy, the Prime Minister executed after the 1956 uprising, will be decorated, said he viewed the events in Beijing as a typical response of Communist leaders who ''think they can reform Comunism but keep a one-party system.''
''That is the first stage,'' he said.
 
Views on Coercion
Lev M. Timofeyev, a Soviet dissident who was released from prison after Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power in 1985, observed that unfortunately the kind of sacrifices that were extracted from the protesting Chinese students in Tiananmen Square was ''a necessary payment of blood for bringing about democracy.''
A major area of concern reflected by the Chinese was how the East Europeans, notably the Solidarity movement in Poland, had forged links between intellectuals and workers. 
''Can you tell us how Soldarity was seen by the common people?'' asked Fu Xinyuan, a chemist doing postdoctoral research at Rockefeller University in New York.
Mr. Haraszti, who is the author of a book called ''Worker in a Workers' State,'' noted that in Hungary, and presumbly in China, the authorities had traditionally sought to exploit differences between workers and students. 
He said he saw similarities between Chinese attempts to blame a few intellectuals for the democracy movement and events in his own country after 1956.
Mr. Boguta noted that in Poland, the links established through Solidarity came after long periods of mistrust. 
He said that during a Polish student rebellion in 1968, workers were sent to beat up students. 
Conversely, in 1970, when workers were killed during a strike at the Gdansk shipyards, students failed to answer their call for help. 
Only in 1976, when groups of intellectuals founded KOR, the Workers Defense Committee, did workers and students begin to talk and listen to each other.
One point made repeatedly was that the first responsibility of students and intellectuals is to testify to killings and terror. 
''If the terror succeeds to keep everybody quiet, then nothing else will make any difference,'' Mr. Haraszti said. 
''This is what intellectuals have to do. 
They have to say what is happening and keep as many people as possible from copping out. 
That is our responsibility.''
