
While China's leaders tighten their grip over the political situation, they now face the even more complicated task of controlling the economy after their military crackdown shook the confidence of Chinese and foreigners alike.
For the Government to consolidate its control and win popular support, it needs to demonstrate that the economy is stable and that everyone will enjoy economic gains. 
But diplomats and others say the crackdown has already eroded confidence that had been carefully nurtured over a decade, and it will be an immensely difficult challenge to restore this confidence and achieve broad economic satisfaction.
Even before the pro-democracy demonstrations began two months ago, there were signs that the country's economy was facing difficulties, and some say that these contributed to the public dissatisfaction with the leadership.
''The economy is in very serious trouble, which is partly why people took to the streets to begin with,'' said Christine Wong, a specialist in the Chinese economy at the University of California at Santa Cruz. 
''There are many structural problems.''
#3 Areas of Difficulty Diplomats and economists suggest at least three areas in which the economy faces severe new difficulties as a result of the crackdown:
* Foreign investors and lenders will be wary of providing the capital and expertise for China to sustain its export-oriented development strategy in coastal areas.
* Tourists, who have been a growing source of hard currency, will be frightened away for some time, and in the meantime the many tourist hotels around the nation are likely to lose money. 
This may also shake the confidence of investors.
* The Government will be tempted to buy support from workers by increasing wages and bonuses, making it tougher to enforce the austerity plan to which it is committed. 
Without austerity, inflation is likely to rise and create new political problems.
These challenges could create major political difficulties for the leadership, which some diplomats say could prevent Prime Minister Li Peng and others in power from holding on to their positions for very long.
The June 4 crackdown, in which the army opened fire on civilians, led almost all foreign business executives to leave the country. 
Many of the executives have no specific date for their return, and many tour agencies have canceled trips to China until mid-summer.
International organizations like the World Bank, as well as foreign governments and private lenders, have postponed approvals for loans and are reviewing their credit assessments of China in light of what has happened. 
Eroding Confidence In Chinese Intentions Growing tensions with the United States will also make American companies think twice about how the business climate will be affected, especially if the tensions lead to anti-American sentiment in China.
Most fundamentally, the confidence around the world that China was really entirely committed to economic restructuring has been eroded. 
Some of the elderly leaders who seem to have reasserted control during the crackdown may be less enthusiastic about change than those who had been in power, and this could significantly reshape the landscape for foreign businesses.
''People had convinced themselves that China was heading for capitalism,'' said William H. Overholdt, director of research at the brokerage arm of Bankers Trust Company in Hong Kong.
''There's been a great disillusionment. 
If they had listened to what the leaders were saying, they would have understood that there was a very important market-oriented reform, but a very limited one and democracy is not what they had in mind.''
In a sign of concern at the economic consequences of the crackdown, senior officials have begun to reaffirm the open-door policy and stress that they will protect foreign investments. 
For example, Mayor Li Ruihuan of Tianjin said today that China would not only maintain its reform and open-door policies, but even carry them further.
 
'Could Mislead Investors'
Localities have also announced that their policies toward foreign investment will be unchanged and that their regions are safe for foreign tourists.
For businesses that already have operations in China, there is little talk of leaving, especially if they have been profitable up until now. 
The problem the Chinese will have to grapple with is persuading companies to make new investments in China.
''Some foreign businesses are likely to come to the conclusion that a Government that tells its people and the world that there were no students fired on in the square could also mislead potential foreign investors,'' said Stanley B. Lubman, a lawyer who specializes in China at Thelen, Marrin, Johnson & Bridges in San Francisco.
It is not clear exactly what it will take to reassure investors. 
Some say it will take a clear indication that the policies of liberalization, like enterprise restructuring, experiments with joint-stock companies and price liberalization, will continue. 
Some say it will take a long period of calm to reassure investors.
China's Business Begins to Suffer ''There will be some risk-takers,'' an investment analyst in New York said. 
''But for now, 90 percent of them will be scared away.''
Others are more optimistic, and they have begun to compare the crackdown in Beijing with incidents like the suppression of a rebellion in the South Korean city of Kwangju in 1980. 
At least 191 people died then, but business bounced back and is now stronger than ever.
Business in China, however, was beginning to suffer even before the pro-democracy demonstrations began. 
Foreign businesses were feeling the pinch from China's retrenchment policies that began last fall, and Prime Minister Li has said the next few years are to be those of austerity. 
The tightening of credit had local companies short of liquidity, and this had affected some joint ventures whose payments were delayed.
 
Regional Variations
But a great deal also depends on where the investment is. 
Guangdong and the coastal areas, for instance, seem to be affected less by the demonstrations, although there were some in major cities. 
As long as those areas are allowed to exercise the economic freedoms they have been given, then investors will probably continue to move in, diplomats and economists say.
''Western companies are faced with a moral dilemma,'' a Western resident in Guangdong said. 
''Headquarters may have instructed them not to continue with talks and ordered them to leave because they felt it was not appropriate to be in China when the Government massacres its people.''
''But like the Cantonese themselves, the joint ventures have a real stake in the economy,'' he added. 
''They are here to make money and to expand their share. 
It is hard for them to walk away.''
11,535 Tourists Who Won't Show Up So far, China's travel industry has been hit the hardest. 
Pacific Delight Tours Inc., based in New York, says it canceled tours through mid-July, a move that affected ''several hundred'' travelers.
The authorities here reported that 11,535 potential tourists had their trips to the capital canceled, and that for the month of May, the tourism bureau lost about $4 million, or 10 percent of its annual projected earnings, the English-language China Daily said today.
China's economic landscape is complicated by the task of restructuring the national economy and shedding rigidities and inefficient institutions. 
Many economists say China needs to focus on building institutions - like its banking system, tax system, legal system and physical infrastructure - but there are doubts about whether the leadership can concentrate on these tasks when it is preoccupied by political turmoil. 
10% Growth a Year in Economy ''This is a very complicated process that they were right in the middle of,'' said Albert Keidel, who runs Rock Creek Research, Inc., an economic consulting firm in Washington, D.C. 
''It involves some masterful combinations.''
There is no question that China's economy has been growing at a remarkable pace - about 10 percent per year over the last decade - so that even if it suddenly were cut in half, the economy's growth still would be respectable. 
Indeed, China's difficulties arise from growth that is too fast, rather than too slow.
But some of the measures for controlling an overheated economy -tightening credit and investment spending, holding down wages, at the same time finding new sources of raw materials and energy - are unpopular, and this can be politically risky when people have already demonstrated discontent with the Government. 
Trying to Beat Galloping Inflation Already the rate of inflation in the first quarter of this year reached 27.5 percent on an annual basis, among the highest rates the country has seen since 1949, and some unofficial estimates put the number much higher. 
While this number is small compared with some other developing countries, the Chinese are sensitive to inflation not only because they have never experienced such high inflation in the recent past, but also because one of the platforms of the Communist Party is stable prices.
In many ways, inflation is a necessary product of economic restructuring, especially price liberalization, so that the problem facing the leadership is largely one of managing the perception of inflation.
One ineffective but tempting way to manage this perception is to ''buy off'' workers by giving them higher wages and bonuses, Western economists say. 
Even before the crackdown, factories were paying their workers to keep them indoors and off the streets when pro-democracy demonstrations were taking place. 
And the television news this week has shown scenes of soldiers distributing grain to citizens when there were shortages last week.
 
'More of a Squeeze Later'
The intention has apparently been to appease workers by giving them material benefits. 
But paying more money to workers means expanding the state budget, and this could lead to new inflationary pressures if the Government needs to borrow or print more money.
''Anytime you get political turmoil, you get a kick to inflation,'' said Mr. Overholdt of Bankers Trust. 
''And obviously it is a kick to inflation that was already very bad, and that means more of a squeeze later. 
The question is whether it is an ongoing process or a one-time kick.''
Buying people's loyalty is a major challenge for another reason: the central Government is desperately short of cash, and this could lead to unrest in both rural and urban areas. 
Some one-third of state enterprises are in financial difficulties, according to official estimates, and the lack of funds has also begun to affect the peasants who make up about two-thirds of China's population. 
A Harvest at Hand, But So Little Cash The shortage of cash is an urgent problem because the harvest season is near. 
The Government already says it lacks nearly $3 billion needed to pay for about half of the grain, oil, tea and raw silk that will be harvested this summer.
Moreover, the price at which the farmers are forced to sell their grain to the state is about one-third the market price, so that farmers are reluctant to turn over a portion of their grain to the state, when they can fetch much higher prices on the market.
Local governments in many parts of the nation have been forced this year to give ''white slips,'' or I.O.U.'s, to farmers instead of cash to pay for pigs and tea and other commodities sold to the Government. 
These slips of paper are likely to be prevalent this year, official press articles have said.
A recent article in Peasant's Daily described how much the farmers dreaded the visits by local government officials who came to collect the grain. 
In some villages last year, the article said, children were given large bells and told to hide in tree tops, and when they saw the grain officials approaching, they would ring the bells as a signal for the farmers to run home and lock their doors. 
What of Rural Areas?
Thus, for the Government, paying low prices and then not giving farmers cash for their crops will create greater political risks at a time when urban populations have already shown their dissatisfaction, diplomats say.
The recent political turmoil, which occurred mainly in the cities, will probably not have a direct effect on peasants, who tend to be scattered across a vast amount of land, specialists say. 
But unless the Government cashes in the ''white slips,'' the farmers are unlikely to show much enthusiasm for the Government.
''The peasant dissatisfaction is certainly real,'' a Western diplomat in Beijing said. 
''But it is unlikely that peasant discontent could turn into resistance. 
They are spread out, so it is hard to organize resistance.''
