
China today ordered the expulsion within 72 hours of two Beijing-based American journalists, including one from the Voice of America.
The Government accused the two reporters, Alan W. Pessin of the Voice of America and John E. Pomfret of The Associated Press, of violating martial-law regulations in Beijing.
China also issued its official version of the ''shocking counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the democracy movement is now labeled, and announced new arrests throughout the nation of students and workers who had been leaders of the movement.
 
In Reaction to U.S. 
Criticism
The expulsion order against the two reporters was widely interpreted as an extension of the Government's campaign of criticism against the United States in the last few days. 
The campaign began after the Bush Administration condemned the violent suppression of the democracy movement and then offered refuge to the dissident Fang Lizhi in the American Embassy in Beijing.
Because the Voice of America is an arm of the United States Government, the expulsion of Mr. Pessin is particularly likely to affect relations between Beijing and Washington. 
It is not clear if the United States will respond by expelling Chinese reporters or by taking other measures.
The regulations that the two reporters are accused of violating in effect ban all news coverage about the democracy movement or about the enforcement of martial law, as well as almost all interviews. 
The restrictions are far more sweeping than the censorship that has been imposed on foreign correspondents in other countries, like Israel and South Africa.
The authorities had not, however, enforced the regulations very strictly. 
At least three foreign correspondents were shot or stabbed by soldiers during the crackdown, and others have been detained and then released, but there have been hundreds of foreign journalists covering the events of the last few weeks, and until today only one - a British television journalist in Shanghai who had entered China on a tourist visa - had been expelled.
 
Details of Charges
The Government accused Mr. Pessin, who is 33 years old, of violating the censorship restrictions by ''conducting illegal press coverage after martial law was declared'' and by ''writing news stories to distort facts, spread rumor and incite and stir up turmoil and counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
''I didn't do anything that other foreign journalists didn't do,'' Mr. Pessin said tonight in his office, while surrounded by other journalists and well-wishers. 
''As with other foreign journalists, we made every effort to check facts and give balanced reporting.''
The official New China News Agency accused Mr. Pomfret of ''having frequent contacts with illegal-organization leaders, passing on information to and providing shelter for them,'' while ''obtaining state secrets through illegal means.''
''I did my job,'' Mr. Pomfret, 30, said. 
''Everything I learned I put on the Associated Press wire.''
Louis D. Boccardi, president and general manager of The Associated Press, said in a statement, ''We deplore and have protested in the strongest terms to the Chinese Government this unwarranted assault on fair and factual reporting.''
 
Bureaus Wlll Remain Open
The Beijing bureaus of both the Voice of America and The Associated Press will continue to function, as the Voice of America has one other accredited correspondent and The Associated Press has two others. 
While the Chinese have given no assurances, both organizations expect the Government to accredit new correspondents to fill the positions of those expelled.
About 40 American journalists are accredited to work in Beijing, and the number has been slowly increasing in recent years. 
The Americans are the largest group of foreign journalists here, followed by the Japanese.
Mr. Pomfret was informed of his expulsion at a meeting with Chinese officials that lasted for more than an hour. 
A brief United States Embassy statement said Mr. Pomfret had been told he had an ''uncooperative attitude'' because he would not provide information about his Chinese contacts.
In the last two days, Chinese news organizations have somewhat slackened their denunciations of the Voice of America and of the United States Embassy.
 
Official Denunciation
But today, the authoritative Communist Paarty newspaper People's Daily carried a front-page editorial condemning Mr. Fang as a behind-the-scenes instigator of the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion'' and warning that some people in the United States are hostile to China and risk harming relations between the two countries.
''The events in China are entirely China's internal affair,'' the editorial said. 
''Any attempt to put pressure on the Chinese Government is foolish and shortsighted, and is doomed to fail. 
China has always sought to develop its relations with the United States. 
We hope the United States will consider the overall importance of our long-term mutual interests, and stop interfering in China's internal affairs, so as to avoid harming our bilateral relations.''
The television news announced tonight that 2 of the 21 student leaders who had been placed on a wanted list on Tuesday had been captured. 
It said that Zhou Fengsuo, a 22-year-old physics student in Beijing, had been turned in by his sister and her husband. 
The television program showed the couple being interviewed by the police.
The other student leader who was reported arrested was Xiong Yan, a 24-year-old graduate law student in Beijing. 
The circumstances of Mr. Xiong's arrest were not reported.
The authorities also announced the arrest of 32 people who were arrested at the Beijing rail station while trying to flee the capital. 
Most were apparently workers who had been involved in the democracy movement.
 
One More Official Reappears
The news program also showed one more Politburo member, Yang Rudai, the Sichuan province party leader, which suggested that he may not be purged in the restructuring now under way in the Communist Party leadership. 
Mr. Yang's appearance means that only two Politburo members are unaccounted for: Zhao Ziyang, the national party's General Secretary, and Hu Qili, who supported Mr. Zhao in favoring conciliation with student leaders.
If only Mr. Zhao and Mr. Hu are purged from the Politburo, which now has 16 full members and one alternate member, that would be a milder shake-up than was originally feared when Mr. Zhao and Mr. Hu disappeared from view nearly three weeks ago, the day before the declaration of martial law.
The detailed account issued today of the events of June 3 and 4, when troops opened fire on civilians and killed hundreds or perhaps thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators and passers-by, recounted events in a way very different than did Western correspondents who were on the scene.
The report, issued by the Beijing Communist Party Propaganda Department, suggests that ''a certain small group of people'' had ''plotted to arrest party and state leaders and seize political power.''
 
Many Dissimilarities Seen
It said the group, financed by ''overseas reactionary political forces,'' attacked the army on the night of June 3, killing nearly 100 soldiers and policemen and wounding thousands. 
Only then, after exercising extraordinary restraint, were the troops obliged to fire their weapons, the official history asserts. 
As a result, it says, about 100 civilians were killed and nearly 1,000 were wounded.
While this version of events is sure to be widely circulated in China in the coming weeks, it bears little relationship to the scenes that actually took place on the Avenue of Eternal Peace, or Changan Avenue, and in other parts of Beijing, as witnessed by this reporter and other correspondents.
While many civilians did attack and kill soldiers, using clubs, firebombs and their bare hands, the violence did not begin solely with the demonstrators. 
It began on both sides almost spontaneously when the troops arrived and tried to push their way forward.
The troops repeatedly fired their machine guns directly at crowds of demonstrators, including those who posed no threat, including those who were fleeing as fast as they could run. 
From interviews with doctors and hospital officials, there is no doubt that far more than 100 civilians were shot, stabbed or beaten to death, and that civilian casualties far outweighed military casualties.
