
Wang Qing's phone bill last month was $120, about six times what it used to be. 
He has been calling his wife's parents in China almost daily since student protesters began their occupation of Tiananmen Square, describing shootings, troop movements and political struggles barely mentioned in the Chinese press.
''Nobody cares about the money,'' Mr. Wang, 26 years old and a doctoral candidate in electrical engineering at Columbia University, said. 
''Some students have bills of $500 or $600.''
In a park near the United Nations, in a tent city marked ''Tiananmen Square,'' dozens of students have been fasting since Monday, demanding that the Security Council meet to condemn the killing of protesters in Beijing and calling for sanctions against China for human-rights abuses.
One of the hunger strikers, Zhang Wei, a 37-year-old graduate student from Beijing who is enrolled at Hunter College and studying dance, said: ''I called my sister and she said she feels like a small animal - if somebody doesn't like her, they would just kill her. 
There is nothing like human rights, nothing like democracy.''
 
Fear of Future Punishment
About 40,000 Chinese students are enrolled in American universities. 
They have comfortable lives that until recently revolved around course enrollments, vacations and exams. 
Most are supported by scholarships or the Chinese Government in college dormitories and subsidized apartment houses.
With China convulsed by violence and uncertainty, most of those students have ignored the library and the lab in favor of a task they consider most crucial: relaying information about the democracy movement in China to people living there - usually their parents, siblings and friends - to keep the movement alive.
At considerable personal expense, Chinese students in the United States are organizing protests, sending news over computers and fax machines, and maintaining a steady voice of opposition.
Although they worry that they will be punished when they return to China, which most of them must under their visa restrictions, they are urging their schools to object to the recent course of events in China. 
Some have urged their schools to fly flags at half-staff, One student, Song Li, a doctoral candidate in finance at Columbia University, has organized the Foundation of Chinese Students for Democracy to collect contributions in support of the movement in the United States.
 
U.S. Influences in China
Despite their fears, none of the students interviewed requested anonymity. 
They said whatever retribution they might face later was nothing compared with what others have already suffered.
''We are doing all this not only out of consideration for our parents, brothers, sisters and friends, but because we understand it is critical for the future of China, said Yang Lixin, a 32-year-old doctoral candidate in sociology at Columbia University.
The movement, with its pro-democracy spirituals and folk songs, and its banners decrying fascism, and its art work featuring such images as angels hovering over protesters' heads, incorporates many ideas that originated outside China. 
At a recent protest, Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, was represented as the ghost in the logo from the movie ''Ghostbusters.''
Mr. Zhang was interviewed as he sat behind the wheel of his gray Ford Fairmont. 
On the hood he had painted the characters for ''Down With'' above unflattering portraits of Mr. Deng and Prime Minister Li Peng.
The students interviewed in the United States, all in their 20's and 30's, described growing up during a period when American influences were infiltrating China in forms that ranged from television programs to high-school teachers. 
At the same time, young people were seeing their parents' experiences and becoming less and less enamored of Chinese Communism, the students said.
 
Parent Who 'Feels Cheated'
Mr. Wang remembers seeing his mother beaten in front of a large crowd when he was 8 years old, because ''she spoke frankly'' during the Cultural Revolution, he said. 
His father, still a member of the Communist Party in Shandong Province, ''quit the Communist idea about 10 or 15 years ago,'' he said. 
''My father looks back on his life, and he feels cheated. 
I think a lot of our parents feel like this.''
Several students said they had trouble getting into high schools because their parents had been labeled rightists or other undesirable elements. 
Others remembered growing up on communal farms after their families were sent to the countryside as punishment.
The students saw ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ''Star Wars'' in Chinese theaters. 
They read novels and Reader's Digest, and listened to Voice of America broadcasts. 
They were exposed to American students and teachers - in China as the result of exchange programs expanded since 1978 and in the United States -who were vocal in their criticism of American government. 
''They set themselves as an example of freedom,'' said Yu Renqiu, a doctoral candidate in American history at New York University.
Fu Xinyuan, 34, a postdoctoral fellow specializing in cancer research at Rockefeller University, said contact with everyday liberties impressed him most. 
Mr. Fu, whose 18-month-old son is in China with his relatives, did graduate research in biochemistry at Columbia.
 
Democracy and Change
''My boss at Columbia, sometimes we would call him a slave driver, and we would have big arguments,'' he said. 
''But afterwards, we have good relations. 
In China, that would be unthinkable. 
You never challenge your leader. 
Once you have a bad relationship with your leader, you ruin your whole life. 
You won't get a promotion or anything else.''
Comparisons were inevitable once Chinese students experienced another way of life, Mr. Fu said. 
He said the seeds of the democracy movement were sown when translated Western books began to be published in Beijing in the early 1980's. 
''These were the driving force behind the whole thing,'' he said, rummaging through a stack of paperbacks in his apartment and holding up copies of ''Seven Modern American Novelists,'' and John Dewey's ''Problems of Men.''
The students interviewed disagreed about the timetable and the form of changes in the Chinese Government. 
They were adamant that the Communist system had to be dismantled, but uncertain about what would take its place.
For some, democracy seems to be synonymous with change. 
Their imagined democracy is a gentle one, more representative of the system by definition than practice.
 
Government 'Must Love People'
''When I say democracy, I just think my country's government must be changed,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
''It must be younger, and it must love people, not cheat people.''
Many of the students said they envisioned a multiparty system that would protect Chinese people by preventing the emergence of dictators. 
''The common sense is that if the one-party system exists, China has no future,'' said Li Shiwei, 31, who is studying for a Ph.D. in physics at New York University. 
''It's not just Deng Xiaoping, Li Peng and the others. 
We must end the one-party dictatorship.''
Other students said any opposition party would have trouble surviving at the moment. 
''If someone dares to organize a small group, they will be immediately put in prison,'' said Yun Zhang, a Ph.D. candidate in biochemistry at the City University Graduate Center. 
''It's necessary to have some short-term improvement first. 
The approach of the students is to say, we don't want a new party. 
We just want you to report our discussions.''
 
George Washington as Leader
The student demands include free speech, freedom of association and fair coverage of news in China. 
They are also demanding that laws be upheld fairly. 
They have condemned corruption among government officials, which is reported to exist at all levels.
Calling for freedom of the press, freedom of speech and other basic rights are not revolutionary, Mr. Yu said. 
Those rights are protected in the Chinese Constitution, but circumvented by other policies, including the imposition of martial law. 
The statue put in Tiananmen Square last month was not a replica of the Statue of Liberty, he said, but was meant to represent a goddess of freedom and democracy. 
''Those are Chinese ideals,'' Mr. Yu said.
The students interviewed often mentioned George Washington as an ideal leader, and they yearn for a Chinese version. 
Their outlooks ranged from optimistic to fatalistic, and they avidly practice democracy at every opportunity. 
Their meetings appear to have abandoned the painstakingly polite discussion format for a more spontaneous approach that occasionally becomes a free-for-all.
''Sometimes their ideas are quite empty,'' Mr. Fu said. 
''They only know slogans, but not the steps they should take. 
But that is not a big question. 
They never got a chance to practice democracy before.''
 
History of Student Dissent
By becoming overseas activists, the students are replicating in some ways the May Fourth Movement of 1919.
But there are striking differences between the students of 1919 and the students of the present. 
The most obvious is that during the early part of the century, students focused on the occupation of China by European and Japanese powers, making that an illustration of the urgent need for change. 
Today the students say their enemy is within, wrapping itself in the Chinese Constitution and protecting itself with the People's Liberation Army.
''I don't think history is repeating itself,'' Miss Yun said. 
''It's on a higher, brighter level. 
This movement may still fail, but I think its chances of winning are much greater.''
''History repeats itself in that Deng Xiaoping repeated the tragedy of Mao Zedong,'' Mr. Yu said. 
''But Chinese people are different this time.''
Meanwhile, the students are searching for leaders. 
''We need someone like Washington,'' Mr. Wang said.
Miss Yun agreed, but only in principle. 
''If we had a Washington,'' she said, ''he would be killed immediately.''
Chinese students at Columbia University gathering yesterday to discuss the situation in China after the crackdown in Beijing. 
From the left were Song Li, Yang Lixin, Wang Qing and Yun Zhang (The New York Times/Jack Manning)
