
The state-controlled local radio and television stations reported today that nine labor dissidents and an undisclosed number of other people had been arrested for their roles in the protests that have swept this city in recent weeks.
The arrests, which followed official warnings two days ago that ''bad elements'' would be ''punished in accordance with the law,'' indicated that the roundup of protesters under way in Beijing was spreading to other cities.
Shanghai, China's most populous city and most important economic center, has been the scene of an active student-led protest movement since the army's savage crackdown in Beijing nearly a week ago. 
Earlier this week, it brought the public transportation system to a halt, and on Friday it brought tens of thousands of anti-Government demonstrators into the streets.
But today, in a move that seemed to signal at least a temporary move away from open protests, students from at least one university, the East China Teachers College, were reported to have voted to disband the autonomous student union formed early in the pro-democracy movement to coordinate student activities. 
Students elsewhere said they expected the unions at other universities to follow the East China Teachers College example.
 
'Don't Have the Strength'
''We simply don't have the strength to do more now,'' said a student union member from Fudan University, adding that many students ''feel that further activism now would get us nowhere. 
They think it would be better to reflect on our experience and to renew the movement sometime in the future.''
Still, several dozen students from Fudan University staged a sit-in today in front of the Shanghai police headquarters, protesting the arrest of nine members of the Autonomous Workers Union.
The Shanghai radio reported this morning that the nine were taken in by the police on Friday. 
There was no information on their identities or the charges against them, but their arrests were seen here as a sign that the crackdown against the democracy movement was intensifying.
While many workers have taken part in the last few days of protest, the Autonomous Workers Union does not seem to have played a major role in the pro-democracy movement. 
There are no officially recognized trade unions in China.
 
Others Reported Arrested
The state press also said today that several other people, described as ''hooligans,'' have been arrested in the last couple of days. 
The evening television news today showed footage of some of them being led to vans by the police and of others being interrogated, apparently at police headquarters.
The Shanghai radio, meanwhile, has been broadcasting almost continuous accounts of the ''counterrevolutionary'' and ''reactionary'' activities of students and others that ''brought great harm'' to the city. 
The radio has asked those who have engaged in ''illegal demonstrations'' and who have ''disrupted transportation'' to register with the police. 
So far, however, there have been no reports that any student leaders have been arrested.
It was unclear whether the crackdown in Shanghai would extend to intellectual circles.
Officials in Shanghai, in contrast with their counterparts in Beijing, have generally taken a moderate approach to the protest movement.
The authorities apparently have not wanted to arouse the anger of a population already seemingly bitter and shocked by the military operation in the capital six days ago.
At the small sit-in in front police headquarters today, for instance, there was no attempt by the police to remove demonstrators by force. 
After several hours, the students sent a small delegation inside police headquarters, presumably to discuss their grievances, while the rest of them returned to their campus.
Still, there have been signs of a toughening attitude on the part of the authorities here toward protesters. 
Brigades of workers militia, hastily organized by the authorities to aid the police, were visible at various points around Shanghai today. 
Their presence at major intersections and near the universities was evidently designed to forestall any resumption of efforts to disrupt the transportation system or to set up new street barricades.
Today for the first time local television showed footage of Friday's mass demonstration, characterizing it as illegal and charging that student demands against the Government were ''unreasonable.''
The students' demands were that flags be flown at half-staff in mourning for the students slain in Beijing, that the local governments agree to a ''dialogue'' with students and that videotapes of the army's operation in Beijing be made public.
At the demonstration on Friday, student speakers warned that if their demands were not met within 48 hours, they would step up their protests. 
Today, however, it seemed unlikely that the students retained the strength needed to follow up on the ultimatum.
