
If they are not pushed too far, there are astounding parallels between the Chinese students demonstrating for democracy in Tiananmen Square in recent weeks and the American students demonstrating for an end to the Vietnam War at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968, before most of those Chinese students were even born.
The most obvious is their shared conviction that ''the whole world is watching.''
That August in Chicago, 21 years ago, it was the slogan most often repeated. 
In Beijing, one American journalist reported its use, but that may be skeptically attributed to persistence in memory. 
More important were the outward signs. 
There were banners in English, surely not for the local population. 
There were plenty of competent English speakers available for interviews. 
There were volunteers to help identify who were the hunger strikers, who were the medical students, who were the demonstrators from the far provinces playing to the television cameras.
Playing to the television cameras was conscious, deliberate and fundamental. 
The presence of cameras alters the shape of events; there need be no more argument about that. 
But is that necessarily bad?
Should television cameras therefore stay away?
Does it make things better to keep them away?
The cameras did not create the anger; they shaped the protest. 
Removing them would make no difference, except it might intensify the anger, which would have found other ways to express itself, perhaps more destructive ways because they would have to be more secret ways.
But it was the physical presence of the cameras that shaped the events, not the journalists who accompanied the cameras. 
The big thing, in Beijing as it had been in Chicago, was that the cameras were there. 
In both cases, moreover, they had not been brought there to show the protest. 
They came to Chicago to cover the Democratic National Convention. 
They came to Beijing to cover the reconciliation of the two Communist giants after three decades of hostility, that is, to report the visit of the Soviet Union's Mikhail Gorbachev. 
The demonstrators knew the cameras would be there and planned their demonstrations to be where the cameras already were.
There is a serious danger of reading too much future portent into this. 
Such live coverage is possible under only the most specialized conditions. 
The site must be small enough to fall within the scope of a few cameras, and it must have boundaries, Tiananmen Square or Michigan Avenue. 
(In 1968, the demonstration in Chicago's Grant Park the night before the convention opened, vigorously broken up by the police, was out of range of live cameras and was not shown on television, except for some snippets of film on the next morning's news programs.) Sports provide paradigmatic live television - a baseball or basketball or football game, a horse race. 
They, too, must be within encompassable boundaries. 
The race for the America's Cup is within boundaries that are too vast. 
As a result, no picture ever tells you at a glance who is winning. 
It would be the same for live coverage of land or sea battles, the horrible prospect so often deplored by those whose chief interest in television is to deplore it. 
Fighting on land quickly boils down to company or platoon action, while in modern sea battles everything is over the horizon from everything else.
Nor can equipment be hastily deployed for live coverage of future demonstrations. 
Logistical plans for television coverage of the 1968 convention were complete to the smallest detail at least a year before the event; months before Mr. Gorbachev arrived in China, networks planning to be there had received permission for camera locations and transmission facilities, submitted detailed lists of equipment complete to serial numbers of camera lenses, and identified by name and passport number every reporter, technician and gofer who was coming. 
The storming of the Winter Palace by the Bolsheviks in March 1917 could have been covered on live television only if someone had attended to the planning no later than May Day 1916.
Both CBS and CNN are properly proud of having had their cameras in Tiananmen Square. 
And it was the presence of those cameras that mattered. 
What was important to the demonstrators was that they present their case to television, which they were thus able to do. 
But the Chinese authorities were aware of the subtle implications of being seen on television in a way that the authorities of Chicago in 1968 were not.
The Mayor of Chicago thought demonstrators were coming to disrupt the convention or start a revolution or both. 
To frustrate them, he took advantage of a strike of union telephone installers that applied to all television except that in the Convention Hall itself. 
As a result, there could be no live coverage of action in the streets. 
Television, however, was far enough advanced to put live cameras in the streets, record their pictures on videotape and supply the necessary power for both with portable generators. 
It was those tapes that America saw - the suppression of the demonstrators which was called by the subsequent official inquiry ''a police riot,'' the first time that term was ever used.
What much of the world saw in 1989 were live pictures of hunger strikers and their supporters in Tiananmen Square. 
It also saw official representatives of the Chinese Government, embarrassed and clearly aware that they were losing face on live television, order all transmissions shut down, a process exquisitely covered and painfully dragged out by the American television staffs themselves. 
The medium, which had been the message, was becoming the masseuse. 
Next there were news reports, presumably from inside the Government of China itself, of hard-liners versus moderates, that is, those who wanted to stop all this nonsense by force against those who were sure that in time the students would tire and the viewers get bored. 
That was as much as the outside world could see when the transmissions were stopped, but the news has plunged on. 
History is not limited to the eye of the beholder.
The physical suppression of the 1968 demonstration by the Chicago police certainly disrupted the Democratic Party's convention and may have defeated its candidate in the Presidential election that followed. 
It was many years, however, between the police being shown clubbing demonstrators on Michigan Avenue and the end of the war in Vietnam. 
We do not yet know whether the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square for more democracy will have parallel results.
