
China lifted martial law in Beijing today, and within hours the United States announced that it was easing its blanket opposition to World Bank loans to China.
Prime Minister Li Peng, who announced the lifting of martial law in a nationally televised speech, warned against unspecified foreign and domestic ''hostile forces'' that he said were working to subvert Communism in China. 
But he said that by and large, China had returned to normal.
Despite the official end of martial law, the Chinese authorities retain the ability and apparently a desire to suppress any signs of political unrest, experts on China said. 
[An article and excerpts from Mr. Li's speech are on page A10.] Administration's China Policy Vice President Dan Quayle said the lifting of martial law vindicated Mr. Bush's efforts to re-establish normal diplomatic ties with China. 
But experts on China challenged the Administration's assertion that Mr. Bush's policy had helped persuade China to lift martial law.
The Chinese action did not quell Congressional anger over the crackdown, in which hundreds of Chinese civilians were killed. 
Nor did it seem likely to mute Congressional criticism of President Bush's policy, which many lawmakers consider excessively sympathetic to the Chinese leadership.
The White House and the State Department praised China's decision to lift martial law as ''a positive step.''
Neither publicly acknowledged that strict laws banning dissent remained in force in China.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said that in ''a partial change of policy'' the United States would examine loans on a case-by-case basis.
 
Support for 'Human-Needs Loans'
Proposals for seven loans totaling $780 million have been held at the World Bank since the beginning of the crackdown in June.
Mr. Bush does not want economic sanctions to ''hurt the Chinese people,'' Miss Tutwiler said. 
''Our view is that basic human-needs loans - for instance, earthquake relief - should be permitted periodically to go forward,'' she said.
Miss Tutwiler said the United States' revised position had been under consideration for months and was ''not connected'' to the end of martial law. 
The timing, she said, ''is sheerly, honestly coincidence.''
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, said the lifting of martial law was ''an empty gesture.''
''Beijing can lift martial law because it does not need martial law to crush dissent,'' she said, noting that China had adopted a series of measures outlawing anti-Government demonstrations and authorizing security forces to stop protests.
Mrs. Pelosi is the author of a bill that would prohibit the United States from sending Chinese students back to China. 
Mr. Bush vetoed it on Nov. 
30. Congress is likely to override the veto soon after it reconvenes on Jan. 
23. Congress is also likely to approve a package of economic and military sanctions banning arms sales to China and suspending Federal insurance for private investments in the country.
 
Quayle Sees Policy 'Dividends'
Martial law was imposed in parts of Beijing on May 20, after more than a million people filled the streets of the capital to support demands for greater democracy.
Sweeping restrictions were imposed, including total bans on rumor-mongering, boycotts of classes, petitions, meetings and anything else that was deemed threatening to what Beijing called ''the normal order.''
After the June 3-4 military crackdown on the democracy movement, the Government banned all dissident organizations and gave the police the right to shoot demonstrators. 
Thousands of arrests and scores of executions followed.
It is not clear if China made a commitment to lift martial law when Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, visited Beijing last month.
Mr. Quayle said today that the lifting of martial law illustrated the ''dividends from the President's policy toward China.''
A White House spokesman, Roman Popadiuk, said the Administration would like to think that the trips to China by Mr. Scowcroft, in July and December, ''played a part'' in China's decision to lift martial law.
 
Repression Said to Continue
But outside experts expressed doubt. 
A professor of Chinese history at Boston University, Merle Goldman, said ''the Chinese have been suffering economically'' and need financial assistance from the World Bank.
''The lifting of martial law is essentially a cosmetic or symbolic gesture to show that things are back to normal and to impress the outside world,'' she said in a telephone interview.
If China released student leaders, intellectuals and workers imprisoned in the crackdown on the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, that would provide tangible evidence of political liberalization in China, Mrs. Goldman said.
Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the lifting of martial law was ''a small step in the right direction.''
But Mr. Pell, a Rhode Island Democrat, said, ''It does not change the fundamental circumstance of repression in China or the many serious issues that remain - human rights and freedom for arrested students and workers, human rights and an end to martial law in Tibet, and a halt to Chinese arms for Pol Pot and the murderous Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.''
Mr. Popadiuk said: ''We are pleased with the lifting of martial law and see it as a positive step.''
He said that the lifting of martial law was ''another in a series of positive steps'' by China. 
In the last few weeks, he said, the Chinese Government has readmitted a reporter from the Voice of America, has discussed renewal of a student-exchange program suspended since June and has curtailed criticism of the United States in Chinese newspapers and broadcasts.
Mr. Popadiuk also said the Chinese had ''announced that they would not be selling medium-range missiles to the Middle East.''
But an Arabic-language newspaper published in London said this week that Syria had ''officially received assurances from the Chinese Government of its commitment to military cooperation between the two countries.''
The report said that China had rejected American pressure to stop selling weapons to Syria.
 
Pledge to Halt Missiles Sales
Chinese officials concluded that they needed to maintain the military capabilities of Syria and Israel's other Arab neighbors because ''Israel is being armed with the most technologically advanced weapons,'' the report said.
Asked about that report, Miss Tutwiler affirmed that China had announced that it ''would not be selling medium-range missiles to the Middle East.''
She said she did not know if the Administration was monitoring China's adherence to its pledge.
It was not immediately clear what types of World Bank loans would be acceptable to the United States. 
Miss Tutwiler said that though Washington might support some ''basic human needs loans'' to China, it would continue to discourage ''project loans.''
A spokesman for the Asia division of the bank, Pastor B. Sison, said the distinction was not obvious, because loans for specific projects could also serve basic human needs.
