
At a time when the international arms trade may be starting to grow again after a sharp decline, the United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to establish the first register of international arms sales.
The aim of the register, which won strong support in the wake of the Persian Gulf war, is to curb the international traffic in arms by publicizing transactions and identifying potential trouble spots by showing where arm stocks are increasing.
Although the resolution calls on all nations to provide the world organization with an annual list of all imports and exports of arms, it does not require them to do so. 
Nonetheless, diplomats say most countries are likely to comply with the register because of the overwhelming support it has received and particularly because of its support from Britain, the United States, France and the Soviet Union, which together account for about 70 percent of the international arms trade.
The register will initially apply only to sales of heavy arms, like tanks, armored fighting vehicles, artillery pieces, combat aircraft and attack helicopters, that can be used to seize and hold territory.
China, a major arms producer, refused to take part in today's vote, even though it participated in talks with the other four permanent members of the Security Council in Paris last summer on curbing arms sales to the Middle East. 
China offered no explanation for its stand. 
But some diplomats said the Chinese action might reflect the importance that arms sales has acquired for China as a source of foreign currency as well as resentment at the pressure to go along with the register from the United States and other Western supporters.
In today's vote, 150 countries approved the resolution establishing the register and procedures for gradually expanding its scope to cover not only heavy arms shipments but also lighter weapons, arms production and national weapon stocks. 
While no nation voted against, Cuba and Iraq abstained.
During the debate in committee, many developing countries complained that the register would discriminate against poorer nations, which import their arms, by requiring them to disclose their purchases while protecting richer nations with indigenous arms industries against revealing their military strength.
As a result, the resolution calls on the Secretary General to set up an expert group to report next year on ways of extending the register to include lighter arms as well as production sites and national weapon stocks. 
This could transform the register from a list of arms sales into one for conventional arms that includes transfers.
Purchases by developing countries account for about 75 to 80 percent of the international arms trade, which peaked at $57 billion in 1987 before declining, according to the latest report of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
The United States earned $14 billion from selling arms overseas in 1988, the last year for which Government figures are available, accounting for 29 percent of the world market. 
According to the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, world arms exports fell 13 percent from $57 billion in 1987 to $49 billion in 1988, the lowest level in 10 years. 
But in average terms, the agency says, sales have been declining 3 percent a year since 1983.
"For the first time in history, perhaps, the favorable prospects for controlling the transfer of conventional weapons appear to outweigh the negative," Prof. Stephanie Neuman, an arms control expert at Columbia University, said in a paper for the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Professor Neuman attributes the downward trend to the increasing sophistication of weapons, deteriorating economic conditions and "the new political order."
But at a recent meeting of arms control scholars at Wisconsin University, Michael Klare of Hampshire College said Iraq's defeat in the gulf war might encourage developing countries to shift from their preference for large tank and infantry formations to a greater emphasis on aircraft, helicopters and precision-guided munitions.
