
In a ruling likely to have far-reaching consequences for Chinese and Soviet staff members here, a United Nations tribunal has said the organization had no right to dismiss three Chinese employees at the Beijing Government's request earlier this year.
The United Nations Administrative Tribunal ordered Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to reinstate the three translators or pay them three years' salary as compensation.
The ruling, made public on Thursday, was hailed as a victory in the fight to end the Chinese and Soviet practice of sending their nationals to the United Nations for fixed periods instead of allowing them to become career international civil servants.
The United States and other Western countries have complained that this practice prevents the emergence of an independent international civil service, as called for in the United Nations Charter.
China and the Soviet Union have also made their nationals serving with United Nations organizations hand over part of their salaries to their governments.
 
Decision Is Praised
''This is an important decision which will strengthen the concept of an independent international civil service and also strengthen the hand of the Secretary General in resisting pressure from member governments over staff,'' said Lowell L. Flanders, the President of the union of United Nations employees.
The tribunal, which adjudicates disputes between United Nations employees and the Secretary General, said governmnents may only legally send their nationals to the United Nations for a fixed period of time if all the parties concerned make a formal agreement to this effect.
The three Chinese translators were among nine Chinese staff members whose contracts were not renewed by the Secretary General earlier this year after Beijing said it wanted them sent home. 
All nine had protested the Chinese Government's suppression of the pro-democracy movement last June and refused to surrender part of their salaries to China's United Nations mission as required. 
The other six are also appealing their dismissals.
Mr. Flanders said that about 700 United Nations Secretariat employees were on temporary assignment from China, the Soviet Union and some Eastern European countries and that many may now seek career appointments as a result of today's ruling. 
The Soviet Union has already said it intends to end its assignment policy.
