
The Bush Administration has decided to allow American commercial satellites to be launched on Soviet rockets for the first time, Government and industry officials say.
As a result of decisions made at the White House this week, an Australian commercial venture, the Cape York Space Agency, will be permitted to hire an American company to run a base in northern Australia from which Soviet rockets will carry satellites into orbit for customers from around the world, perhaps as early as 1995, the officials said.
The project provides a major opportunity for the Soviet Union to expand its international space business and is expected to increase foreign competitive pressures on the American rocket industry.
 
Industry Is Divided
Domestic rocket companies had opposed letting the Soviet Union provide launching services for American customers, but the satellite makers had favored opening up the market. 
Representatives for both groups said the Administration's decision seemed evenhanded, since it includes provisions intended to insure that the Soviet Union prices its rockets fairly.
In recent years, the United States has shifted the job of launching privately owned satellites from the Government's space agency to aerospace companies. 
In August the McDonnell Douglas Corporation became the first company to conduct a commercial launching in the United States, and nearly a dozen launchings by several companies are expected this year.
 
Among Thorniest of Issues
But the domestic industry faces intense competition from the European consortium Arianespace, and the availability of inexpensive rockets from China and the Soviet Union is also a worry. 
The domestic industry has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in a business fraught with technical risks.
This week the National Space Council, an interagency committee headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, completed a broad set of recommendations on the international launching business. 
The decision to approve the Cape York project was among the thorniest issues in the council's policy review.
Last year China won limited approval from the United States Government to launch a few American satellites from Chinese territory. 
But despite the warming in Soviet-American relations, and considerable interest from American satellite companies in using Soviet launching services, there has never been any sign that the United States was ready to abandon its opposition to a cooperative arrangement, especially if it meant launching American satellites from Soviet soil. 
Rocket and satellite technologies are strictly controlled because of their military applications.
 
The Australian Arrangement
Now the State Department, with the approval of the White House, intends to grant an initial export license to the USBI division of the United Technologies Corporation to operate the Cape York station, where Soviet Zenit rockets could be launched beginning in 1995. 
The project, estimated to cost nearly $500 million, is backed by an Australian real estate development company and would not receive any Australian Government money. 
The Soviet space agency, Glavkosmos, would supply rockets and engineers, but would not own a share in the venture.
Despite strong opposition from American rocket manufacturers and some skepticism by other Federal agencies, the State Department is expected to issue the Cape York license once President Bush approves the new policy governing the international trade in rocket-launching services, several officials said.
The proposal for the Australian launchings of Soviet rockets first surfaced last year, but the Bush Administration decided not to make a decision on it without conducting a broad review of its policies for promoting the domestic commercial space industry. 
The Reagan Administration had never considered letting the Soviet Union launch American satellites, but improving relations between the two countries made the Australian proposal palatable to the Bush Administration.
Although the National Space Council's recommendations will not become final until formally approved by President Bush, the new policy has already been explained by White House officials to a few Congressional aides, and after several weeks of intense review virtually all the details have been agreed to by senior officials on the space council.
 
'A Middle Approach'
Dawn Gifford, a Washington lawyer who is director of the Competitive Alliance for Space Enterprise, an industry group that represents rocket makers and satellite makers, said the Administration had taken ''a reasonable approach'' in its policy review. 
''My impression is that they have taken a middle approach that will wash well with both sides,'' Ms. Gifford said of the industry's reaction.
One rocket industry official said the new policy appeared to include safeguards against unfair competition from the Soviet Union, but this executive cautioned that enforcing those provisions might be difficult.
Satellite manufacturers tend to favor letting the Soviet Union supply launching services.
Although more licenses would be needed later for American-made satellites to be launched from Cape York, the decision to allow an American company to manage the operation in effect insures the approval of subsequent licenses as long as Australia and the Soviet Union adhere to conditions laid down by the United States.
Those conditions, as outlined in the space council's recommendations, include a Soviet promise to limit its overseas launching to a single site and to abide by an international agreement controlling the export of ballistic missile technologies, which have commercial and military uses.
Domestic rocket manufacturers, supported by officials from agencies as diverse as the Defense Department and the Transportation Department, have argued that the domestic rocket industry would suffer unfairly in a head-to-head competition with Soviet suppliers.
But the State Department viewed the Soviet-Australian proposal favorably, and American satellite companies warned that if they were prevented from putting their payloads on the cheapest available rockets they would eventually lose business to emerging foreign satellite makers who faced no such restrictions.
 
Australians Eager for Business
The Australians had pressed the proposal vigorously because they are eager to play a bigger role in the potentially lucrative aerospace business.
The Administration's policy statement declares it is in the economic and national security interests of the United States to maintain a healthy commercial industry for launching satellites. 
But it seeks to foster that industry by promoting further research into advanced rockets that would cost less and be more reliable, rather than by using trade barriers.
An official said the policy called for negotiating new ''rules of the road'' with the European Space Agency, which controls Arianespace. 
The official said such rules might include limiting subsidies and defining fair pricing for launching satellites.
The Soviet Union and China would be expected to adhere to the same fair-trade policies in pricing their rockets on the world markets, even though it is very difficult to estimate fair prices for rockets designed and built in controlled economies. 
How to Enforce Fair Pricing?
One major point that remains to be resolved is how the United States and other Western nations would enforce the fair-pricing rules.
Some Administration officials favor using export licenses as the enforcement mechanism. 
For example, if the United States determines that the Soviet Union is pricing its rockets too low, licenses would be refused for future American launchings from Cape York, shutting the Australian base off from its biggest source of customers.
But the State Department is arguing that the export control laws, which it administers, are meant only to prevent the sale of militarily useful technologies to potential adversaries, and not to enforce fair-trade rules.
The domestic rocket manufacturers are already complaining that China has violated the agreement it signed last year, when the United States first allowed that country to launch a few American satellites on Chinese rockets. 
The American companies say China submitted an unreasonably low bid when it recently won a contract to launch a communications satellite for an Arab consortium.
The American companies, supported by their European competitors, are urging the State Department to revoke licenses for the Chinese to launch more American satellites if the United States determines that the Chinese bids have been unfairly priced.
