
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told South Korea today that Washington considered North Korea's suspected development of nuclear weapons a matter of urgent global concern and that it was now actively exploring with Japan, China and the Soviet Union ways to curtail the move.
South Korea's Foreign Minister, Lee Sang Ock, endorsed the American initiative to try to further isolate North Korea economically and diplomatically until it opened its nuclear installation to international inspection and halted work on what is suspected to be a reprocessing plant capable of producing hundreds of pounds of weapons-grade plutonimum, a senior Korean official said.
In his meeting with the South Korean Foreign Minister, Mr. Baker said Washington had come to see curtailment of the North Korean nuclear development as a "matter of urgency," and something that was "not just a Korean issue but a matter of global concern," according to a Korean official who attended the talks. 
The North Korean nuclear activity is at Yongbyon, a nuclear complex 60 miles north of Pyongyang.
While Mr. Baker is in Seoul for the annual meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, to discuss Asian trade issues, many of his private discussions have focused on how to generate pressures to halt the North Korean nuclear program before it sets off a nuclear arms race in Asia that could prompt South Korea and Japan to try to develop nuclear weapons.
 
Forcing Inspections
Having been slow to react to the Iraqi nuclear bomb program, the Bush Administration is trying to make sure that it does not repeat the mistake by underestimating North Korea's moves.
For now, American officials say they are concentrating their efforts on finding ways to squeeze the North Koreans diplomatically and economically in order to force them to open their nuclear installation to the International Atomic Energy Agency for inspection, which the North is obliged to do as a signer of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
But a senior State Department official told reporters traveling with Mr. Baker today that while it is important to compel North Korea to open itself up to international inspection, "we need to go beyond that -- there should not be a reprocessing facility there at all."
Up to now, North Korea has refused to allow any inspection of its nuclear installations and has spurned a South Korean offer on Nov. 
8 that both nations agree to forego development of any weapons of mass destruction.
 
Tokyo's Important Gesture
The first sign of the multilateral American approach was manifested Tuesday when Japan, at Mr. Baker's behest, pledged that it would not go ahead with plans to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea unless it scrapped its center for reprocessing nuclear fuel. 
Japan's Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, who met Mr. Baker in Tokyo on Monday, made the pledge during a meeting in Seoul with his Korean counterpart.
That gesture was important to the South Koreans, who were annoyed by a visit to North Korea by senior members of Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party. 
Privately, some South Korean diplomats suspect that the Japanese would prefer that the peninsula remain divided so they would never have to compete with a unified Korea -- much the way many European countries preferred a divided Germany.
In addition, on Tuesday Korea's President, Roh Tae Woo, formally requested China's help in halting the North Korean nuclear program. 
The request was made in Seoul during the first meeting between a Chinese Foreign Minister and a south Korean President. 
The two countries still do not have diplomatic relations.
The Korean pres agency quoted President Roh as telling Foreign Minister Qian Qichen that continued North Korean nuclear development "would endanger stability, not only on the Korean Peninsula, but also in northeast Asia and the whole world."
 
Last Major Benefactor
American officials said that in their tentative discussions with the Chinese on the issue, Beijing had indicated some willingness to be helpful, but the extent of cooperation remained to be seen.
With the Soviet Union having already slashed its economic aid to Pyongyang, and demanding to be paid in hard currency for its oil exports to North Korea, China remains the last major benefactor to the isolated Government of Kim Il Sung.
Speaking generally of the evolving American strategy on the North Korean nuclear issue, a senior State Department official said: "What we are doing at this stage is first trying to raise the profile of the issue as a way of starting to build some multilateral diplomacy to deal with it. 
Second, we are starting to discuss specific steps people might take. 
The overall strategy is to heighten the sense of isolation of the North Koreans."
Korean officials said Foreign Minister Lee indicated to the Secretary that while his country wanted to see the North Korean nuclear program stopped immediately, it was ambivalent about involving outside powers in too formal a manner.
 
Role of 4 Powers
While the Koreans recognize that without outside pressure there is little hope that the North Koreans will respond, they have long maintained that the fate of the Korean Peninsuala, particularly questions involving unification and relations between north and south, should be resolved in a direct dialogue between Seoul and Pyongyang.
That is because the North insists that the South is simply a colonial creation of the United States and therefore it will only discuss security issues with Washington and not Seoul. 
The North wants to conclude a peace treaty with Washington that would ultimately lead to a withdrawal of American forces from the South.
As The Korea Times said in a lead editorial today: "The two-plus-four formula, or German unification method, is not applicable to the Korean case, as the Korean question is fundamentally in the South and North's own hands, whereas German unification required the sanction of the four allied forces -- the United States, the Soviet Union, France and Britain. 
Yet, it is the stark reality that Korean problems will be hardly unravelled without assistance and guarantees of the four neighboring powers."
Mr. Baker, Korean officials said, assured Mr. Lee that while Washington sought to enlist the help of Japan, China and the Soviet Union, it would not be in any institutionalized form -- as with the German unification process -- and that the United States still believed that the political future of Korea should be determined in direct talks between the North and the South.
Korean officials quoted Mr. Baker as saying that neverthless, "because of the urgency of the matter all interested countries should be involved."
