
A yacht carrying 85 people from the People's Republic of China was seized this week by Federal authorities, who said the people were apparently being smuggled into the United States.
It was the fourth time in six months that officials have reported capturing a large group of illegal Chinese immigrants who had crossed the Pacific Ocean aboard a Taiwanese fishing vessel.
Coast Guard officers and immigration agents boarded the 57-foot yacht Liberated Lady in United States waters near Los Angeles on Tuesday and found the vessel packed with human cargo.
"It was deplorable," said Robert M. Moschorak, regional director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
"They were literally stuck in every nook and cranny."
He said the aliens may have been at sea for months.
 
16 Men Arrested
A few hours after stopping the yacht, the Coast Guard intercepted a Taiwanese fishing trawler that the authorities believe transported the aliens across the ocean before transferring them to the Liberated Lady.
Sixteen men aboard the two vessels were arrested and face criminal charges. 
The men, who remain in prison, could not be reached for comment. 
Mr. Moschorak would not say whether they are believed to part of a larger alien smuggling operation.
Interviews with the aliens disclosed that they were to be taken to New York City, where work awaited them, Mr. Moschorak said. 
He declined to say whether officials had identified any of the prospective employers.
Mr. Moschorak said the 85 people on the yacht were the fourth large group of illegal Chinese aliens to be caught in the United States since September, when immigration officials found 135 Chinese aliens being held by smugglers in a house in a Los Angeles suburb. 
Two smaller groups were later caught off the coast of Hawaii.
The cases were unprecedented, in terms of both the numbers of aliens and the amount of money involved, Mr. Moschorak said. 
"Some of the fees paid to the smugglers are as much as $25,000" a person, he said. 
"As long as people have that kind of money to offer, there's going to be someone who's willing to do the smuggling."
In the most recent case, the immigration service and the Coast Guard put the Liberated Lady under surveillance three weeks ago, when a group of Asian men bought it for $70,000 in cash.
The authorities say the boat picked up the aliens on Monday in a rendezvous with the Jinn Yin No. 1, a 150-foot Taiwanese trawler, 300 miles southwest of Los Angeles. 
The Coast Guard seized the smaller vessel when it re-entered United States waters, and caught the trawler in international waters about 400 miles offshore.
Mr. Moschorak said the citizenship and immigration status of the six-man crew of the yacht, including five ethnic Vietnamese and one ethnic Chinese, had not been determined. 
The entire 10-man crew of the trawler is believed to be from Taiwan.
The 16 crew members, who have not yet been indicted or arraigned, could face 85 counts of illegally bringing an alien into the country. 
Each count carries a penalty of up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
Some of the aliens will be held for a time as witnesses in the criminal case, but all 85 will eventually be returned to China.
