
A dispute between China and the United States about restrictions on diplomatic movements has grown into a case study in how negotiation strategies can go awry.
Chinese-American relations are generally friendly, and the United States characterizes the dispute as only an ''irritant'' in a cordial overall relationship. 
But no one knows how to remove the irritant, and instead of going away it has become worse.
The dispute originated in 1984, when the United States opened a consulate in the northeastern city of Shenyang. 
The small American diplomatic staff there was forbidden to travel by private car beyond the city limits, although they could travel to any open area by train or plane.
In fact, there are hardly any cities nearby that any diplomat could or would want to visit by car, so the restriction was not a major difficulty.
 
China Pressed to Relax Rule
It is not completely clear why the Chinese banned car travel in the area in the first place, except that the area may be sensitive because of its proximity to the North Korean border and because many companies in the military industry are believed to be in the northeast.
For some of the same reasons, the Americans may have wanted greater freedom to look around. 
So in negotiations beginning in 1987 the United States pressed China to relax the rule and warned that otherwise the State Department would be obliged by law to adopt reciprocal restrictions on Chinese diplomats based in the United States.
In October the United States finally adopted what officials felt was a measured response: Chinese diplomats based in Chicago were forbidden from driving by car outside Cook County, which includes Chicago. 
In fact, the Chinese were probably affected by the restriction more than the Americans in Shenyang had been, because they traveled more than their American counterparts and because when they traveled they were far more likely to drive.
In November, the Chinese responded by decreeing that American diplomats based in Shenyang and Shanghai would have to get permission 48 hours in advance before leaving those cities by any means, even public transportation.
 
Angry Chinese Response Feared
''We consider the Chinese restrictions unreasonable, since they go well beyond the restrictions on P.R.C. diplomats here,'' Phyllis E. Oakley, deputy to the State Department spokesman, said at a press briefing last week.
Li Zhaoxing, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said, ''It is entirely unreasonable for the U.S. 
State Department spokesman to say that.''
After the restrictions put in October on the Chinese Consulate in Chicago, he said, the Chinese side had no choice but to increase restrictions on the consulates in Shanghai and Shenyang.
Now the United States is in a difficult position. 
If it retaliates, as it is obliged to by law, by restricting movements of Chinese diplomats in New York or Houston or elsewhere, that might lead to an angry Chinese response and further escalation of what began as a minor frustration.
''We don't want to have a downward spiral,'' said an American diplomat in Beijing. 
The legislation requiring reciprocity includes no deadline, so the State Department can wait indefinitely before retaliating, in the hope that the threat will remove the restrictions.
 
Law Worked Well in Mexico
In the past, the reciprocity law has sometimes worked well. 
Mexico, for example, used to forbid diplomats stationed there from buying imported cars. 
After the United States responded by prohibiting Mexican diplomats stationed in the United States from buying imported cars, the rule was lifted.
So far in China, however, the reciprocal restrictions have increased the limits on travel instead of reducing them, and negotiators here are concerned that if the United States appears heavy-handed, that would do more harm than good.
''If you get their backs up and excite the strain in them that's upset by 100 years of Western domination, then that doesn't help,'' an American diplomat said.
Some diplomats also worry that if the Chinese are backed into a corner, they will apply reciprocity in ways that would not be welcome to American diplomats.
 
Frustrations With Beijing
For example, diplomats in Beijing are given badges that allow them to walk wherever they want to in airports. 
That is a useful privilege when receiving arriving dignitaries, and the United States would like to continue to enjoy it without giving Chinese diplomats license to roam at will through American airports.
On the American side, there are other frustrations with the Chinese. 
About 10 American diplomats are living in hotels in Beijing because China has not provided housing for them as promised. 
In early 1986, China pledged that it would provide 23 new apartments for the United States Embassy in Beijing by the end of 1987, but only eight were made available in that time. 
The reason was apparently construction delays.
Another problem for diplomats in China is that since April 1987, their spouses have not been able to hold jobs without giving up their diplomatic immunity. 
Since the State Department is not willing to allow spouses to give up their immunity, the spouses have usually had to give up their careers if their partner is assigned to Beijing.
An American official said there were some signs that the problem could be resolved soon with a bilateral agreement allowing spouses to retain immunity while holding jobs.
