
Granting a waiver of the sanctions announced by President Bush last month, State Department officials said today that the Boeing Company could sell four commercial jetliners to China.
The waiver involves only the four 757-200 aircraft. 
But State Department officials said the decision could have important long-term implications for Boeing, which hopes to remain active in China's potentially lucrative market for civilian aircraft.
The decision to grant the waiver was made by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and was coordinated with the White House, the officials said.
A White House spokesman said tonight that he did not know who in the White House had coordinated the decision, but said of Mr. Bush, ''I'm sure he's aware of it.''
 
No Softening Seen
The State Department asserted that the waiver did not represent a softening of the sanctions that President Bush had already put into place.
''I don't think the President ever intended to put a stop to this transaction,'' a State Department official said.
The decision to grant the waiver was quickly criticized by some members of Congress who have lobbied President Bush for tougher sanctions against China. 
Last month, Mr. Bush halted the sale of hardware and items of military value to increase the diplomatic pressure on Beijing after its crackdown on the pro-democracy movement.
''My concern is that there are powerful forces in this country that are ready to do business with China irrespective of what Chinese human rights are,'' said Representative Tom Lantos, a California Democrat who is a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 
''These people have many spokesmen within the Administration.''
 
Exports to Communist Nations
The State Department officials said the Boeing deal had been been held up because the plane's navigation system was on the State Department's munitions control list that applies to exports to Communist countries. 
The Bush sanctions blocked the sale of all items on that list.
But the officials said the navigation systems would be used in civilian aircraft and would have no important military value for the Chinese. 
''Our decision is in keeping with the President's intent not to disrupt nonmilitary commercial trade,'' a State Department spokesman said.
A State Department official said the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Boeing's principal rival, has also applied for a waiver of President Bush's sanctions, so that it might ship its navigation systems to Shanghai, where it is building its MD-82 midsize aircraft in a joint venture with the Chinese.
The State Department also authorized Honeywell Inc. to maintain navigation equipment in planes sold to China, arguing that this action was needed to protect the safety of Chinese airline passengers.
The four Boeing 757's are narrow-body 200-passenger planes, with a total value of about $200 million. 
They are part of an 11-plane order, but Administration officials said the exemption applies only to the four planes, which were scheduled for delivery in June.
Delivery of the remaining planes in the order depends on developments in China, the officials said. 
Boeing has already sent five 757's to China under a previous order, a company spokesman said.
The State Department officials said Boeing, which is based in Seattle, had pressed hard for a waiver, provoking some criticism in Congress.
 
Action With Allies Urged
Representative Lantos said the Administration should try to work out sanctions with allies to block the sale of commercial jetliners to China.
Such a move would ''exact a price,'' he said, adding, ''The Chinese must understand that massacres will not go unpunished.''
A State Department official said it would be a mistake to block American companies from selling planes to China, allowing airplane manufacturers from other countries to make the sales.
Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon, a Republican from Glens Falls, N.Y., who had also called for sanctions tougher than the Administration's, complained about the waiver, saying it sent the wrong message to the Chinese.
''We ought to be going to our allies to get them to join us in putting our foot down with the Chinese, instead of just saying that if we do not sell airliners to the Chinese somebody else will,'' he said.
Mr. Solomon said the decision to allow the sale might be a sign that the Administration also plans to allow the export of American communications satellites to China for launching on Chinese rockets under an agreement reached last year.
 
Also on Control List
The sanctions prevent the export of American-manufactured satellites to China since they are also on the munitions control list although do not have military use. 
An Australian consortium and a British-Chinese consortium, both of which arranged the Chinese launchings, are asking for exceptions from the sanctions.
Mr. Solomon has sponsored an amendment that would prohibit the export licensing for the satellites because of China's crackdown on the democracy movement. 
China has drawn customers for its launching of satellites because its prices are cheaper than those of American and Western European companies.
Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, which is based in St. Louis, have been competing for China's aircraft market.
Last month, China announced that it would buy 90 planes in the next four years to add to its commercial fleet of 420.
Boeing has sold 61 planes to China since the early 1970's for about $2.35 billion.
Some experts said China is significant more as a potential market than as a immediate purchaser of American planes.
''There is no doubt China represents a potentially huge market,'' said Jack A. Modzelewski, vice president of research for Paine Webber Inc. 
''But we do not see China as a major source of buying potential for aircraft in the next three to five years.''
 
Constraints on Purchases
Mr. Modzelewski said aircraft purchases would be constrained over the next several years because of slow economic growth in China and China's limited supplies of hard currency.
In response to questions, Boeing said in a statement that the company did not believe that the licenses for the navigation equipment on the four 757-200 planes should have been suspended. 
It said it had ''discussed that issue at length with appropriate Government agencies.''
An Administration official provided one example of Boeing's activity on the issue. 
He said Boeing helped draft language that was included in House legislation that stated items on the control list intended for civilian use should not be blocked.
It said the four planes would be delivered to Guangzhou Airlines and Shanghai Airlines as soon as possible.
