
Amid the uncertainty created by the unrest in China, American companies with operations there are being urged to consider a variety of options.
The United States-China Business Council's annual meeting held in Washington last week was dominated by talk of the outlook for operations in China, particularly for the short term, said Timothy A. Gelatt, a senior associate with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
Once the safety of employees is assured, Mr. Gelatt said, companies should scrutinize their obligations with Chinese partners and ''think about ways to deal with those in a situation in which they may not be able to handle them in person.''
''Nobody knows how long people will have to stay out of China,'' Mr. Gelatt said, ''but even if it is just a few weeks, things have to be watched carefully.''
Signs of Normality
Daniel L. Spiegel, a partner with the law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, said his clients were asking what signs to look for to show that the situation was returning to normal. 
Akin Gump is based in Washington and Texas.
But Charles J. Conroy, a partner at Baker & McKenzie, a law firm in New York, said he has advised clients at least to think about how to suspend or end operations if the situation worsens.
Albert Y. P'an of Transcapital International Inc. said he has told clients not to postpone any activities that are under way but not to start new ones.
Jack T. Huang, a senior associate at Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, a law firm in New York, said that it was too soon to talk about ending business relationships but that the Army's attack against students in Tiananmen Square would ''set things back for a number of years.''
 
'Lingering Uncertainty'
''The most terrible situation is the lingering uncertainty,'' he said. 
''Now you don't know what kind of game you'll be playing.''
Some companies like PPG Industries and SmithKline Beckman are keeping in direct contact with plants and partners in China to make sure that workers are safe and production is unimpeded.
Michael C. Oskenberg, a professor of political science at the University of Michigan and a senior adviser to Akin Gump, said a number of things had to occur in China before business relations could return to normal.
At the top of his list are the following actions: the removal of the military from the streets; regular appearances over several weeks of top leaders with identifiable positions; regular contact between the American and Chinese partners in joint ventures, and a declaration by the United States that calm had returned to China.
 
Mood in Hong Kong
Also important, Professor Oskenberg said, is the mood in Hong Kong, the British crown colony that is supposed to revert to Chinese control in 1997. 
Hong Kong has been a crucial link in the economic relationship between China and the West in the last decade, and feelings there can be assessed through such indicators as real estate prices and the local stock market index.
Mr. P'an of Transcapital said he sensed that Chinese business people would want to resume business deals where they were broken but that Western companies would probably want more assurances that their projects will be safe and profitable. 
Companies seeking future agreements, he said, will want faster returns on their money and more operating concessions.
 
If Contracts Are Suspended
If the situation worsens, it is possible to suspend contracts under Chinese law, said Mr. Conroy of Baker & McKenzie, but if the reason given is civil unrest or insurrection, the companies may face a legal difficulty.
Mr. Conroy said the Chinese may argue that the student protests are illegal and cannot be used to invoke force majeure clauses - which refer to an event that cannot be reasonably anticipated or controlled.
If there is a dispute, a resolution may not be easy, he said. 
The Chinese prefer conciliation to arbitration, he said, but any arbitration would probably take place before the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce - perceived by the Chinese to be a neutral site.
Mr. Conroy, whose firm employs about 30 lawyers in the China practice group, said he is advising clients to look at their contracts, get copies of them out of China and study their options under Chinese law.
