
On the eve of a vote on the issue in the House, the Administration is still trying to decide whether to make a series of concessions to persuade a hostile Congress to extend normal trading privileges to China for another year.
The House is now expected to vote overwhelmingly to renew the so-called most-favored-nation status for China, but with conditions for future renewal, such as the improved observance of human rights, that the White House has promised to veto. 
Instead, the Administration is leaning toward making a series of promises, including a possible major shift on United States policy toward Taiwan, that would satisfy some Congressional objections without being set in legislation.
At stake is not only the level of Chinese-American relations but also President Bush's reputation for consistently being able to persuade Congress to support his foreign policy positions.
 
Private Sector of Economy
Many Democrats and some Republicans have contended, sometimes heatedly, that China's poor human rights record, arms exports and ballooning trade surplus with the United States justify limits on Chinese access to the American market. 
But the Administration has countered that raising tariffs would seriously hurt American-Chinese relations and would hurt the private sector of the Chinese economy, the group the United States would most like to see succeed.
Congressional leaders and Administration officials say that President Bush is likely to veto any of the alternative measures now being circulated on Capitol Hill. 
These bills and resolutions would either attach conditions to the renewal of normal trade relations with China, such as requiring human rights improvements and an end to Chinese support for the Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia, or cancel it outright. 
There are enough votes at least in the House to override a veto of any of the measures, the officials agreed.
The Senate is expected to vote next week, and the outcome has been less clear there than in the House. 
Senate Republicans are more nearly united in support of the President while some Democrats support a renewal if the Administration agrees to other changes in economic policy toward China and Taiwan. 
Chinese and Administration lobbyists have been slowly lining up votes among farm state legislators in both houses by highlighting China's position as the biggest export market for American wheat last year.
An announcement on concessions is expected within the next several days, a senior Administration official said. 
At least some concessions are likely, said the official, who insisted on anonymity.
 
Concession on Taiwan Proposed
One concession proposed to the Administration is for the Administration to drop its opposition to Taiwan's immediate admission to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a group of countries that agree to abide by a set of free-trade principles.
Senator Max S. Baucus, the Montana Democrat who is the chairman of the Senate Finance subcommittee on international trade, organized a bipartisan group of 15 senators who sent a letter on June 19 to President Bush asking for this and several other concessions in exchange for their support for normal trade status for China.
But a spokesman for the Chinese Government, which has long insisted that it is the sole legitimate government of all China including Taiwan, condemned any United States support for Taiwan's position in an interview on Wednesday, calling it "totally unacceptable," even though Taiwan has applied to join the GATT as a customs territory rather than as a sovereign country.
 
U.S. Policy Change Sought
The Commerce Department, Treasury Department and the office of the United States Trade Representative have long advocated in interagency talks a change of the American policy toward Taiwan. 
The State Department and, to a lesser extent, the National Security Council have been opposed on the grounds that this would infuriate China and result in lasting damage to a strategic relationship with the world's most populous country.
Another, less sensitive concession called for by Mr. Baucus and his allies has been for the Administration to take broad legal action against Chinese import barriers. 
This issue has also divided the Administration, with some officials contending that there are so many barriers that it is better to tackle them with a series of small measures.
"You look at China and say, 'What's wrong with China?' and you fill up books," the senior Adminstration official said.
Other concessions urged by Mr. Baucus and more widely supported within the Administration include new requirements that China prove its exports are not produced by prison labor, a renewed effort by the United States to block loans by multilateral agencies to China and the negotiation of strict controls on Chinese exports of arms and nuclear technology.
