
The Bush Administration lifted sanctions against China's transfer of high technology today after accepting its promise to abide by restrictions on the sale of missiles and missile technology to the Middle East.
The decision was pushed by the White House and the State Department despite recent intelligence reports that China is continuing to sell missile technology to Syria, Iran and Pakistan and nuclear technology to Iran, according to some senior Administration officials and lawmakers.
Lifting the sanctions, which prevented the sale of American satellite parts and high-speed computers to China, is important because it removes the obstacle to China's signing of the Missile Technology Control Regime, a 1987 international agreement restricting the export of missiles and missile technology. 
In November, Beijing promised Secretary of State James A. Baker that it would adhere to the agreement if Washington lifted the sanctions.
The decision also reflects Mr. Bush's firm belief that the way to moderate China's behavior is through contact and trust as well as the Administration's willingness to give the country the benefit of the doubt on the missile issue.
Despite the announcement, there is division within the Administration and among lawmakers about China's intentions and the wisdom of lifting the sanctions.
In explaining the reasons, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, and other Administration officials argued that adherence to the missile control regime was an important gesture and could signify the first step toward achieving similar concessions in other contentious areas, like the transfer of nuclear technology and intellectual property rights.
But these officials stopped short of stating categorically that China had ceased the sale or delivery of missile technology that would violate the missile control regime. 
Instead, one official explained, they said only that the Administration "has thus far not determined that the Chinese have engaged in activities that would bring about sanctions."
They also argue that there is no evidence to support the claim that China shipped technology after the pledge made to Mr. Baker.
Other Government analysts cite intelligence reports indicating that Chinese exports continue, including, for example, the recent shipments of chemicals needed to make missiles to Syria and Iran. 
They also say they believe that China has accelerated the delivery of some nuclear technology to Iran in anticipation of signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 
China has said it favored signing the treaty, but has not yet done so.
 
A Letter From China
The Bush Administration has made the issue of nonproliferation the linchpin of its post-cold-war foreign policy, and is especially eager to halt the transfer of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and ballistic missiles to the developing world.
Today's decision follows a letter three weeks ago from Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China formally agreeing to abide by the guidelines of the Missile Technology Control Regime, Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, said in a statement today.
"China's written commitment to abide by M.T.C.R. guidelines and parameters is an important step forward in securing Chinese support for ballistic missile nonproliferation," Miss Tutwiler said.
In recent days, Mr. Eagleburger has met with a number of Republican Senators, both to inform them that the Administration was lifting the sanctions as well as to urge them to renew most-favored-nation trade status for China when the current certification expires in June. 
The trade privileges allow China's goods to enter the market at the lowest tariff rates.
 
Closed-Door Session Urged
On Thursday, some Senators briefed by intelligence analysts came away convinced that sales were continuing and concerned about the scope of the pending Chinese contracts that are believed to involve billions of dollars and extend over several years.
The Senate vote on the trade status is set for Tuesday, but many are urging the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine to hold a rare closed-door session to discuss the recent intelligence findings.
 
No Response
In criticizing the lifting of the sanctions, Senator Mitchell said in a statement today: "The Chinese leaders have again failed to keep their word, but President Bush has once again placated their demands without any tangible substantive evidence in their policy of repression and deceit.
"In doing so, he has continued his failed policy regarding China, and has increased the threat to peace," he said.
Early this month, a bipartisan group of 17 Senators sent a classified letter to Mr. Baker complaining about recent arms sales by China to the Middle East. 
The letter, signed by Senator Mitchell and leading members of the Senate Foreign Relations, Armed Services and Intelligence Committees, was an effort to prevent the Administration from going forward with the agreement made by Mr. Baker in November. 
No response has been received, Senate staff members said.
The Administration had delayed lifting the sanctions pending China's clarification of several issues, including its agreement not to deliver missiles and technology that were contracted for before its pledge to Mr. Baker.
The sanctions, which are unrelated to those imposed after the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing in 1989, were imposed last June after American officials discovered that China had sent launchers for its newly developed M-11 missiles to Pakistan.
When the sanctions were announced, the Commerce Department had 20 pending license applications to allow the sale to China of about $30 million worth of high-speed computers, Administration officials said.
A number of senators are also upset that the Bush Administration has not fulfilled its obligation under last year's State Department Authorization Bill to submit a report by Jan. 
26 detailing China's arms transfer practices.
 
Report 'Stuck,' Some Say
Senator Joseph R. Biden, the Delaware Democrat, said in a statement today that what "angers" him is that the report has been delayed. 
"I have been told by the Administration that this report is 'stuck in the State Deparmtent,' " he said. 
"What I suspect that means is that the report contains information confirming that the Chinese have not changed their ways and are already breaking their promises to the Bush Administration, promises that led to the lifting of sanctions on Friday."
The State Department denied that the report was "stuck," but could give no explanation for the delay.
According to some Administration officials, China has complained that the Administration is demanding too many restrictions on the sale of arms-related technology. 
Although there is a detailed annex to the Missile Technology Control Regime, which lists the forbidden materials and equipment, there is some disagreement within the Administration on what constitutes a violation.
