
The United States and China struck a deal this evening intended to provide greater protection for American pharmaceuticals, computer software, books and music recordings against illegal copying in China.
China essentially agreed to adopt most international standards for foreign inventions, and will enact laws that extend the duration and scope of patent, copyright and trade-secret protections.
American trade associations have contended that the copying has resulted in $400 million in annual losses from violated pharmaceutical patents and $419 million in annual losses from violations of copyrights on computer software, books and music recordings.
The International Intellectual Property Alliance, a Washington-based trade group representing industries with copyright concerns, said today's deal was acceptable. 
"If they implement what they have agreed upon in good faith, we will begin to see a major shift on the ground for our stuff beginning next year," said Eric H. Smith, the group's general counsel.
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association was closed this evening and its officials did not return telephone calls. 
But a senior United States official said the group had agreed to endorse the pact.
In another development today, China agreed to allow two American companies to compete directly with Chinese rivals in shipping the nation's cargo. 
[Page D2.]
But Timothy A. O'Leary, a spokesman for Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said it was a coincidence that both deals came on the same day.
In the deal on copying, China agreed to join the Bern Convention on copyrights on Oct. 
15 and the Geneva Phonograms Convention in June 1993. 
Both conventions, which are strongly backed by the United States, set high international standards for copyright protection, the senior United States official said.
China also agreed to extend patent protection to 20 years from 15 years and to eliminate most requirements that force multinational corporations to license production of their inventions to local Chinese companies instead of exporting directly to China, said the official, who insisted on anonymity.
The last issue settled concerned the protection of pharmaceutical and other chemical products already patented but not yet available for sale. 
The issue was especially important for the pharmaceutical industry because 10 years of safety tests are typically needed after a product is patented.
After initially insisting that only future inventions be covered, the Chinese agreed to protect products patented since Jan. 
1, 1986, the senior American official said.
The United States had threatened to impose prohibitively high tariffs on up to $1.5 billion worth of Chinese exports to retaliate for the losses of American royalties caused by illegal copying, although Mrs. Hills had said that a final figure covering $750 million of Chinese goods would be "in the ballpark."
But China threatened to impose up to $1.2 billion in retaliatory sanctions if the United States acted, and the senior American trade official said last week that he believed the Chinese threat. 
A trade war with China would have been politically awkward for the Administration during an election year, particularly given President Bush's insistence that China should maintain its access to the United States market, without conditions.
The trade official said that if China broke its commitments, then the United States would still be able to retaliate against Chinese exports under the same law used to threaten trade sanctions in recent months.
That law, under which Mrs. Hills brought the trade case on May 26, required that she reach at least a tentative arrangement with China or impose sanctions by Feb. 
26. Mrs. Hills set today as her own deadline for working out a deal.
With Congressional attention still focused on China's political prisoners and the Tiananmen Square massacre, trade sanctions imposed on China for purely commercial reasons were unlikely to appease Administration critics in Congress. 
Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who has led efforts in Congress to impose conditions on the renewal of China's most-favored-nation trade access to the United States, said tonight that failure to reach an agreement and the likely resulting trade war would have "doomed" the President's hopes for an unconditional renewal of the preferential status for China.
