
In defiance of numerous requests from the Bush Administration, China has recently sent large new shipments of weapons to Khmer Rouge guerrillas battling the Cambodian Government, Administration officials say.
The weapons, they said, include mortars, rifles, rocket-propelled grenades, antiaircraft machine guns, rocket launchers, 122-millimeter howitzers, 130-millimeter field guns and other heavy artillery.
On trips to Beijing in July and December, President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger asked the Chinese to curtail military support for the Khmer Rouge. 
More than a million Cambodians died under Khmer Rouge rule, from 1975 through 1978, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia. 
The United States has repeatedly said the Khmer Rouge must never return to power.
In a confidential report to Congress this month, the State Department said there had been no discernible decrease in Chinese arms deliveries to the Khmer Rouge over the last six months. 
Indeed, Administration officials said the quantity and quality of the weapons had increased as fighting in Cambodia intensified.
 
Policy Setback for Bush
The last seven months have seen the heaviest fighting in Cambodia since 1985, when Vietnamese soldiers pushed many guerrillas over the border from Cambodia into Thailand.
The Chinese have been arming the Khmer Rouge for years. 
But the discovery of large new arms shipments represents a setback for Mr. Bush's policy and is the latest example of the failure of United States attempts to change Chinese behavior through the Scowcroft missions.
ABC News reported on Thursday that American aid to non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas had the effect of helping the Khmer Rouge because they cooperate on the battlefield. 
But the Administration has said sees ''no pattern of cooperation.''
A Bush Administration official said the Chinese appeared to be ''thumbing their nose'' at the United States on Cambodia, as on other issues like human rights and the case of the dissident Fang Lizhi. 
Mr. Fang has been given refuge at the American Embassy in Beijing since June. 
The Chinese authorities have issued a warrant for his arrest on charges of organizing the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square last spring, and Beijing has spurned American requests to let him leave the country.
 
Supplies to Non-Communists
The State Department quoted the Chinese as saying they would stop their aid to the Khmer Rouge ''when the Vietnamese troop withdrawal has been independently verified, when all other external assistance to the Cambodian factions ceases and when a comprehensive settlement is in place.''
Mr. Eagleburger said the United States had urged China, ''in any number of forums on a number of different occasions,'' to reduce and preferably to end its military support for the Khmer Rouge, even in the absence of a political settlement. 
French, Soviet and Thai diplomats said they saw no chance of such a settlement in the near future.
Even while criticizing China for arming the Khmer Rouge, Administration officials said they were grateful to Beijing for supplying weapons to two non-Communist Cambodian guerrilla groups supported by Washington. 
The non-Communist factions are led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann, a former Prime Minister of Cambodia.
''We encourage China'' to continue supplying the non-Communist factions, an Administration official said, adding, ''The non-Communist resistance would be vulnerable if it were not armed.''
 
'More Flexibility' Urged
American officials said Chinese military aid to the Khmer Rouge far exceeds that to the other guerrilla factions. 
The Phnom Penh Government has received large amounts of weapons, including tanks, from the Soviet Union and Vietnam.
China and the other permanent members of the Security Council, the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France, have held three rounds of talks this year in an effort to arrange a cease-fire and a framework for a political settlement in Cambodia. 
But a State Department official said the Chinese ''need to display more flexibility'' for the talks to succeed.
A professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lucian W. Pye, said the Chinese leaders who suppressed the democracy movement last year were ''obsessed with the need for stabilityI'' inside China and were now subordinating foreign policy to that goal.
Washington openly provides the non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas with food, medicine, clothing and money. 
Critics of Administration policy, including some in Congress, say the non-Communist guerrillas have used American aid funds to buy arms in Thailand or from Singapore. 
They also assert that American aid to the non-Communist guerrillas indirectly benefits their coalition partner, the Khmer Rouge.
A State Department spokesman, Adam M. Shub, said on Friday: ''We have no indication at all that any of the assistance we've provided to the non-Communists has been turned over to the Khmer Rouge. 
We provide no arms. 
We provide only nonlethal assistance to the non-Communist resistance.''
But battlefield reports sent to the Pentagon from the American Embassy in Thailand give details of increasingly close cooperation and ''joint military operations'' conducted by the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist factions.
In the last two months, the reports say, Khmer Rouge guerrillas and their non-Communist allies have stepped up joint operations in northwestern and central Cambodia, and Prince Sihanouk has said his troops fight ''side by side'' with the Khmer Rouge.
