
The naming of a new set of Chinese leaders is viewed by the Bush Administration as a temporary measure that leaves many questions about the long-term shape and outlook of the Chinese political hierarchy and its relations with the United States.
''What we have seen is a certain consolidation of power for the time being,'' a senior Administration policy maker said today. 
''It is a leadership that will be a little more confident in that it has succeeded in establishing its authority, but only in one way: by fear and intimidation. 
But fear and intimidation will only take you so far. 
It remains an open question as to how things will evolve in the longer term.''
The official said that as of Saturday, contacts between Ambassador James R. Lilley and the Chinese authorities were still limited to the level of deputy foreign minister. 
But Washington expects higher-ranking overtures from the Chinese leadership now that Jiang Zemin, a political hard-liner who favors continued economic modernization and openness with the West, has been named Communist Party General Secretary, replacing Zhao Ziyang.
''Now they have to start dealing with the political and economic consequences of what they have done: the cutoff in foreign investment, the loss of financing from the West, the fall in productivity from their own workers,'' the Administration official said. 
''It will be much more difficult for them to deal with these problems when ruling by fear and intimidation alone.''
 
Long Adjustment Seen
It could be months or years, though, before it becomes clear ''where they ultimately find their center of gravity -what mix of repression and openness they will come out with,'' the official added. 
''The players may have become a little clearer, and they can talk now about wooing Western businesses back. 
But if those businesses don't come back and their economic problems worsen, then they may ultimately have to make an accommodation with the political forces represented by the democracy movement.''
For the time being, the official said, United States policy toward Beijing will continue as it is. 
''We don't have an interest in seeing them turn inward and become isolated,'' the official said, ''or in taking measures that will punish the Chinese people. 
Those are the two factors that will shape our policy.''
The specific geopolitical concerns underlying Washington's interest in not seeing the Chinese become isolated are manifold.
To begin with, the United States continues to have a fruitful intelligence-sharing relationship with China, from the electronic listening posts equipped by the United States in 1980 in Qitai and Korla to monitor Soviet missile tests just across the border.
 
Fear of Soviet Influence
China has also been covertly cooperating with Washington in confronting pro-Soviet regimes in Afghanistan and Cambodia, and, more broadly speaking, has served as the main counterbalance to any aggressive expansion of either Soviet or Japanese influence in Asia.
Administration officials privately have expressed their fears of doing anything that might drive Beijing into the arms of the Soviet Union, although this is considered unlikely given China's need for Western technology.
In addition, given the fact that the United States had reached an informal understanding with China on limiting its export of medium-range missiles to the Middle East, it does not want to see that understanding shattered in a way that might lead to further sales of Chinese Silkworm and DF-3 missiles in an already unstable region.
Lastly, any prolonged instability in China could have enormous implications for how one-quarter of the world's population is fed and treats its environment.
 
Up to the Chinese
These concerns notwithstanding, the Administration official said, the degree of warmth or coolness in the Chinese-American relationship in the coming year will depend largely on the Chinese.
''If they opt for egregious forms of behavior and continued internal repression, a price will be paid,'' he said. 
''It will very much limit the options we have in relating to them. 
It cannot be business as usual.''
With Italy and Belgium having joined the ranks of Western nations suspending their financial credits to China, said Michel Oksenberg, a China expert at the University of Michigan and a National Security Council staff member under President Carter, the authorities in Beijing are ''beginning to confront the widespread sense of revulsion at what they have done.''
''I hope that they recognize that the United States is not orchestrating this, but that there is a worldwide sense of unease that is going to cost China a lot of money in the coming years,'' Mr. Oksenberg said. 
''Their leaders are going to have to deal with some serious problems, and we should just lay back and be patient.''
