
The American Embassy today formally protested what it called a ''premeditated'' attack on a foreigners' residential compound here a month ago. 
It said certain apartments of American diplomats and others were ''deliberately targeted'' by the Chinese Army.
American officials said the Chinese Foreign Ministry, which received the protest, had no immediate response.
The unusual American protest, which was accompanied by the release of an embassy study of the incident here on June 7, seems bound to do further damage to relations already strained by American criticism of China's crackdown on protests on June 4 and the harsh repression that has followed.
As the embassy issued the protest, a Taiwan journalist was arrested outside his hotel this morning about 24 hours after he reportedly met with Wang Dan, a student leader of the protest movement, who had eluded a national manhunt under way since the June 4 crackdown. 
It appeared that Mr. Wang may have also been arrested.
 
Car Was Being Followed
Colleagues of Huang Teh-pei, the arrested Taiwan reporter, said that he and Mr. Wang, who knew each other well, met in Beijing on Sunday. 
They said that Mr. Wang, a 20-year-old history student at Beijing University who is generally regarded as one of the three major student leaders of the democracy movement, had returned secretly to the Chinese capital after hiding for several weeks in the south of the country.
The colleagues of Mr. Huang, Antonio Chiang and Hsu Lu, both reporters from Taiwan, said that Mr. Huang and Mr. Wang were traveling in a car on Sunday driven by a common friend of theirs. 
When they discovered that the car was being followed, Mr. Huang jumped out. 
As the car continued on its way in the northeast part of Beijing, it was still followed by another car and a motorcycle of the type generally used by the Public Security Bureau.
Chinese news programs today announced the arrest of five more students in Beijing, accusing them of possessing weapons and ammunition taken from the army during the confrontation in and around Tiananmen Square a month ago.
There were no official reports of the arrest of Mr. Wang, one of 21 student leaders on a most-wanted list.
If he was arrested, Mr. Wang would be the seventh of the 21 leaders to be taken into police custody.
The American protest was delivered to the Foreign Ministry today by the charge d'affaires, Raymond Burghardt. 
It concerned an incident in which Chinese troops raked the facade of one of the high-rise buildings inside a guarded, walled compound where diplomats and other foreign residents of Beijing are required to live.
The official Chinese explanation for the episode, which took place three days after the suppression of the protest movement, was that a sniper was in the compound firing on troops on the broad avenue below. 
After the troops fired at the building, Chinese plainclothes police officers entered the compound and, after searching it, appeared to have apprehended a suspect.
But the American Embassy report on the incident, released to reporters here, takes sharp issue with this version of events. 
It says that the arrest of the sniper ''appeared to be staged, since the sniper did not appear to be distressed nor did the P.L.A. appear to be using expected force during the 'arrest.'
'' The P.L.A. is the People's Liberation Army.
''There is no doubt in this embassy's opinion that certain apartments were deliberately targeted by the P.L.A.,'' the report concludes. 
Some of the ''hits'' sustained by the apartments resulted from direct fire from a building across the avenue from the diplomatic compound, which had been occupied by Chinese troops the day before, the report said.
''Events on June 6 and 7 indicate that this action appears to have been premeditated and that specific apartments were targeted,'' the report says.
Many have noted here that the firing on the diplomatic compound took place the day after Fang Lizhi, China's leading dissident, was given refuge inside the American Embassy.
