
The White House announced today that it was suspending high-level meetings between United States officials and the Chinese Government. 
The move was taken to express American anger over the crackdown against pro-democracy demonstrators.
The Administration also announced that it intended to do all it could ''to postpone consideration'' of loan applications by China that are now before international financial institutions.
The actions were Washington's first concrete steps against Beijing since the United States suspended military sales and high-level visits by military officers after the army violence in the Chinese capital early this month.
Student Leader Seized
As the crackdown continued, the Beijing authorities announced the arrests of one of China's most-wanted student leaders and of another student who was accused of passing rumors to an American reporter. 
[Page A8.] In announcing the Administration action, the White House statement said: ''The President today directed that the United States Government suspend participation in all high-level exchanges of Government officials with the People's Republic of China.''
The ban applies to talks between Chinese officials and members of the Cabinet, their under secretaries and assistant secretaries.
''This action is being taken in response to the wave of violence and reprisals by the Chinese authorities against those who have called for democracy,'' the statement said.
Also today, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, announced that the Chinese Ambassador, Han Xu, was summoned to the State Department on Monday evening and handed a formal petition from the Bush Administration appealing for clemency for demonstrators in Shanghai and Beijing who have been sentenced to death, and for pardons for those who have been sentenced to jail terms.
The steps announced today, which fall short of a formal break in diplomatic relations, reflect the Administration's effort to walk a tightrope between public and Congressional pressure for more decisive action against China and the President's wish to avoid shattering American relations with the Chinese leadership. 
Administration officials said they sensed that the ground under Mr. Bush was eroding as China's leaders continued to round up suspected demonstrators and mete out harsh punishments.
The measures today were apparently calibrated to be harsh enough to undercut pressure from Congress for additional sanctions but not so harsh as to aggravate Beijing into a deep breach in the Chinese-American relationship, which has been nurtured since 1972.
The appeal to the Ambassador for clemency for those sentenced to death was delivered by the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, William Clarke.
 
'Human Rights Are Universal'
''The United States raised this subject in the spirit of a country that has worked with China over the past two decades to improve relations,'' Mr. Fitzwater said. 
''But we believe that human rights are universal and our duty to comment on them is great. 
We urge the leaders of the People's Republic of China to show clemency and to use their powers to pardon those who were arrested in the demonstrations for democracy. 
Sentences of death in Shanghai and Beijing could only deepen the wounds of the past few weeks.''
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d underscored the balancing act today in 90 minutes of testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
The Administration apparently coordinated its announcements for maximum effect, using Mr. Fitzwater to disclose the appeal to the Chinese Ambassador and having Mr. Baker unveil the additional economic and political moves while on Capitol Hill.
Mr. Baker was asked by Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, how the Administration was handling relations with China.
 
'Brutal and Outrageous'
Calling the arrests and death sentences ''indeed brutal and indeed outrageous,'' Mr. Baker said of the Administration's response: ''I think the President was mindful of the need to preserve, to the extent that we can, what is a very, very important relationship. 
And, as a result of that, he took some carefully crafted steps. 
You referred to it as 'tiptoeing along the line between countervailing considerations,' '' he told the Senator.
 
Mosbacher Trip Canceled
Mr. Baker said a July 10 visit to Beijing by Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher was being canceled, and State Department officials said a similar visit by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, planned for November, could also be postponed if the situation does not improve.
Administration said they were not aware of other high-level visits but said there were regular exchanges with China at the levels of assistant secretary and under secretary. 
They added that the curbs would not affect the normal diplomatic contacts.
Mr. Baker said the Administration ''will be attempting as well to do what we can to postpone consideration of loan applications'' by Beijing to international financial institutions.
The World Bank, which has more than 70 investment projects under way in China, worth $8 billion, announced today that it was holding up a planned $160.2 million urban-development loan to Beijing until the head of the bank's China department, Shahid Burki, completed an on-site assessment of conditions there after the violence of the last month, Reuters reported from Tokyo.
