
To avoid violating sanctions imposed on China last year because of its crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators, the Administration has excluded Beijing from an international conference on air pollution and climatic change, even though the Chinese burn more industrial coal than any other country, officials said today.
The conference, to be held here on Tuesday and Wednesday, will include the rest of the world's most industrialized or populous nations, and White House officials said they normally would have considered Chinese participation an important element of such a meeting.
The White House Conference on Scientific and Economic Research Related to Global Change is part of President Bush's effort to spur research into the way pollution may be changing the global climate and to allay criticism of his environmental policies. 
Mr. Bush will address the gathering on Tuesday morning and Wednesday afternoon.
The conference is to focus on the kind of research the industrialized and developing nations should conduct on the theory of global warming, which postulates that certain kinds of pollutants are causing the Earth's temperature to rise. 
The burning of coal is the primary source of carbon dioxide, a chemical that is believed to be a major cause of this phenomenon.
Criteria Explained
In drawing up the guest list for the conference, the White House selected countries ''that have substantial populations, large land masses, industrial economies or heavy future energy needs,'' said Stephen Hart, a White House spokesman.
China, which has the world's largest population, about 1 billion people, burns more coal than any other country and is expected to increase its consumption dramatically in an industrialization drive. 
At present, it is the third largest producer of carbon dioxide in the world, after the United States and the Soviet Union, according to United Nations statistics.
''China has the potential to emit a lot of carbon dioxide as they continue to develop, as well as chlorofluorocarbons, and under different circumstances they probably would have been invited to this meeting,'' Mr. Hart said.
Scientists say chlorofluorocarbons, chemicals used for such purposes as propellants in aerosol sprays and coolants in refrigerators and air conditioners, damage the ozone layer, increasing the amount of harmful radiation reaching the earth's surface.
 
High-Level Exchanges Banned
But Mr. Hart said China was excluded from the list because of the sanctions Mr. Bush imposed against the Beijing Government last year after its nationwide crackdown on political dissent, which culminated in the violence in Tiananmen Square last June.
Among those measures was a ban on high-level exchanges between the two nations. 
Mr. Hart said the White House determined that the rule would apply to the conference since the invitations went out to government officials of ministerial level.
Officials said that even if China's participation might have been useful, the Administration wanted to avoid the kind of severe criticism it drew last year after it was disclosed that Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, had made two trips to China after the sanctions were imposed. 
The White House took the position at the time that the Scowcroft-Eagleburger mission was not an exchange.
The United States signed the 1987 Montreal Protocol, which called for a reduction of 50 percent in the production of chlorofluorocarbons. 
The 80 nations that signed the document are now negotiating a deadline for a complete ban on the chemicals. 
China has not ratified the protocol.
Sending delegations to the conference besides the United States are Australia, Brazil, Canada, West Germany, France, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, the Soviet Union, Britain and Zaire, as well as the European Community and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
