
The Bush Administration said today that weeks or months of negotiations would be required before it could accept a proposed GATT agreement to pull down international trade barriers.
With the European Community already unhappy about reductions in agricultural subsidies called for by the proposal, the Administration reaction today insured that the five-year-old talks known as the Uruguay Round, for the country in which they began, will drag into the spring on a wide range of issues. 
There are 108 countries in the negotiations, which seek to reduce obstacles to trade and broaden the authority of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based organization that sets rules for international trade.
Julius Katz, the deputy trade representative overseeing the United States negotiating team, told the House Agriculture Committee today that "considerable work remains to be done with respect to the negotiations on market access for goods and services and the schedules for internal support and export subsidy in agriculture, and only when these negotiations are completed can we assess the true worth of the entire package of agreements."
The United States and other countries will give their formal responses to the proposal in Geneva on Monday. 
Originally envisioned as a chance for countries to endorse or turn down the pact, the meeting now is likely to be the beginning of further talks.
One requirement of the current proposal, presented by GATT's Director General, Arthur Dunkel, in late December, is for countries to reduce their spending on agricultural export subsidies by at least 36 percent in six years and the tonnage by at least 24 percent. 
Farmers picketed President Bush during his visit to Australia last week to protest America's wheat-export subsidies, which were enacted by Congress in response to Europe's even larger farm-export subsidies.
The proposal would also reduce some Japanese trade barriers that have resisted American efforts during President Bush's current visit to Tokyo, such as Japanese limits on imported rice.
President Bush in Tokyo and several Administration officials here said today that the broad proposal put forward on Dec. 
20 was a step forward but would require changes and clarifications. 
Administration officials had hoped that they would need very few amendments to the text.
"Both the United States and Japan believe that Director General Dunkel's proposed text is an important step that helps establish momentum to bring the Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion," said a communique issued at the end of President Bush's meetings with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan. 
"Of course, the Dunkel proposal is not a final text."
The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said Mr. Dunkel's text "is probably where we should have been a year ago."
But the Administration believes the proposal still does not address enough subjects in adequate detail for the plan to win any immediate endorsement. 
The proposal does not cover the opening of markets currently closed to services, like insurance, and goods, like computers. 
It also does not provide details by country of how much agricultural subsidies are to be reduced each year.
 
April 15 Target
These issues are to be negotiated by April 15, and the Administration response today indicates that even the issues included in Mr. Dunkel's text will not be settled until then, and possibly later.
Mr. Katz expressed skepticism about Mr. Dunkel's goal of concluding all negotiations by early April. 
"I do not know at this point whether such a timetable is achievable," he said. 
"The United States will not rush to sign an agreement just to meet a deadline."
On a related trade issue, a senior American trade official said today that the United States would definitely impose up to $1.5 billion in sanctions on imports from China next Thursday unless an agreement on patent and copyright protection is reached in talks scheduled to begin today..
China announced on Tuesday that if its exports were penalized it would impose up to $1.2 billion in sanctions on imports from the United States. 
The senior United States trade official, who insisted on anonymity, said he believed the Chinese were serious but that this would not affect the Administration's willingness to act.
Chinese retaliation would not help the Administration's efforts to insure that China retain its most-favored-nation trade status without restrictions, the official added.
 
Dimming Chance in Congress
The prospects of a GATT pact winning Congressional approval have also been slowly dimming this year as trade increasingly becomes an issue in the Presidential campaign. 
Senator Max S. Baucus, the Montana Democrat who heads the Subcommittee on International Trade and sometimes supports the Administration, today became the first senior member of Congress with trade responsibilities to criticize Mr. Dunkel's proposal.
Industries that would lose their protection from imports will oppose the agreement in Congress, and the proposed pact contains too few benefits for exporters to back it enthusiastically, he said.
"In order to overcome their opposition, mainstream U.S. agricultural, manufacturing and service industries must be willing to strongly support the round," Mr. Baucus wrote in a letter to Mrs. Hills. "I do not see this support as forthcoming."
Administration officials offered specific criticisms today of the pact's visions on agriculture, patents and copyrights.
Mrs. Hills said Mr. Dunkel's proposed schedules for introducing international protections of patents and copyrights was "a little excessive."
Pharmaceutical patents would not be protected in developing countries for 10 years under the proposal, and the poorest developing countries would be allowed extensions.
