
The national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, asked the Chinese authorities last weekend to allow Fang Lizhi, China's most famous dissident, and his wife to leave the country, senior Administration officials said today. 
He came away hopeful that their fate will be resolved soon.
Mr. Fang, an astrophysicist, and his wife, Li Shuxian, who is also a leading critic of China's Communist Party, took refuge in the United States Embassy a few days after Chinese troops crushed the pro-democracy movement last June, and they remain there. 
Their plight was discussed last weekend by Mr. Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger in their meetings with Chinese officials.
Under the arrangement under discussion, Mr. Fang and his wife would migrate not to the United States, where they would be quite visible, but to a more neutral country. 
The release could come within a few weeks, the officials said.
 
A Request Deemed Unacceptable
The Chinese authorities have insisted that the couple be prevented from continuing their political activities from abroad, but Administration officials said the United States is unable and unwilling to give such assurances.
The effort by the United States and China to reach a deal to release the dissidents from their six-month confinement was first reported in The Los Angeles Times today, but senior officials said they were still unsure of whether the Chinese would carry out a release.
Administration officials are reluctant to discuss the highly delicate matter, concerned that advance word could lead the Chinese to back out. 
But they acknowledge that the release of Mr. Fang (his name is pronounced fahng lee-jur, rhyming with burr) and his wife (her name is pronounced lee shoo-shyen) would help the Administration. 
It would do so by blunting the sharp criticism of Democratic lawmakers and some China specialists and political analysts that secretly dispatching such a high-level delegation to Beijing was unwise and sent the wrong signal to Beijing.
These critics have argued that while Mr. Bush has pressed for democratic reform in Eastern Europe, he has subjected China to far less rigorous standards.
 
Expectations of Reciprocity
In response to criticism that Mr. Bush received nothing in return for his bold diplomatic move, White House officials have hinted that they expect a reciprocal gesture before relations can improve. 
In conversations with Republican lawmakers after the visit, Mr. Scowcroft hinted that they should stay with the Administration because something tangible might come out of the trip.
Administration officials have raised the issue of the couple's fate a number of times since last summer, stressing that the matter must be resolved before relations between the two countries can return to normal.
The status of Mr. Fang and his wife was also broached to the Chinese both by former President Richard M. Nixon and former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger during their separate trips to China last month. 
In a meeting with President Bush after the trip, Mr. Kissinger said he was fairly optimistic that the issue could be negotiated, according to officials familiar with the discussion.
In an interview with the Cable News Network on Thursday, Mr. Kissinger said Mr. Fang's release to a third country so that he could pursue nonpolitical activities was desirable. 
Asked about Mr. Fang, he replied, ''If the Chinese understand American concerns, a way should be found that makes it possible for him to leave and move to a country in which he has an opportunity to pursue his scientific career.''
 
Sign of a Concession
In an important signal that the Chinese are changing their position on the status of Mr. Fang and his wife, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, Jin Guihua, said at a weekly news briefing Thursday that their confinement was ''inappropriate'' and called the sheltering of him in the United States Embassy ''a sensitive question'' that involved China's sovereignty and international law. 
In an acknowledgment that China must help to resolve the matter, he added, ''Solving the problem will require effort on both sides.''
Until now, Chinese leaders have branded Mr. Fang a traitor and counterrevolutionary and demanded that the United States turn him over to the authorities.
Chase Untermeyer, an aide close to Mr. Bush who was part of the delegation in Beijing, today denied reports that he had discussed the two dissidents privately with two Chinese friends of Mr. Bush, who is a former Ambassador to China.
Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicistand China's most famous dissident, whose fate may soon be resolved.
