
American officials and other Western experts cautiously welcome the summit meeting of Soviet and Chinese leaders this week, but acknowledge that there are some risks for the United States.
In a recent speech to the Asia Society here, J. Stapleton Roy, one of the State Department's senior experts on China, said, ''Insofar as the summit meeting contributes to the relaxation of tension in the world, we welcome it.''
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that the summit meeting was ''not something that the United States ought to be worried about.''
On the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,'' he said the meeting was ''something that we really ought to welcome, and we do welcome.''
Another Administration official said: ''We have not reacted negatively or nervously. 
We do not need to fear that the Soviets and the Chinese will improve relations at our expense.''
American officials said they would become concerned if Moscow and Beijing began to cooperate closely in military affairs or started to coordinate their foreign policies to accentuate differences with the United States. 
But the officials do not expect such collaboration.
President Bush said he had ''no problem'' with plans by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, to visit Beijing this week to meet with China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping. 
The stated purpose of the four-day visit is to achieve a ''complete normalization of relations'' after 30 years of estrangement between the two Communist countries. 
[Mr. Gorbachev arrived in Beijing early Monday morning.] Bush Accents the Positive Just before visiting China in February, Mr. Bush said the Chinese-Soviet summit meeting was ''a good thing, and it's nothing detrimental to the interests of the United States.''
Indeed, he said, the improved relations between Moscow and Beijing could enhance prospects for peace in Cambodia and for negotiations between North and South Korea, a contention endorsed by experts on Asia.
Mr. Bush's comments would have alarmed conservatives 15 years ago. 
But today the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research and policy center, concurs wholeheartedly.
''Washington should welcome the thaw between Moscow and Beijing,'' said Roger A. Brooks, director of Asian studies at the Heritage Foundation. 
''The web of relations among the three countries is no longer a zero-sum game. 
The United States does not necessarily gain if Chinese-Soviet relations cool, nor does the U.S. necessarily lose if those relations improve. 
American relations with Moscow have been rapidly improving, so we can hardly look askance at the Chinese for following the U.S. lead.''
A generation of American policy makers were comforted by the fact that the Soviets and the Chinese did not get along. 
American officials are gradually adjusting to the fact that neither Moscow nor Beijing wants to sustain their open-ended competition.
 
No Longer a 'China Card'
The United States was often said to be playing ''the China card'' when it tried to exploit relations with Beijing for advantage in dealing with the Soviet Union. 
But Mr. Bush, who served as chief of the American Mission in Beijing in 1974 and 1975, said in February, ''We've passed the day on the U.S.-China relationship where anyone talks about 'playing a card.'
''
That term was ''highly offensive to the Chinese, and properly so,'' because it implied that the United States was interested in China only as a counterweight to the Soviet Union, he said.
Winston Lord, who served as the American Ambassador to China from November 1985 to April of this year, said in an interview that he saw ''no reason for concern about the improvement'' in Chinese-Soviet relations.
''For both geopolitical and economic reasons,'' he said, ''there are inherent limits on Sino-Soviet rapprochement.''
Donald S. Zagoria, a professor of government at Hunter College in New York, who has been following Chinese-Soviet relations for more than 25 years, said: ''There will be a normalization of relations, but there will still be a certain distance between these two countries. 
The Chinese still regard the Soviet Union, not the United States, as the main threat to their security.
''It's not in China's interest to move so close to the Soviet Union as to alarm the West. 
If they alarmed the West, the West might cut back on trade, technology transfer and investment.''
 
Arms Accords Not Likely
Gerald Segal, a research fellow at the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London, said there was no prospect of a monolithic Communist bloc. 
''Detente in Europe is actually made more possible by detente in Sino-Soviet relations,'' he said.
If the improvement in Chinese-Soviet relations led to a restoration of ties between the armed forces of the two countries or to a military alliance, then American officials would become concerned. 
But Mr. Lord said the long history of mistrust and animosity between the two countries ''would rule out a military alliance.''
Harry Harding, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said, ''It is relatively unlikely that the two sides will reach agreement on arms control along the Sino-Soviet frontier.''
In general, American experts are remarkably relaxed about the reconciliation between Moscow and Beijing.
''So long as the Soviet Union and China continue to move in the direction of market reforms, political liberalization and greater integration into the global economy, the West has little to be concerned about in the Sino-Soviet detente,'' Mr. Zagoria said.
''But if the reform path were sharply reversed in either country or both, and if they continued to improve ties with each other while cutting back relations with the West, then we would obviously have something to worry about.''
