
He may have killed people by the millions, but he was also a great nationalist and one of the most brilliant commanders in history. 
So, in one of the most unusual political rehabilitations in any Communist country so far, Genghis Khan is re-emerging as a national hero.
Two of Mongolia's hottest pop songs are about Genghis, the warrior who nearly eight centuries ago founded the Mongol Empire, which eventually stretched from China to Hungary. 
A new vodka and hotel are being named for him, and historians are searching for his grave so that they can build a museum on the site.
This rediscovery of Genghis, after decades in which he was ignored by Mongolia's Communist historians, is just one example of the resurgence of nationalism that is sweeping this longtime Soviet satellite.
The pro-democracy protests that began in December have led the country on a path toward free elections, but, perhaps more worrisome for Mongolia's neighbors, they have kindled a powerful nationalist movement.
 
'Good Grounds to Worry'
Some of this nationalism is already rubbing off in small ways on the 500,000 Mongols who live in Soviet Asia - they are studying their history and culture more than ever -but their numbers are small and for now they are far from the top of the list of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's problems.
China, on the other hand, has about 3.5 million Mongols, mostly next door in Inner Mongolia, and many Western diplomats and Chinese and Mongolian officials see a significant risk that Mongolian nationalism could spread across the border.
''I think the Chinese have good grounds to worry,'' a Mongolian official said in an interview. 
The risk is generally seen as coming from two sources. 
First, the ouster of the Communist leadership here by a democratic opposition may inspire Chinese dissidents. 
Second, the rising tide of nationalism could provoke ethnic unrest in China.
 
Old Script Is Returning
For those Chinese who come to Mongolia these days, the signs of the new nationalism are everywhere. 
Even the maps may have to be altered, for Mongolians are talking about changing the names of several cities, including the capital - Ulan Bator means Red Hero - to their pre-revolutionary names.
The traditional script, which resembles Arabic but is written vertically, is also returning to vogue. 
Four decades ago, Mongolia adopted the Cyrillic alphabet, but these days more and more signs are written in the old script.
''I don't know when it will happen, but I'm sure that the old writing will again become the official script,'' said Daavaasambou, director of Mongolia's state museum.
''Mongolia has a world-famous history,'' Mr. Daavaasambou added. 
''But the leaders didn't pay enough attention to history, and they pointed out only the bad side of Genghis Khan, not his good side. 
It is connected to the Stalinist policies implemented here.''
 
Critical View of Genghis
Mr. Daavaasambou seemed a trifle embarrassed when a visitor pointed out that the museum itself perpetuated the official line; only one room in the three-story structure is devoted to Genghis Khan, and much of the information is critical. 
Facing a portrait of Genghis is a painting of a dead warrior, with the inscription ''Let there never be war.''
Next to it is a quotation from Karl Marx that refers to Mongols as a warmongering tribe.
''We will take down that quotation from Marx,'' Mr. Daavaasambou said. 
''In its place we will put up a sign with the words of Genghis Khan, 'I do not fear death for myself so long as my nation may live.'
''
In the last few months, even the official press has taken to referring to ''Lord Genghis Khan,'' and a Buddhist revival is under way after a long period of religious suppression. 
Until the 1921 Communist revolution, Mongolia had about 800 monasteries and some 100,000 monks. 
But the authorities suppressed religion, and now there is only one monastery, with 110 monks. 
In the last few weeks, the monks have hatched plans to reopen many monasteries that were closed.
Relations between Mongolia and the Soviet Union may also be touchy in the future because there are growing accusations that the Soviet Union has exploited Mongolia economically. 
One of the mysteries of Mongolia is how a country with 2 million people and 24 million head of livestock can have meat shortages; the answer is that a large amount of meat is exported to the Soviet Union.
 
Tougher Bargains Expected
In fact, the Soviets give large amounts of aid to Mongolia, and it is not entirely clear which country is getting the better deal. 
But in any case, Mongolian leaders have been criticized for not standing up to Moscow in negotiating trade agreements, and it is certain that Mongolia's new leaders will drive tougher bargains.
There also seems to be considerable enthusiasm here for the scheduled departure in 1992 of the last Soviet military forces based here. 
But Mongolian officials take pains to point out that theirs is a tiny nation, and that China in particular has only grudgingly given up its claims to sovereignty over their country.
