
Oil prices rose moderately yesterday as traders grew uncertain about passage of a United Nations proposal authorizing the use of military force in the Persian Gulf.
Light, sweet crude for January delivery rose 42 cents a barrel, to $33.28, on the New York Mercantile Exchange. 
The contract had been off by more than a dollar a barrel, largely in response to comments by the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, that his country will not vote in favor of the resolution when it comes before the United Nations Security Council today.
"It kind of takes some of the absoluteness out" of the resolution's passage, said Brian Tagler, an oil broker at Lehman Brothers.
 
'Low-Volume Day'
Mr. Qian refused to say whether China, one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, would veto the resoultion, which calls for Iraq to withdraw its troops from Kuwait before Jan. 
15 or face "all necessary means" to force it from the country.
Passage of the resolution is widely viewed as increasing the likelihood of war in the Persian Gulf, which could result in significant oil shortages.
Traders said the market turned bullish again, however, on reports that United States officials were reiterating that the Chinese have promised not to oppose the resolution.
"It was a fairly low-volume day," said Bob Baker, senior energy analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities. 
"It didn't take too much action in the pit to move prices."
Also adding some strength to the market was the release late Tuesday of figures from the American Petroleum Institute showing a lower-than-expected domestic stockpile of crude oil.
Contracts for delivery of crude in later months also settled higher.
Home heating oil for December settled 1.22 cents higher at 92.71 cents a gallon. 
Some traders said it was lifted by a forecast for decidedly colder weather this winter, while other analysts noted regional weakness in the nation's stockpile of heating oil that showed up in Tuesday's report from the institute.
Unleaded gasoline for December fell 0.97 cent a gallon, to 83.75 cents, with other delivery months mixed.
Natural gas for January dropped 3.5 cents per 1,000 cubic feet, to $2.505.
