
It is tough to lose an election in China, since they are both rare and rigged, but a tiny handful of senior officials have been so extraordinarily unpopular that they have managed to lose even fixed elections.
So it perhaps says something about the present Government that the two most prominent electoral losers are enjoying a remarkable comeback and today wield considerable power. 
Many Chinese see the comeback of the two losers as a measure of how isolated the hard-line Government has become.
The men are named Deng and Chen,but they are not Deng Xiaoping and Chen Yun, the octogenarians who are the two most powerful men in China. 
Rather they are Mr. Chen's 45-year-old son, Chen Yuan, and Deng Liqun, a 76-year-old propaganda specialist who is unrelated to Deng Xiaoping.
Deng Liqun, a former head of two Communist Party departments, is an unalloyed Maoist who has been a driving force behind purges in cultural and intellectual circles. 
Generally regarded as the hardest of China's hard-liners, Mr. Deng never appears in public but quietly issues advice and instructions through a network of lieutenants in the Propaganda Department, the Culture Ministry and the press. 
Chinese officials say he is seeking a seat on the party Politburo, but most doubt that he will get one.
 
Key Economic Planner
Chen Yuan, who is vice president of the central bank, has also gained influence since the army crackdown on the democracy movement in June 1989. 
Mr. Chen has emerged as a key figure in formulating China's economic policy, and his backing for projects is coveted by Chinese officials and foreign investors alike.
The accumulation of power by men like these two, despite their electionlosses, suggests to some Chinese intellectuals that the relationship between power and popularity in China is an inverse one.
The nearly 2,000 delegates at the 13th Communist Party Congress in the fall of 1987 were presented with a slate of candidates for the Central Committee that included 5 percent more names than the 175 positions available. 
Mr. Deng, who then as now was angling for a Politburo seat, found himself ousted even from the Central Committee, and by most accounts he had fewer votes than any other candidate.
It was an excruciating defeat for Mr. Deng, and perhaps the best indication in recent years of the distaste that party cadres, even senior ones, feel for the the hard-liners.
Just six weeks later, in December 1987, Mr. Chen had a similar encounterwith electoral politics. 
The Beijing branch of the Communist Party convened a congress of 750 delegates, also senior party members, to choose by secret ballot 50 people to serve on the Beijing party committee, from a slate of 55 candidates. 
Mr. Chen was supposed to be a shoo-in, but instead he was among the five who lost.
 
Fear of Father's Influence
The Communist Party leader of the time, Zhao Ziyang, was afraid that Mr. Chen's father would be riled if his son should lose, said an acquaintance of Mr. Chen. So Mr. Zhao reportedly offered his help to the younger Mr. Chen but was assured that a defeat was impossible.
Mr. Chen, who acquaintances say is shy and ambitious, with few close friends, apparently lost the election notso much because delegates disliked him personally as because they disagreed with his father and resented the favoritism shown to children of top leaders in general. 
It is not clear to what extent Mr. Chen shares his father's enthusiasm for central planning, and he has often conveyed an image as a reformist, particularly to foreigners.
After losing the election, Mr. Chen was transferred to his post at the central bank, while Mr. Deng disappeared from public view.
Hua Sheng, a once-influential economist who for the last two years has lived in England, said in a telephone interview that the two men's rise despite their electoral defeats was "a signal that the main policy makers are isolated and have deviated from the main stream in the party, the Government and especially the country."
