
President Bush said today that he had ''no second thoughts at all'' about sending envoys to China last week. 
But he added that he did not believe that it was time for the United States or other countries to remove sanctions against China, imposed after the killings of students protesting for democracy in Beijing.
''To those suggesting that I have normalized the relationship with this power because of one visit, they simply are wrong, off the reservation on this point,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to the visit to Beijing last weekend of Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State.
''I think we've made the right step,'' Mr. Bush said, ''and only time will tell how this leadership in China views the mission.''
Mr. Bush's remarks came during a news conference held this afternoon with President Francois Mitterrand of France after the two leaders met to discuss the changes transforming Europe and the Soviet Union.
 
'Responsive' to East Germany
President Bush, speaking in a voice hoarse from a cold, also said the United States would be ''very responsive'' if East Germany requested emergency food aid to get through the winter.
He said he had not received a request for such assistance from the East Germans. 
But when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d met on Tuesday in Potsdam with Prime Minister Hans Modrow, the East German said his country could face food and energy shortages in the winter, a situation that could hasten the push for unity as East Germans demand what West Germans have.
Mr. Mitterrand had positive remarks for Mr. Baker's proposal this week on changing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization from a military to a more political grouping and on establishing a closer American relationship with the European Community.
''There are quite a few elements in this very important statement which obviously meet with my approval,'' Mr. Mitterrand said. 
''It is very important to become aware of the future of the community, and of the necessary acceleration strengthening its structures.''
He added that Mr. Baker had shown ''great understanding'' about Europe.
Traditionally, France has viewed NATO as America's vehicle for influencing Western policy in Europe, and the community as its own vehicle.
The fact that Mr. Mitterrand was receptive to a new vision of alliances suggests some success in President Bush's efforts to coordinate American and French policy more tightly. 
As unification of the two Germanys becomes a real prospect, it also reflects a more sympathetic attitude by France and other Western European nations toward a more prominent American role in Europe to counter the weight of Germany.
The two leaders, casually dressed, met for an hour under a striped tent on the beach at L'Habitation de Lonvilliers, a hotel on the French side of this this Dutch-French resort island in the West Indies. 
Then they continued their discussion in English without a translator as they walked on the powdery sand and as they ate a lunch of lobster, goat cheese, Chassagne Montrachet wine and chocolate tarts.
 
Moving at the Same Gait
At the news conference, the French President said that he and Mr. Bush agreed that they must deal with the ''German problem'' in a ''harmonious'' way.
''I made this comparison,'' Mr. Mitterrand said, speaking through a translator. 
''If the horses of the team don't move at the same speed, there'll be an accident.''
''We need to know and observe the evolution of the forthcoming months, which remains uncertain,'' Mr. Mitterrand said of the German situation.
Mr. Bush said that France and the United States had not reached any agreement on seeking to slow the West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, in his drive for reunification with the East. 
Mr. Mitterrand said that Mr. Kohl should proceed carefully, however. 
He said he had been assured by Mr. Kohl that he was not ''precipitating events'' even though the Chancellor hopes for reunification.
Today's meeting, which marks the sixth time the two have met in the last 10 months, was part of Mr. Bush's continuing effort to emphasize to France that the United States will continue to play a major but not domineering role in Europe.
President Bush has gone out of his way to reorient America's ties with Europe from the days of the Reagan Administration. 
While Mr. Reagan worked largely through Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, Mr. Bush has sought to establish a close relationship with Mr. Mitterrand and with Chancellor Kohl.
Mr. Mitterrand said he and Mr. Bush got along well today, as they did when the French President visited the American President at his home in Kennebunkport, Me.
 
No Competition With Thatcher
Asked whether he had replaced Mrs. Thatcher somewhat in the affections of the United States Government, Mr. Mitterrand said a poet had written that ''one may have one's heart open to several friendships in life.''
This provoked laughter from the press corps.
''We're not in a sentimental competition,'' the French President said of Mrs. Thatcher.
At a meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers in Brussels this week, the French were the most outspoken in casting doubt on Mr. Baker's proposal that traditional institutions like NATO and the European Community assume new roles.
Today, Mr. Mitterrand agreed that ''we cannot stay where we were before the collapse of all the walls that existed between peoples of Europe.''
