
Braving gale-force winds and drenching rains from Typhoon Brenda, demonstrators turned out by the thousands today in Hong Kong and Macao in support of the Beijing student protests, and against the Chinese Government's hard line.
The Hong Kong Government said that more than 11,000 people massed in Victoria Park on Hong Kong Island, while in Macao, 10,000 marched through the streets calling for freedom in China and condemning the Government's action against protesters.
A political expert here declared that the demonstrations in both colonies were 'truly amazing.''
''These are not places where people take to the streets with their politics,'' he said.
 
A Sea of Umbrellas
In both territories, the demonstrators moved beneath a sea of umbrellas, slogging through rain-flooded streets.
In Hong Kong, protesters closed their umbrellas for a moment and stood bare-headed in the pounding rain to demonstrate their support.
Hong Kong will revert to Chinese control in 1997, and Macau is to be handed back to China two years later.
In Hong Kong, where the slightest shift in Chinese policy is watched anxiously, the stock market's Hang Seng index plummetted 132 points on Friday - the biggest one-day drop since the worldwide market collapse of 1987 -and experts are fearful that the colony's healthy economy may soon be reeling as China grows more chaotic.
In both Hong Kong and Macao, demonstrators marched to the local offices of the New China News Agency, which serves as the official spokesman for mainland China. 
On Friday, the top official of the agency in Hong Kong visited with protesters outside the agency's headquarters here, and even offered to hold discussions with them, an offer the students refused because the talks would not be open to the press.
But today there were no reports of the news agency's officials attempting to placate the crowds that gathered outside their large office building on busy Queens Road East.
 
Reports From Chinese Cities
News footage from Shanghai -China's largest city - and Canton showed huge, orderly marches through main thoroughfares, with students chanting pro-democracy slogans and demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Li Peng.
A Western resident of Canton, reached by telephone, reported that the prosperous, normally complacent southern city was streaming with student demonstrators, who staged a lively but decorous four-hour march through the main streets to the provincial Government building, later dispersing without incident.
''These are big numbers for Canton because the people here prefer to mind their own business, to look but not act,'' said the Westerner. 
''The turnout today is very large.''
The Westerner, familiar with the city's politics, said local government officials ''are prepared to act, but so far, there has been nothnng to act against. 
It is calm here.''
He said there was a large police presence in the city, but no troops were observed.
''Premier Li's tough speech was repeated again and again during the day on local newscasts,'' the Westerner said. 
''That clearly is the Government's position.''
The Hong Kong television report said the Shanghai demonstrations broke up following a stern Government warning, and showed buses brought in by the authorities to carry protesters away from the scene. 
In Shanghai, marching protesters finally dispersed after they were confronted by a wall of police, according to the television reports.
The English-language television broadcast Limited of Hong Kong showed students shuffling onto buses, with one angry young man shaking his head and declaring, ''China is hopeless.''
