
China issued a bitter protest today against a Congressional decision to impose sanctions and said lifting the curbs was a ''necessary condition'' for normalizing relations with the United States.
The protest, which was delivered to the United States Ambassador, James R. Lilley, by Vice Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu, expressed China's ''utmost indignation'' at the legislation, adopted on Tuesday in the Senate and earlier by the House of Representatives. 
Mr. Liu said the United States had ''willfully trampled on the basic norms governing international relations.''
The criticism was surprisingly harsh, since the sanctions bill attracted little notice here or elsewhere. 
The bill is largely symbolic because it reflects measures already adopted by the Bush Administration last summer after the military crackdown in June on demonstrators seeking democracy.
The sanctions bill, which President Bush is expected to sign, asks the Export-Import Bank to continue to postpone financing for United States exports to China and suspends financial support from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and the Trade and Development Program.
 
President Could Waive Sanctions
It would also suspend sales of controlled munitions or crime-control and detection equipment, exports of American satellites and the liberalization of multilateral export controls. 
Mr. Bush would be authorized to waive the sanctions if he deemed it in the national interest or if he could show Chinese improvement on human rights.
There have been repeated mixed signals from the Chinese authorities on a range of issues in recent months, and it is not clear whether the protest signaled anything more than ruffled tempers in the Chinese Government. 
In the last month, relations between China and the United States appeared to be warming after months of tension.
''The present problems in Sino-U.S. relations are entirely caused by the U.S. side,'' the official New China News Agency quoted Mr. Liu as saying. 
''The U.S. 
Government has repeatedly expressed its hope to see Sino-U.S. relations back on a positive track, to which China expresses its welcome.
''The Chinese side shares the hope that Sino-U.S. relations will soon return to normal and has made efforts this end,'' the agency's account of Mr. Liu's remarks continued. 
''To lift the sanctions by the United States against China is a necessary condition for the return to normal of the bilateral relations.''
The United States Embassy declined to comment today.
 
Connection With Dissidents
If the Chinese are particularly upset at the passage of Congressional sanctions, they could toughen their stand on negotiations that are believed to be under way on the release of Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, the dissident couple who sought refuge in the United States Embassy in June. 
There has been no official word recently on the dissidents, but they are generally believed to be still inside the embassy. 
Mr. Liu is said by Chinese officials to be head of a committee in the Foreign Ministry charged with the problem.
Last month, after the House of Representatives voted to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would have eased visa restrictions on Chinese students in the United States to protect them from deportation, the Chinese Government issued a strong protest. 
But after the Senate failed to override the veto, the Chinese issued no formal response.
After the Senate vote, however, Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin told a national television audience, ''After a difficult period, there are now some indications that China's relations with some Western countries have taken a turn for the better.''
