
Chinese readers discovered today that a Soviet organization had awarded a medal to a famous Chinese writer for fostering cultural relations, but they did not learn a word about President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to abolish the Communist Party's monopoly on power in the Soviet Union.
The official Chinese-language press has also been silent on recent news about demonstrations in Moscow for a multiparty system, and the closest that Chinese leaders came to hinting that there was great change next door was an announcement on television tonight about efforts by Chinese leaders to improve China's system of ''multiparty cooperation,'' involving several very small parties that are under the leadership of the Communist Party.
A solemn-faced newscaster, against a stark-gray background, read the long text of a Communist Party document issued internally on Dec. 
30 that praised China's multiparty cooperation, as it is known here, and called for democratic party members to assume more leading posts in the Government.
Late tonight, the official New China News Agency issued a summary of an editorial comment on the document that will appear in People's Daily on Thursday. 
The editorial calls on Communist Party members to carefully study the document, which it says was the result of a combined effort between the Communist and democratic parties. 
#8 Tiny Democratic Parties The release of the internal document, which may not originally have been intended for publication at this time, appeared to be an indirect attempt by Chinese leaders to highlight a relative openness in China's political system. 
Along with the absence of any news reporting about events in Moscow, the timing of the document's release also seemed to indicate a concern over the situation in the Soviet Union. 
News about Eastern Europe also has been selectively reported.
''The system of multiparty cooperation under the leadership of the Communist Party as practiced in China is a characteristic and strong point of the country's political system,'' the document said, according to a paraphrase by the New China News Agency.
The document, however, was cautious about any similarities that might be drawn between China's political system and those of other countries. 
''It is fundamentally different from the multiparty system or bipartisan system in the Western capitalist countries, and also differs from the one-party system practiced in some socialist countries,'' the document said.
China has eight tiny democratic parties, whose combined members total about 300,000, compared with the Communist Party's membership of 48 million. 
Although those parties relish greater influence, they disavow any thought of competing with the Communists.
Communist leaders have called for a greater role for democratic parties, but the increase in influence, if any, has been significantly limited, and such parties have no real power. 
The leaders envision continued firm control by the Communist Party, with the friendly assistance of other political parties.
 
Caution Toward Gorbachev
The document pointed out that the democratic parties are not only under Communist Party leadership, but also are ''in favor of socialism'' and must work ''for the cause of socialism.''
Political parties that ''endanger the state power are absolutely not allowed to exist,'' the document said.
Chinese officials privately admit that the leadership has indicated a cautious attitude toward Mr. Gorbachev and his changes.
''We can't condemn him right away, but we can't support him either,'' said a Chinese official who was aware of recent events in the Soviet Union. 
''This news must be spread very slowly and carefully. 
Otherwise it might cause instability, and that would not be good for China.''
Although China has not officially reported on Mr. Gorbachev's proposal, Chinese officials have learned about it through internal documents issued by the Chinese Government. 
Those documents disclosed the text in translation of Mr. Gorbachev's speech on the opening day of the session of the party's Central Committee on Monday. 
They also included translations of foreign news reports and analyses of the situation in the Soviet Union and the possibility that Mr. Gorbachev would resign.
Ordinary Chinese, without access to such documents, also may learn about events in the Soviet Union by listening to ''Voice of America'' or the British Broadcasting Corporation, as well as Moscow's own radio broadcasts translated into Chinese.
