
Chinese radio broadcasts monitored by the United States Government show strong support for Beijing student protesters in provinces all around China.
Dozens of radio news reports, broadcast in the last five days, paint a dramatic, extraordinarily detailed picture of sympathy for the student demonstrators across the length and breadth of China, from Heilongjiang Province in the far northeast to Inner Mongolia, from Guangdong Province in the southeast to the remote Xinjiang autonomous region in the west.
A demonstration or march involving more than 10,000 protesters is not unusual. 
The radio reports indicate that 100,000 people demonstrated in Guiyang, the capital of Guizhou Province; 40,000 marched for democracy last week in Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province, while the Guangdong provincial radio reported that 30,000 students marched in the port city of Canton.
News reports from Inner Mongolia said that ''more than 15,000 students from all institutes of higher learning'' held street demonstrations on Thursday to support the student hunger strike in Beijing.
The radio reports indicate that there have been demonstrations of more than 10,000 people in at least eight other provinces: Gansu, Guangxi, Hunan, Jilin, Liaoning, Qinghai, Shaanxi and Zhejiang.
 
Rally in Economic Showplace
Reuters reported that more than 100,000 protesters marched today through the thriving new city of Shenzhen, on the Hong Kong border, chanting for democracy and demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Li Peng. 
The marchers, organized by the Shenzhen University students' union, represented about one-fifth of the population of the city, a showplace set up by the Chinese Government to attract foreign investment and trade.
The radio broadcasts were transcribed by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service, an arm of the United States Government that routinely monitors foreign broadcasts. 
They reported that marchers in the provinces have been shouting messages like ''Support the patriotic students,'' ''Long live democracy,'' ''Get rid of old-man politics,'' ''Mama, we are not wrong,'' ''Eradicate privilege,'' ''Down with official racketeering,'' and ''Unless the official profiteers are toppled, the state will collapse.''
In many provinces, there have been sit-ins and hunger strikes by students and young intellectuals demanding dialogues with officials of local government agencies and local Communist parties. 
In Zhengzhou in Henan Province, the radio reported that students ''swarmed into the courtyard'' of the provincial government building and presented petitions complaining about ''official profiteering'' and other ''anomalies.''
 
Reports Have Approving Tone
Radio and television news reports in Beijing often focus on the actions and statements of national political leaders. 
The provincial radio broadcasts have given much more detail about local protests, and the tone is, in some cases, remarkably tolerant of the protesters.
For example, on Thursday, the Hunan radio reported, ''Tens of thousands of students, teachers, workers, journalists and citizens staged processions in various cities of our province to express their support for the patriotic action of Beijing's university students.''
The mental and physical anguish of the hunger strikers in Beijing ''has aroused the serious concern of people in our province,'' the Hunan radio said.
At Nanning, the capital of Guangxi Province, the radio reported that more than 10,000 students took to the streets on Friday to support the uprising in Beijing. 
Some went to the gate of the provincial government headquarters to demand a dialogue with local leaders.
 
Chants Against Corruption
In Hunan Province, the radio reported that ''some of the 200 students on hunger strike fainted'' in the 90-degree heat on Friday. 
In Jilin Province, students from more than 20 colleges and universities marched through the capital, Changchun, shouting slogans like ''Down with bureaucracy!'' and ''Eradicate corruption!''
In Xining in Qinghai Province, the local governor, besieged by students, workers, scientists and technicians, declared, ''We support the students' activities and will faithfully relay your demands to the central authorities.''
Several hundred local journalists sent an open letter to the Governor demanding that he investigate the ''business operations and profiteering of the sons and daughters of top leaders.''
In Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province, thousands of students blocked a Yangtze River bridge and marched last week under banners affirming their support for the Beijing students. 
They also shouted slogans demanding greater freedom of the press, the local radio said.
Likewise, in Harbin, the capital of Heilongjiang Province, radio news reports said students from more than a dozen colleges marched in the streets and presented local officials with petitions supporting the democracy demonstrations in Beijing.
Other radio broadcasts reported demonstrations in the ancient Chinese capital of Xian and in the coastal provinces of Shandong and Fujian.
