
Shocked at the upheavals in Rumania, the Chinese Government is reacting by taking an even harder line politically and adopting a tougher posture diplomatically, Chinese officials and foreign diplomats say.
Police and army units have been put on alert, and plans to lift martial law have been canceled, the officials and diplomats said. 
They say the Chinese leadership has been deeply traumatized by the toppling of the Rumanian Government.
''The entire picture has changed because of Rumania,'' said a university professor who backed the democracy movement last spring. 
''Things were getting better for a time, but now they seem to be worsening again.''
The hardening of policy is the opposite of the conciliatory signals that President Bush apparently anticipated when he sent Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, on an official visit to Beijing in early December.
 
Relaxing Economic Controls
But while political control tightens, Chinese officials say that the Government is relaxing some economic controls to avoid the threat of unrest from disgruntled workers. 
Most importantly, a central party document has called for salaries of employees at state-owned companies to be raised before Chinese New Year late this month. 
In addition, special efforts are being made to assure plentiful supplies for the holiday, and the authorities are trying to win support by easing monetary policy and restrictions on rural enterprises, Chinese officials said.
While almost everyone interviewed describes the Government these days as tense and anxious, few expect large demonstrations in Beijing soon.
''I tend to think of the population in terms of sullenness rather than explosiveness,'' said a Western diplomat.
A university student said: ''We were so happy about Rumania. 
But who dares to go out on the streets, with martial law still in effect?
We can't show our pleasure.''
 
Banners and Quiet Gatherings
Yet some students and intellectuals have been surprisingly bold, putting up posters and banners and holding quiet gatherings at a half-dozen universities and other institutions.
Residents of the capital are also talking - some with an air of wonderment - of the small group of students that demonstrated last month in front of the Government television offices. 
Seven to 10 of the students were arrested, but their action is widely hailed as a sign that the people of Beijing have not been entirely cowed.
An aspect of the Rumanian rebellion that is believed to have most shocked the Chinese leadership was the army's role in overthrowing President Nicolae Ceausescu. 
Since that happened, there has been a stream of meetings reported in the People's Liberation Army Daily in which the Chinese leaders have stressed that the army must always obey the Communist Party.
''The easiest way to capture the fortress is from within,'' cautioned the People's Daily in reporting the discussions at political study classes for the army. 
The newspaper said that the chief of the general staff, Chi Haotian, had ''rushed'' back from the provinces to join the classes, which, it said, stressed that ''the party must exercise absolute control over the army.''
 
Tough Statement on Dissident
There have been two important statements on significant foreign policy matters since the Rumanian unrest that have suggested a harder line is emerging, diplomats say. 
The first was China's unexpectedly harsh criticism on Dec. 
30 of a British plan to allow 225,000 Hong Kong residents who hold British passports to take up residence in Britain after the colony is turned over to China in 1997.
The second was the Government's tough statement on Wednesday about Fang Lizhi, the dissident astrophysicist who has taken refuge in the American Embassy. 
Mr. Fang and his wife, Li Shuxian, who is also a leading dissident, fled to the American Embassy during the Government crackdown last June. 
The statement, which was much harsher than comments about the couple by the Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin on Dec. 
21, said the ''only way out'' for Mr. Fang was to plead guilty immediately.
While there was never an announcement that martial law would end, some knowledgeable Chinese say that the Politburo had agreed to lift it, possibly on Dec. 
24. But they say that this decision was revoked in a series of emergency meetings that began on Dec. 
22, as the Rumanian rebellion unfolded.
