
For Chinese students studying in the United States, being left out of the demonstrations sweeping Beijing and other parts of China has been frustrating. 
But some students are using fax machines to share in the events through a two-way exchange of information.
Calling their efforts an emergency ''newslift,'' students at the University of California at Berkeley and at Stanford University are compiling the latest news from American news organizations and then faxing it to China.
Student leaders said they got the idea after the computer bulletin board that links students at Chinese universities to their counterparts in the United States stopped working on Sunday.
''We are trying to get information back to China because of the news blockade,'' said Yu Tau, a graduate student in applied mathematics at Berkeley. 
''The people there don't know what's going on.''
 
Information Gatherers
Mr. Tau, who heads the Chinese Students and Scholars Friendship Association, said the Berkeley students are organized into groups who read newspapers, watch television programs and listen to radio news broadcasts.
They then compare notes to make sure that their facts are in order and write summaries of what they believe to be the most important information arriving in the United States.
The summaries are faxed to China from a machine at a Chinese-language newspaper near the campus.
''We're all very worried and very angry at the Li Peng regime,'' Mr. Tau said of the Chinese Prime Minister. 
''We are trying to do anything we can to show our support of the students.''
 
Faxing Far and Wide
At Stanford, Huang Jingsheng, a graduate student in sociology from Beijing, said the students compiled a list of fax numbers by collecting business cards from representatives of Chinese companies. 
Some of the companies are involved in joint ventures with United States corporations, and the representatives had recently visited.
Mr. Huang said the students were also sending news to at least 20 cities outside Beijing, including Shanghai and Nanjing, using the fax numbers for large hotels. 
''We do not know who is receiving the messages,'' Mr. Huang said. 
''But with the wide popular support from all walks of life for the student demonstrators, we just hope that the people will pass on the messages. 
But this cannot be guaranteed.''
Such efforts by Chinese students are not limited to the San Francisco area.
 
Free Phones in Massachusetts
Chinese students at Boston-area universities have been given free use of four telephone lines by the Walker Center for Ecumenical Exchange, an international study center in Newton, Mass.
The telephones have been used continuously since Thursday by students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and from Harvard, Northeastern, Brandeis and Tufts universities. 
The students are using the phones to call students in Europe and Asia, and they are trying to get access to fax and computer lines linked to Beijing.
''We turned over our entire phone system to this project,'' said Gordon Schultz, executive director of the Walker Center. 
''We wanted to provide Chinese students with a chance to be linked with their fellow students around the world, so they can decide what a new China should look like and how they can get there, rather than sort of a vague idea of democracy.''
Xiao Xan, a graduate student in environmental engineering at Northeastern, is one of those working on the telephone bank. 
''It's very hard to complete a call,'' she said, ''We try to call the students in Beijing, but it's always busy. 
Sometimes we get through to Beijing, but then can only speak several words in the phone before the phone is cut off. 
We get so little news from Beijing, it's just terrible.''
