
Soviet television viewers tonight received their most accurate account so far of the political turmoil in the streets of Beijing, including a brief glimpse of troops using force against the demonstrators.
No less revealing, a commentator indicated for the first time that Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, was something of a rallying point for the protesters. 
''The students turned to Gorbachev as a model,'' the commentator declared.
Helidopters on TV
During the day, the official accounts from Tass, the Soviet press agency, gradually presented something of the full scope of the troubles, finally including an announcement that the Chinese Government had called in the army to end the protests.
By this evening, the main television program, ''Vremya,'' or ''Time,'' offered video clips of the troubles, including combat helicopters flying over the protest, with the commentator describing the ''very tense situation.''
The news accounts were in contrast to dispatches earlier in the week, when Mr. Gorbachev was still in Beijing visiting Chinese leaders. 
Then the fact and extent of the popular protest and demand for political feedom had not been revealed to Soviet readers and television viewers.
 
The Details Increase
The Tass dispatches tonight were full of detail in reporting that ''the students' action continued unabated in Beijing''s central square.''
Soviet reporters said Chinese troops were being brought in ''from all sides.''
The reports noted that protesters were urging the people to offer ''resolute resistance to the military dictatorship,'' which is the sort of detail that was omitted earlier this week.
There were descriptions of hunger strikers fainting and being taken to medical help by way of a corridor protected by ''a human chain of young people'' at the heart of the protest.
 
No Editorializing
''They shake their fists and explode firecrackers,'' Tass reported.
For the moment, the Soviet authorities appeared content to let the reports speak for themselves. 
There was no obvious editorial commentary on the scene or on the problems of the Chinese leaders.
''Two human streams'' are connecting the protest square with other parts of the city, Tass correspondents reported in detailed dispatches devoid of political characterization.
