
When a small convoy of military trucks used to launch tear gas and to spray water on rioters rolled through eastern Beijing early this morning, the soldiers met their first unexpected challenge. 
An old woman street cleaner rushed up and lay down on the road in front of the trucks.
Several hundred students immediately dashed toward the convoy, and the soldiers found themselves surrounded by Beijing residents who showered them with questions about why they wanted to repress a democratic movement. 
The residents also offered the troops breakfast: bread, Coca-Cola and popsicles.
''We absolutely won't repress the people,'' an officer told the crowd. 
''We are the people's soldiers.''
And then the soldiers, so moved that several were crying quietly, drove back the way they had come.
 
Their Only Weapon
In an awakening of sorts, the Chinese people are tapping the only weapon they can to defend themselves and their struggle for democracy against the tens of thousands of military troops ordered by the Government to move into the city: what many residents were calling ''people power.''
Martial law in some sectors of Beijing went into effect at 10 A.M. today. 
But by late tonight none of the special troops that have been brought in from outside Beijing had made much progress into the city. 
All over the capital, China's ''desperados'' and ''kamikazes'' - as they call themselves -were emerging from their silence and standing up for the university students' protest for democracy.
''We have towels for tear gas and maybe buckets of cement to make road blocks, but besides that, we come just as we are - people,'' said Kong Lingqi, a 39-year-old worker at Capital Iron and Steel Company.
Mr. Kong and the people around him in the Haidian district of Beijing were preparing for the coming of the troops, who they said were based about seven miles away. 
They were hoping that every inch of the seven miles would be lined with people prepared to bodily block the convoy of military trucks.
The residents tried to obstruct the soldiers with persuasion. 
They tried to engage soldiers in discussions about the democracy movement, and often they found that the troops had no idea at all of their cause. 
At least some of the troops said they had been told by their leaders not to read recent newspapers or watch television news.
 
Massing of People on Roads
Flush with exuberance, crowds have massed along roads they think the troops may use to approach Tiananmen Square, the nation's political center. 
When five military helicopters encircled the area above Tiananmen Square today, thousands of fists went up in the air and angry shouts rose against the Government.
The crowd swelled at many intersections, and the hum of the crowd's voices rose into shrill shouts every so often when someone believed he had spotted the troops.
''We will lie beneath the wheels,'' said Wang Gang, a 30-year-old leader of a new workers organization whose members have taken an oath to risk their lives for the students. 
These 300 ''desperados,'' as they call themselves, wear white bandannas to distinguish themselves from the 400 ''deputies'' who wear red bandannas and take fewer risks because they have families to protect.
''We are not afraid of guns or bullets,'' Mr. Wang said. 
''But we are not allowed to smash glasses, flatten the trucks' tires or beat the drivers.''
Mr. Wang, a sweater factory designer who has spent most of the last few days at Tiananmen Square, spent this morning planning where the men in his organization should be placed.
Similar volunteer groups have sprung up all over the capital as angry residents form neighborhood teams that link up with others to protect the area from soldiers.
 
Spontaneous Teams
Often these teams form spontaneously. 
In the predawn hours today in the southern suburbs of Beijing, 48 armed personnel carriers and 17 trucks holding about 850 policemen found their path impeded by a truck driver who parked his large vehicle right in front of them and then ran around the neighborhood to get the help of neighbors, witnesses said.
''I'll never come again,'' a lieutenant in the convoy was quoted as saying. 
''I'll never touch a hair of a student's head.''
When troops parked three supply trucks near the Beijing Steel Institute, students drained the gas from the tanks and deflated the tires of the trucks.
This evening, people were out on the streets discussing the political state of affairs and waiting for the troops to come.
In the Xizhimen district, thousands of people crowded around the train station because they had heard that the soldiers may be forced to come in by train since they were having difficulty entering by truck or tank.
''We are waiting here,'' said a film worker, Wu Jianping, ''because we hear there are tens of thousands of troops coming in by train.''
