
When one of China's student hunger strikers said last week that his demand was for ''a beautiful, perfect system,'' he was not merely being naive. 
He was reflecting in somewhat naive-sounding terms the yearning for restored national greatness that has led Chinese youth several times this century to take to the streets to demand change from what they saw as incompetent or dictatorial governments.
Protests by Chinese youths, which go back at least 70 years, have always shown a combination of utopianism and practicality, self-interest and patriotism. 
They have also been among the most important elements pressing for change - and sometimes merely turmoil - in a country whose recent history has been among the world's most tumultuous.
But if the students leading an extraordinary month of protests against their country's leaders belong to a tradition well-established this century, there are important differences of style and tactics between them and their predecessors.
Despite the streak of utopianism and occasional episodes of naivete shown by many in the demonstrations, the students seem far more sophisticated, mature and knowledgeable about the world than any of their predecessors.
This has astonished many experts on China, virtually all of whom admit that they never believed it possible for hundreds of thousands of students to conduct a mass movement of civil disobedience worthy of a Gandhi or a Martin Luther King Jr. 
The explanation for the extraordinary development is that China has been changing rapidly and irreversibly; the students' dramatically increased sophistication reflects those changes.
 
Old Slogan Reappears
Historians cite an episode 70 years ago known as the May 4 movement as the grandfather of the student movement. 
The May 4 movement started as a march through central Beijing in 1919 to protest China's weakness in the face of Japanese aggressiveness. 
But it turned into a long and heated examination of China itself in an effort to find out why it had lost its place among the world's pre-eminent nations.
There was a striking reminder of the May 4 generation when the protesters recently held up the slogan ''Democracy and Science'' as one of their demands. 
''Democracy and Science'' is the most remembered slogan of the May 4 movement, which largely introduced the idea that tradition had to be replaced by freedom and rationality if China was to take its place among leading nations.
Sixty years later in Beijing, during a short-lived protest movement known as the Democracy Wall period, which lasted from late 1978 until early 1980, a similar slogan emerged. 
It was ''The Fifth Modernization - Democracy,'' which alluded to the so-called Four Modernizations of the economy.
The most important recent instance of student activism in China came as part of the near anarchic Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, a complex and violent episode that among other things involved the effort by Mao Zedong to exploit youthful idealism to eliminate his rivals for influence among China's senior leaders.
Mao encouraged the formation of immense bands of young Red Guards, a group remarkably different in temperament from today's youth. 
Stoked to a frenzy by Mao's demagogic appeal, the Red Guards believed they were patriots serving China's interests.
 
A Contrast on Violence
In this sense, they were similar both to the generation of May 4 and to the current protesters. 
But they were also different in that they were anti-democratic extremists who obeyed no laws as they persecuted those thought to be the enemies of Mao's revolution.
They broke into homes, confiscated property and beat and humiliated the perceived enemies in kangaroo courts until finally Mao, who first egged them on from the sidelines, called in the army to restore order.
The present student generation seems, in striking contrast, to be genuinely committed both to democratic methods and nonviolence. 
When the protesters confronted soldiers with handshakes, Popsicles and exhortations to disobey the Government's order to suppress the movement, the students were invoking a new and far more sophisticated tactic than anything their forebears in the Cultural Revolution ever tried.
''The Red Guards were full of faith in Mao and in the leadership,'' said Prof. Andrew J. Nathan, a specialist on contemporary China at Columbia University. 
''They really and truly believed in Maoism. 
It was only after Mao cracked down on them in 1967 that people woke up, some sooner, some later. 
Many of the Red Guards were sent to the countryside, and they discovered that life was miserable there, so they started doing some thinking about what was wrong.
''Today's students, it seems to me, don't believe in the party. 
They are still idealistic. 
But the ones I've spoken to have lost all faith in Marxism and socialism.
''Partly it is that their own professional prospects are bleak because of the extreme underfunding of education and the low pay of educated people in all walks of life. 
More fundamentally, the experience of Maoism and a national reflection on what that meant has now come to a head with virtually all the intellectuals inside the party and outside of it concluding that the Chiniese system is fundamentally a bad one.''
 
A Culmination of Trends
Many experts on China in the United States see the current movement as a culmination of trends that have been developing slowly since the death of Mao in 1976 and the institution of a far more moderate Government ready to tolerate a greater measure of free expression.
Several smaller student-led protests have already taken place, including the Democracy Wall movement of the late 1970's, named for a stretch of street in Beijing where free expression was briefly allowed. 
After a period of euphoric activity, that movement was suppressed by the authorities and its leaders were jailed.
In the meantime, there have been student marches in important university cities like Shanghai and Nanjing, all of them rigorously suppressed, all of them reappearing now.
But even experts who have closely watched developments in China have been surprised by the apparent skills and maturity of the current protesters, including their use of English, both in interviews with American television networks and on protest banners, signaling an ability to appeal to international public opinion.
 
'A New Approach'
''The parents of these kids, many of whom were intellectuals who suffered in the Cultural Revolution, have told them about it,'' said Thomas Gold, a professor of sociology at Berkeley who has spent time among Chinese students in China. 
''And maybe their parents said: 'Look, you don't get anywhere with violence. 
You have to take a new approach.'
''
The changes also include China's far greater openness to the outside world, which included the dispatch of tens of thousands of students to study abroad, and its ambitious program of economic changes.
At the same time, economic changes have unsettled Chinese society in ways that have been deeply dissatisfying to intellectuals.
''On the one hand, economic reforms haven't given students and intellectuals the economic benefits that others, especially those who have gone into private business, have gotten,'' said Prof. Susan Shirk, a political scientist at the University of California at San Diego. 
''College graduates have suffered a relative decline in their economic status compared with people who operate in the free sector.''
 
The Philippines Example
''On the other hand,'' Professor Shirk said, ''the students are more willing to take risks because there are other options now. 
You can go off and join a private consulting firm. 
You can become a private entrepreneur. 
So the system is less monolithic.''
Perhaps more important, the students have gotten information about the use of ''people power'' in the Philippines to overthrew the Marcos dictatorship.
''The students are very plugged in,'' Professor Gold said. 
''If you look on the magazine racks you'll see a great deal of information about what happens in the rest of the world. 
They listen to the Voice of America and the BBC. 
They have friends and siblings in the United States, and they get information about what life is like in this country. 
A lot of them are planning to go abroad, so they want to know more about what is happening.''
''And,'' he continued, ''because they are frustrated with their own leaders, they've really been casting about for ideas. 
They really keep in touch.''
