
Dwarfed by the bedraggled red curtain that covers the faded pink walls of the Hotel Intourist dining room here in the Soviet Far East, a Japanese businessman taps relentlessly through dinner at a shiny laptop computer. 
Continuing even after a stern, slow waitress flicks an abacus to tally his check, he is straddling two very different worlds: one breaking out of the late 19th century, another hurtling into the 21st.
The long-cloistered Soviet Far East is a huge but sparsely populated region rich in forests, fisheries, minerals and wildlife, and it is beginning - ever so slowly - to venture into the 20th century's international economy.
''We are actively seeking contact with Pacific Rim countries,'' said Pavel L. Morosov, deputy chairman of the executive committee of Khabarovsk Krai, one of seven jurisdictions that make up the Soviet Far East.
For years, Soviet Far East officials who hungered for economic development had to look west thousands of miles and seven time zones to Moscow and they received little but scraps. 
Now, as the Soviet Union reaches out to build trade with the West under Mikhail S. Gorbachev's economic restructuring program of perestroika, the Soviet Far East wants to forge its own ties with the commercially vibrant Pacific Rim nations - and particularly Japan.
But although foreign business executives are beginning to venture into this area, the bureaucratic obstacles blocking these efforts are formidable and plans are moving at a snail's pace, at least by Western standards.
The Russians say ''handsome rewards'' await foreign investors supplying the Far East with technological expertise and equipment for sawmills, pulp mills, reforestation, fisheries processing, mining, construction and a host of other projects. 
But they offer few details.
Mr. Gorbachev, a strong booster of Far East development, said the region could be a magnet for sorely needed hard currency. 
Yet no one is able to estimate what the potential sums would be.
Furthermore, the products targeted for export from the Far East are hardly forcing trading partners to scramble for orders. 
Although forest products and coal are on the 67-item list, most of the others are such things as yak hair, birch sap, horse heart, reindeer antlers, beeswax, fir pitch and moss. 
Dalintorg, a Soviet Far East international trade organization serving as a conduit to Soviet-Pacific exports, has targeted these products mainly because of their availability.
The process of trading, too, is complex. 
Dalintorg has had no authority from Moscow to deal with American companies, which means they must contact Soviet Far East enterprises on an individual basis. 
And while Japanese companies are permitted to do business with the Soviet Union, no treaties exist regarding economic cooperation or investment.
Dependability of supplies and a shortage of roads and rail lines remain a problem. 
And complicating the situation is the fact that the Soviet Union lacks convertible currency, which means trading partners must accept barter deals, work out other arrangements for payment or maneuver in other currencies.
''People must not underestimate the excruciating difficulty of trade,'' warned a senior commercial attache with a Western embassy in Moscow, who asked not to be identified. 
''That doesn't mean that there won't be some nuggets of gold in the Far East'' for companies trying to profit from the well-documented Soviet shortages of consumer goods, he said. 
But he warned that companies ''trying to sell chrome bird cages or something'' will not find a ready market.
Western diplomats in Moscow remain skeptical about the potential for increased trading with the Far East. 
They point to a lack of specifics in Soviet plans to attract foreign companies accustomed to favorable terms offered elsewhere in the highly competitive Pacific region.
They cite vagueness in a 1987 Soviet Far East economic development plan, and note that none of seven Soviet jurisdictions to be granted economic autonomy in an experiment beginning in 1990 is located in the Far East. 
Figures on existing international business volume are not readily available.
''There is a strong political desire to develop the Far East and to make the Soviet Union an economic power in Asia,'' said one Western economic attache, who asked not to be identified. 
''It's more a hope, a goal, than it is a political reality now or even in the next five or 10 years.''
A Japanese businessman interviewed during a two-and-a-half-hour flight from Niigata, Japan, to Khabarovsk cited some stumbling blocks to investment. 
The executive, who asked that his name and that of his company not be used, noted, for example, that he had to go all the way to Moscow to initiate business, despite the fact that the Soviet Far East faces Japan. 
And because the Soviet Union lacks convertible currency, the factory he is supplying with equipment could pay only by bartering its future production. 
Furthermore, he could not visit other plants because they were located in large tracts that are off-limits to foreigners.
Conditions at the Hotel Intourist are primitive, especially by Japanese standards, and a phone call to the home office can cost $10 per minute before it gets cut off in mid-sentence. 
And with the lack of legal guarantees, a chronic labor shortage, a historically transient work force and international travel restrictions on Soviet partners, the business climate seems as harsh as a Far East winter.
Despite the difficulties, Western and Asian executives are looking at the Soviet Far East with growing interest, considering whether to brave the harsh conditions to gain a foot in the door to its eventual markets. 
Westerners are betting on the long term - say 10 or 15 years in the future - hoping that they can arrange deals by then for much broader trading partnerships.
Right now, the Japanese seem most interested in getting into this market first. 
Of the seven joint ventures known by the Japanese Government to be operating between Japanese companies and the Soviet Union, four are located in the Soviet Far East and involve catching, raising or processing fish products.
Of the four, two have combined capital of $1 million and the other two have total capital of 28.6 million rubles, or $45.8 million. 
At the current exchange rate, which is set by the Soviet Government and greatly overvalues the ruble, a ruble is worth $1.60. 
No figures are available for the value of trade between Japan and the Soviet Far East.
Other arrangements are either underway or planned for the region. 
Mr. Morosov, the Khabarovsk official, outlined several:
* Barter or currency plays. 
The ruble is not convertible to American or other Western currencies and cannot be taken out of the country. 
To avoid having to accept rubles for their goods and services, a foreign company may trade products or use other currencies.
* Joint ventures. 
The Soviet-Nippon Company processes fish; Swedes and Russians work together to catch deep-sea crab; Russians team up with North Koreans and Cubans to process timber. 
In its first joint venture, Khabarovsk Krai and the Chinese recently built a stylish Chinese restaurant in Khabarovsk.
* Cooperation. 
A Soviet enterprise sends cloth to Vietnam and North Korea, where workers assemble shirts. 
Those shirts are then sold in the countries in which they are assembled. 
Profits are split between that country and the Soviet Union.
* Compensation in kind or output. 
A Japanese company supplies equipment to build a wood-chip plant, and is reimbursed in wood chips once production begins.
These arrangements are tiny compared with multinational special economic zones envisaged by Mr. Gorbachev. Those zones, he said, ''would have an easy regime of customs duties, licensing of foreign economic transactions and taxation, and where reduced payments for natural and manpower resources would exist.''
Japanese economists have advocated the concept of zones in which the Soviet Union would supply resources and development opportunities and other countries, including Japan, the United States, China, North Korea and South Korea, would supply labor, capital, consumer goods and equipment.
The zones dominated discussion in October at a Soviet-sponsored conference in Vladivostok, which drew academics, business executives and diplomats from around the Pacific region. 
The Malaysian Ambassador to Moscow, Renji Sathiah, who attended it, said he believed Japan is ''the key'' to Soviet intentions in the Far East. 
''It's really the country they're looking at,'' he said. 
''It's the one with the big bucks and with the demand for the resources they have.''
But Japanese companies' dealings with the Soviet Union are carefully limited by Tokyo, which continues to predicate normalized relations on the return of four northern islands held by the Soviet Union since the close of World War II. 
The disagreement leaves the two nations without a peace treaty; as a result, Japanese companies doing business in the Far East - or trying to - have been taking a low profile.
''They need a political breakthrough before anything will happen on the economic front,'' Mr. Sathiah said. 
The Russians, meanwhile, are seeking membership in the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council, a group of political and economic authorities.
Mr. Gorbachev's interest in opening the Far East was clear during a September speech in the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk. 
Beyond that, Far East officials take heart from new laws. 
Enterprises may now determine product distribution, and joint ventures with foreign companies are liberated from initial import taxes, onerous customs fees and requirements that local citizens retain majority ownership and top management jobs.
For Soviet enterprises, the changes pose challenges. 
Energomash, a plant outside Khabarovsk producing turbines and compressors, has received the right to trade directly on foreign markets. 
This year, the portion of the plant's production covered by state orders will drop to 10 percent from 80 and managers must now scramble to learn such basics as world prices.
Not surprisingly, some enterprises are slow to pick up the beat. 
''There is opposition to perestroika,'' said Mikhail Postnikov, a Khabarovsk government economist. 
''You can't point to individuals. 
If you ask anyone, they will say they are for it.''
Soviet economists have criticized Dalsprom, a Far East institution handling forest products, for sitting on American and South Korean proposals for joint ventures to produce chopsticks for the Asian market.
Despite the difficulties, supporters of Mr. Gorbachev's trade initiatives say the effects of those efforts are spreading, even to long-neglected parts of the Soviet Union like the Far East.
''The soul, the feeling of perestroika has reached the outskirt regions,'' said Valentin V. Romanov, director of the Khabarovsk Pedagogical Institute, which trains teachers. 
''We can feel it here now.''
