
The influx of nearly 100,000 Asians over the last decade, many of them Chinese entrepreneurs from Hong Kong, has transformed the look and character of Canada's third-largest city and helped shield it from cold economic winds blowing across the rest of the country.
As a result of new Canadian immigration policies and worries in Hong Kong about absorption by China in 1997, Vancouver, which now counts 15 percent of its 1.5 million people as ethnic Chinese, has emerged as a bustling Pacific Rim finance and trading center.
It is a harbor city of gleaming towers, silvery hills and crisscrossing ferries, and already looks much like Hong Kong.
In recent years, the similarities have increased sharply. 
In some Vancouver schools, more than 90 percent of the students are ethnic Chinese; bilingual signs are now widespread; Chinese-language newspapers can be found in in hotels and shopping centers, and Hong Kong institutions like the Hong Kong Bank of Canada and Cathay Pacific Airways have established a presence in the city.
Terms like "feng shui," meaning the positioning of a house so that it brings good fortune to a family, have also emerged in everyday language.
 
Encouraged by Government
Fearing for the future in Hong Kong under Communism, many of the immigrants have bought their right to live here. 
They have come under new Government programs offering "landed immigrant" status, which is almost as good as citizenship, to those who commit at least $250,000 or start businesses employing at least three people.
These entrepreneurs are acquiring businesses ranging from ginseng, chopstick making, doughnuts and garments to computer software.
They are building $1 million homes and gobbling up commercial real estate. 
One official estimate says that Asian-Canadians now own 7 percent of the land in the downtown area, including Canada's biggest real estate development, the giant Pacific Place of Li Ka-shing, a billionaire and one of Hong Kong's richest men.
Mr. Li bought 204 acres on the Expo 86 site next to Chinatown for $320 million in 1987, and hopes to complete a huge waterfront commercial and residential center in the next 10 to 12 years.
Some older Canadians of European extraction talk of an ethnic Chinese takeover of the city. 
Resentment is expressed over perceived competition for jobs, real estate and services, over Chinese clannishness, and over occasional violence by Asian street gangs.
The magazine Vancouver has just published an article, titled "Look What They've Done to My Neighborhood," that laments a pattern of residential building by Hong Kong millionaires in which modest, airy old houses surrounded by gardens and trees are replaced by pretentious mansions with all sorts of extra bathrooms, hot-tub rooms, rec rooms and exercise rooms.
 
'Greed Now Calls the Shots'
"It's megabucks and build to the max," an author, Kerry McPhedran, wrote. 
Where modesty once dictated design in this city, he said, "greed now calls the shots.
Tung Chan, a Hong Kong-born banker who is the only ethnic Chinese member of the Vancouver city council, accuses critics of using a double standard. 
"When a European family has a large house," he said, "people call it an estate. 
When a Chinese family has a large house it's called a 'monster house.'
"
Still, he is urging the new Canadians to be more restrained in their housing tastes to avoid "racist backlash."
He quotes an old Chinese saying, "When you go into a river, you follow the flow of the stream."
In spite of friction, just about everyone agrees that the economic effect of the new immigration wave and the accompanying investment of $2 billion a year for the region have been positive.
"The heavy Chinese immigration is one reason why Vancouver outperforms the rest of the country," said Prof. Don J. DeVoretz, an immigration economist at Simon Fraser University here. 
"It has created jobs."
 
The Need to Hustle
The employment situation is hardly good, but not as bad as in Canada's two largest cities. 
While unemployment in Vancover rose from 7 percent to 8 percent in the last year, the rate in Toronto nearly doubled, from 5.8 percent to 10.4 percent, and Montreal's rose from 10 percent to 12 percent.
"We're in a situation where we have to get out and hustle," said Sid Fancy, manager of Vancouver's economic development office, "and our friends from Hong Kong are showing us how."
Longtime businesses are divided on how to respond. 
"Some are still resentful," said Peter Ladner, editor and publisher of the weekly Business in Vancouver. 
"Others want to accept the challenge and say, 'Let's learn something.'
"
One sign of the resentment is the absence of Chinese faces in the Vancouver Club, inner sanctum for the city's business aristocracy. 
At the nearby Terminal City Club, though, Hong Kong Chinese sit on the governing board.
Not all the immigrants are buying factories and building shopping centers. 
Many Asian newcomers arrive without jobs, hardly speak English and must adjust to a very different way of life.
To ease the fears and frustrations, the United Chinese Community Enrichment Services Society offers employment seminars, English-language training and orientation classes.
Georgina Lane, herself from Hong Kong, and a mortgage specialist at the Royal Bank, is a volunteer teacher at the agency. 
Her class on mortgage financing is one of the most popular.
"Their response is tremendous," she said of her students. 
"They want to know everything they can about mortgages."
