
The aging Vietnamese leadership is deeply divided over the direction of future policies, Communist Party officials say, raising doubts that the 75-year-old General Secretary of the party will step down in May.
The party is scheduled to hold its first congress since 1986 in May, when the General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, has said he will resign. 
But persistent disagreements over crucial issues, such as how far to open to the West while preserving Communist Party power, have become inevitably linked to party personalities, complicating the choice of Mr. Linh's successor, the officials and other mid-ranking party members say.
Many Vietnamese and some Western and Asian diplomats in Hanoi say they now believe that Mr. Linh may not step down at the next congress, which may itself be postponed past May.
"This is the biggest crisis in the socialist camp since 1917," a party member said. 
"Right now the leadership just doesn't know what to do."
 
'How Angry People Are'
Another party member said the leaders "know how angry people are."
He added: "But they don't have the answers. 
There is a contradiction between reality and their principles, which they cannot abandon."
So there is confusion and stalemate, with a continuing search for the right form of words, especially for the political report, the key document assessing the last four years and pointing toward the future, that will be adopted at the next congress.
A party meeting of the Politburo and the Central Committee ended here in mid-January with a terse statement saying that "many important ideas" were raised to improve the political report, and that a subcommittee had been appointed to revise it.
The prospect of so much debate at this late date, after months of meetings at all levels of the party, is a sign of the divisions, these party members say. 
The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and its chaotic efforts for reform in the Soviet Union have shaken the Vietnamese, who had started down the path of perestroika and glasnost themselves at the last party congress, in December 1986.
 
Efforts for Change Slowed
Since 1989, however, party leaders have slowed efforts for openness and political change, while stating bluntly that Vietnam will not tolerate a multiparty system. 
There have also been efforts to improve relations with China, the other stolid Asian Communist society. 
Those relations had been severely strained since the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in late 1978.
Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach has become a sort of focus for the debate, party officials say. 
Some party members said Mr. Thach nearly lost his job at the end of the meeting this month, but this assertion, though widely repeated, could not be confirmed.
A skilled negotiator well known to the West and a member of the Politburo, Mr. Thach is nonetheless thought to lack a solid political base, and he has been associated with controversial policies of only middling success.
He has pushed the leadership to withdraw Vietnamese forces from Cambodia so as to regain acceptance in the West and end an American-led embargo on aid and investment to Vietnam, which badly needs hard currency. 
But he has resisted moving closer to China and is widely disliked by the Chinese leadership. 
It is significant, diplomats say, that at a secret Vietnamese-Chinese meeting of top party leaders in Chengdu in September, to discuss Cambodia and future relations, Mr. Thach was not present.
 
Thach Favors Economic Reform
Mr. Thach has also pushed for economic reforms and a modified market system, going so far as to have Paul Samuelson's basic textbook on economics translated into Vietnamese.
At the recent meeting, Mr. Thach was criticized for being "pro-Soviet," some Vietnamese say, which still translates here as meaning too eager for political changes. 
The name of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is not raised easily any longer in the company of ranking Vietnamese leaders, who think more and more as the Chinese do that Mr. Gorbachev has been a disaster for Communism.
Mr. Thach has also been criticized for the number of his family members who have high positions in the bureaucracy, party members say, at a time when the party has excoriated itself for abuses such as nepotism and corruption.
While the party has done little to correct its own complaints -- "washing only from the shoulders down," as the Vietnamese say -- such personal criticism of Mr. Thach may be a pretext for deeper political struggles.
 
Most Soviet Aid Stops
Mr. Gorbachev's economic changes have also given Vietnam severe difficulties. 
Most Soviet aid has stopped, and there is a new requirement this year that all trade be denominated at world prices in hard currency. 
That immediately makes most Soviet imports, in particular needed oil products and fertilizer, seven times more expensive than last year.
For oil alone, a Western banker says, that means an extra cost of $250 million, and that is at prices prevailing before Aug. 
2, when Iraq invaded Kuwait.
How to cope with such economic strains, and how much they may require further economic changes or relations with the West, are fundamentally political and ideological questions, a party member said.
The leadership knows it must deal with the West, he said. 
"But if you go too far, you lose the respect of your people, whom you pushed to fight Western imperialism and the rule of the dollar," he said.
"So you can't accept all the premises of either socialism or capitalism," he added. 
"And the situation just gets worse."
