
A police officer said that he did not believe the recent spate of crimes signaled a major crime wave, but added, ''Try telling that to the public after what they've seen here lately.''
In the attack early this morning, three men entered the mah-jongg club in a gritty working-class Chinese neighborhood and ordered the patrons and staff to kneel as they tossed homemade firebombs onto the floor and set the club ablaze. 
The police blamed Hong Kong's notorious triad gangs, ancient secretive groups whose modern criminal activities include drugs, extortion, prostitution and protection rackets.
While the Hong Kong police routinely contend with triad-gang vice, intimidation and even murder, a senior official said the firebombing today was the most lethal single crime that any triad had carried off in years.
''I can't remember a triad incident with six deaths and this many injured - not for many, many years,'' he said.
The firebombing occurred at the King Fok Club in densely populated Kowloon, on the tip of China's mainland across from Hong Kong Island. 
About 60 people, most of them men, were in the club at the time of the fire at 3 A.M., the police said.
The three men escaped in a car after setting the blaze, witnesses said.
The club, situated above a restaurant and below several floors of apartments, was a place for members to play the Chinese table game of mah-jongg, the consuming pastime of many Hong Kong residents. 
Blue-collar workers go to Hong Kong's 200 mah-jongg clubs to eat, drink and socialize late into the night.
The police said that the King Fok was a licensed mah-jongg parlor, and that they believe the arson was ordered because rival triad gangs were demanding protection money. 
They said the King Fok Club was not a known triad hangout.
''We think what happened here was competing triads had a conflict of interest over protecting this club,'' said Mohamed Khan, the spokesman for the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
While Hong Kong, with a population approaching 5.8 million, has a relatively low crime rate, a series of well-publicized crimes recently has left citizens and store owners here feeling threatened.
On Sept. 
3, for instance, the police and robbers exchanged shots in central Hong Kong amid bustling crowds of shoppers. 
About 11 A.M., two robbers carrying automatic pistols entered a jewelry store on Queens Road Central, a main shopping thoroughfare, while a third stood outside armed with what appeared to be a hand grenade. 
The police arrived as the robbers were leaving, and the two groups traded 12 shots as the robbers fled. 
Pedestrians were herded off the sidewalks and into buildings as officers set up roadblocks to search for the three, who escaped.
Jewelry stores here, popular targets of robbers, have been the hardest hit by the growing rash of thefts, and insurance companies are threatening to increase premiums by 30 percent.
This week, several legislators demanded that Hong Kong's policemen be given heavier bulletproof shields and larger guns because of the new wave of violence. 
Between January and June of this year, police officers opened fire 13 times, compared to 11 in the same period last year.
