
CATHAY
A Journey in Search of Old China.
By Fergus M. Bordewich.
Introduction by Jan Morris.
304 pp. 
New York:
A Destinations Book/Prentice Hall Press. 
$19.95.
The Chinese claim that theirs is the oldest culture on earth, and even now it is so deep-rooted that it has been shaken only superficially by the West. 
The homogeneity of this vast nation is always more striking than its diversities, and the waves of invasion that have swept over it have been absorbed as naturally as the periodic floods of its great rivers.
Yet the Western challenge has posed problems that no other invader has equaled. 
Other insurgents had nothing to teach the Celestial Kingdom, whereas Western ideas -- Communism and democracy among them -- have endangered its very essence. 
Above all, the Cultural Revolution, which engulfed the country for 10 years beginning in 1966, dealt out destruction to the older civilization with a terrible evangelism. 
"Build the new, destroy the old!" rang the Maoist battle cry -- and no more un-Chinese slogan could be envisaged. 
The Chinese world had been built on a Confucian concept of the past -- on the myth of a Golden Time -- and in theory the Chinese always strove to return to this era of imagined purity, as if the centuries were simply fading echoes of an ancient harmony. 
In China, age and precedent have always been revered.
Today, after decades of destruction and modernization in China, the traveler enters a country of superficial monotony, in which the greater palaces and temples (built, fatally, of wood) have mostly been burned away, and the old scholars and es thetes who were the repositories of the past are disappearing -- either killed, "reformed" or made redundant by events.
In "Cathay: A Journey in Search of Old China," Fergus M. Bordewich sets out to discover "how much of Old China had survived behind the blank mask of communism, and to ask how much of post-Communist China might be a reincarnation of the old."
He answers the first question with affectionate and vivid portraits of places and people. 
But the second, more ambitious task -- to diagnose the past in the living present -- eludes him.
This failure partly stems from his having taken the easy option of visiting familiar tourist sites. 
He entered the country from the unexpected direction of Hunza, beginning his journey in the "vast emptiness" of China's far western frontier, but then traveled the Silk Road eastward through Xinjiang Province to Xian, site of the great Tang dynasty (A.D. 618-907) capital, and on down the gorges of the Yangtze. 
After exploring the rambling complex of Confucius' home at Qufu, he visited the sacred mountain of Taishan; Jiuhuashan, the site of many venerable Buddhist temples; the garden city of Suzhou; the old Southern Sung dynasty (A.D. 1127-1279) capital of Hangzhou; the holy island of Putuoshan, and at last Beijing.
These are, on the whole, conventional destinations, and it is sad that this author's passion for his subject did not lead him to experience what remained of ancient China in country villages and lesser-known towns.
Yet he is a receptive and hardy traveler, and he writes memorably about some of the people he met: Tung, the caretaker of an art collection housed in a garden pavilion in Suzhou, who slowly comes to trust him; the art teacher Peng, who takes refuge from his own ambiguous past in a passion for scroll paintings; the absurd dilettante Chen, who dreams of becoming a monk on Putuoshan, but who discovers at the last moment that life in the monastery there is as corrupt as life outside.
"Cathay" is a frankly romantic and nostalgic search for a way of life that, the author acknowledges, coexisted in its day with bitter poverty and callousness. 
This was the culture of the private scholar and esthete, or of the monk. 
It is crystallized in the Sung dynasty paintings of idealized landscapes and contented hermits, in allusive poetry and chrysanthemum-gazing, in the subtle love of simple things.
Mr. Bordewich, who was an adviser to the Xinhua News Agency in Beijing in the early 1980's, writes of all this in a style that is sometimes evocative and often lush. 
His is a Western romantic's response to this most restrained and economical of cultures. 
Yet he recognizes the limitations of the Old China, and those of its spokesmen. 
"Nearly all served in the imperial bureaucracy," he writes, "but they were also painters, calligraphers, scholars, and connoisseurs. 
The rarefied life that they lived was difficult to imagine, or to respect entirely, in the democratic twentieth century. 
. . . Imperial service bred disdain for the less favored."
And what, in the end, does he find?
The Cultural Revolution did not, of course, extinguish the past. 
No political movement can. 
The past goes on existing in the national psyche and announces itself in new guises. 
Once the glaze of Westernism is chipped away, the old Chinese reticence and politesse, the attachment to form and precedent, the pomposity and delicacy are all in place. 
But Mr. Bordewich is less concerned with dissecting the subtleties of national character than with discovering physical evidence of the past he romanticizes. 
And he does, sometimes, find it -- in the depleted but still active Buddhist monasteries, in architectural leftovers, in the memories of old men.
That this past pervades the whole national psyche is a phenomenon that is beyond this author (or perhaps any author) adequately to compass. 
The Chinese application of Communism -- so different from its Soviet or Western counterparts -- is a fascinating story that has yet to be properly written. 
It betrays more about the Old China than any scroll painting.
But even the gentle, esthetic (and rather pedantic) past that Mr. Bordewich eulogizes proves, in the end, elusive -- like the pigeon-flutes whose music haunts him. 
These curious instruments are still occasionally whittled from bamboo or tiny gourds and then attached to the tail feathers of pigeons. 
When the birds fly, they make an eerie, whining music. 
It haunted the author like the old culture itself, coming and going in the sky, half sensed and half imagined.
The past is like that in China still. 
Mr. Bordewich has sometimes caught it in flight, sometimes not.
