
The real news does not travel fast in this Communist country, at least through official channels. 
So when the streets here swell with protesters, people all over China tune in the Voice of America.
During the turmoil of recent weeks, people in offices, factories and schools throughout China have clustered by the radio to listen to the latest episodes in the saga of student protest. 
At Beijing University, students huddle around posters that report the latest Voice bulletins, and the other day, hundreds of students crowded around a dormitory window listening to a dispatch.
Voice of America Has Won the Ear of China
The United States Government radio network hardly competes with China's Central People's Broadcasting station, which probably has the largest number of listeners in the world. 
But during times of unrest, China's news organizations tend to be silent about what many Chinese people are most interested in, sending waves of would-be listeners to the American competition.
''I always listen to V.O.A.,'' said Xi Rimo, a 28-year-old chemistry student at Beijing University. 
''Some news takes a long time to get to us, and some news we never hear at all. 
V.O.A. helps us understand what's going on in our own country.''
In times of turmoil, Chinese people have always scrambled for access to foreign news reports.
The Voice of America has enjoyed a much wider audience than the BBC partly because it offers nine hours of news in Chinese every day, compared with two and a half hours at the BBC. 
While more Chinese tune in these days to the English-language news programs, the great majority still listen to Chinese programs.
Because it has some 60 million listeners in China, the Voice at times seems to have a greater effect on local politics than do China's own news organizations.
Perhaps the peak of the Voice's influence here came during nationwide student demonstrations in December 1986, when many people said the Voice was partly responsible for the spread of the protests from city to city, as people learned from the broadcasts what was happening elsewhere and decided to join in.
''Our listenership goes through the roof during protests,'' said David W. Hess, chief of the China branch at the Voice of America in Washington.
Because of the station's political influence here, its broadcasts have sometimes become an irritant in Chinese-American diplomatic relations. 
China protested the broadcasts during the 1986 student demonstrations, and five months ago during racial unrest in the city of Nanjing, the official People's Daily called a Voice report ''nonsense.''
Last August the Foreign Ministry turned down a request for press accreditation from a Voice correspondent, giving no explanation.
So far the Government has not made any comment about the Voice's coverage of the protests, and last week it accredited a second journalist for the station's Beijing bureau. 
In addition, China's television and radio and newspapers now are reporting limited information about the protests, and so the Voice is not playing so pivotal a role.
 
Some Special Attention
Newsmakers sometimes give the Voice special attention. 
Indeed, in the middle of a demonstration, or a march on the Communist Party headquarters, when other foreign correspondents are stalking students to interview, the students are stalking the Voice reporter.
''Have you seen the V.O.A. reporter here?'' a student demonstrator asked a foreign reporter recently.
Yet some students now seem disappointed with the Voice's coverage, complaining that it has not been as aggressive as before.
''We have very little information about what goes on in Beijing,'' said Zhang Z., a 24-year-old electrical engineering student who had come here from Fudan University in Shanghai. 
''Of course we listen to V.O.A., but V.O.A. has been rather moderate in its news reports of the student protests, not like in 1986.''
The Voice of America insists that its coverage of this round of protests essentially has not changed, although it relied more heavily during the first week of unrest on news-agency reports.
