
Responding to the unrest in China, the Voice of America has begun sending television signals to China, the first time that the agency has taken that step, the director of the agency said today.
The Voice of America signal is going directly to about 2,000 satellite dishes in China, operated mostly by the People's Liberation Army. 
The V.O.A. director, Richard W. Carlson, said there was no way to tell whether the transmission was being watched by the military or being passed along other channels.
The United States Embassy in Beijing is receiving the signal ''loud and clear'' on a satellite dish, Mr. Carlson said. 
The transmission began on Tuesday.
The broadcast of news to the military is significant because of reports that units backing the pro-democracy demonstrators may have exchanged fire with units supporting the crackdown.
 
Broadcasts Available to Military
''We are sending a television signal that is available to every major military installation in China,'' Mr. Carlson said. 
The signal originates in the United States and bounces off satellites over the Indian and Pacific Oceans. 
The signal can be received all over China.
''It makes available to the Chinese military information about what is going on in China,'' he said. 
''Information that may not otherwise be available to the Chinese military.''
Television and radio sets cannot receive direct satellite signals. 
The transmissions must be received by satellite dishes and rebroadcast in a signal accessible to individual receivers.
The radio service, which broadcasts radio programs in many languages around the world, including transmissions directed at Communist nations, has never used a television signal before, Mr. Carlson said.
 
Radio Broadcasts Increased
''It seemed like the right thing to do,'' he said. 
Mr. Carlson said he made the decision and informed a special State Department task force monitoring the events in China.
''The State Deparment is aware of it,'' he said. 
''No one has objected.''
The service usually beams 8 hours of Mandarin-language radio broadcasts to China each day, but it increased that to 11 hours in response to the student demonstrations in Beijing.
''Chinese authorities have said that we have a regular listening audience of 60 million,'' Mr. Carlson said. 
''We believe that we are over 100 million now. 
We are clearly the most pervasive non-Chinese source of news in the country.'
 
Jamming of Radio Broadcasts
The Voice of America's television image shows a broadcaster reading the news as a Chinese-language script scrolls across the lower part of the screen. 
The service has not tried to broadcast television pictures of the demonstrations or the aftermath.
During the unrest, Mr. Carlson said, the Chinese authorities tried to jam the service's Chinese-language radio broadcasts, but they have not tried to jam its English-language broadcasts.
The service has a bureau with two correspondents in Beijing, and it uses other Western news services, which have been reporting a different story than the official Chinese news organizations.
''The Chinese media have been very dishonest about the student demonstrations and the role of the military,'' said Mr. Carlson.
''Chinese media have said there were 300 dead, and that they were mostly soldiers, which is not true,'' he said. 
''The Red Cross says 3,000 people died.''
Some Western sources in Beijing have estimated the dead at 7,000.
