
A poet and assistant professor from Shanghai, he agreed to speak candidly only if his name was not used. 
He joined the party in 1985, when he was asked to apply during his third year in college. 
He said cynicism and disillusionment are widespread among younger party members, particularly among intellectuals.
To my surprise, I was accepted by the party very quickly. 
I think this was due to the policy of the party then. 
At that time Deng Xiaoping said we should accept more intellectuals in the party. 
I was lucky, so I was accepted as a party member.
To tell the truth, I didn't like that. 
But like anybody else, I dared not refuse to join the party. 
How could you do that?
It's very bad. 
It might turn out to have a bad effect on your future.
I did not even attend the ceremony for newly accepted members. 
I was accepted, but very soon I was considered to be one of the bad elements there, because I seldom attended the political meetings for party members. 
I was too concerned with my own work -poetry, translations. 
. . .
First you have to love the party. 
To love the party - that means you have to agree with the party unconditionally, although that is not stated. 
That means you should not ask any questions as to whether the party's policies are correct or not. 
You just agree with the party even though you think it is ridiculous and despise the policy. 
. . . They just don't think, these people in China.
Then, you must love the motherland. 
That is, you should not say anything that is actually true about the motherland. 
But we have a lot to say about our country, about the poverty, the lack of culture of our country, of the people. 
You're only supposed to say you love the country, the country is good, we have a glorious civilization - these kind of things. 
. . .
Nobody is interested in joining the party really. 
In the past, yes, we wrote applications to join the party. 
The reasons for that are also very practical. 
One thing is that in the future, your assignment will be determined by the school authorities, and that all depends on your personal relations with the school leaders and also your political attitude. 
. . .
The party members don't have a single goal to strive for. 
Everyone has their own purpose for joining the party. 
I don't know anybody who joined the party just to realize communism. 
I don't think the Chinese feel that politics is very important. 
It's all politics of the leaders instead of the people. 
I think people are just led around by political leaders. 
They play with the people. 
Chairman Mao played with the people.
