
The Wellesley College basketball coach had nothing but praise for her new point guard.
''She's poetry in motion on the break,'' Roxanne Dale said of her player, Cai Jinqing.
As recently as last June, Miss Cai had little time to practice her best shot, a three-pointer from the corner. 
Then, the shy, studious Miss Cai was a straight-A chemistry major at Beijing University and a spokeswoman for the student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square.
But after the People's Liberation Army moved into the square on June 4, killing hundreds of students and civilians, Miss Cai managed to escape and made her way to Boston, thanks to help from friends and relatives in America.
Miss Cai knows she was exceedingly lucky. 
Only a few of the student leaders were able to flee. 
Most were arrested, and many of her classmates at Beijing University are now faced with uncertain futures and long hours of political indoctrination.
 
Repercussions in Beijing
She still gets letters from friends at Beijing University. 
The entire freshman class has been kept at an army base for a year of political study. 
Under a new rule, graduating seniors will have to work for at least five years before being able to study abroad, the dream of many Chinese students. 
Many of the seniors, under suspicion by the Communist regime, are unable to find jobs.
''My friends say they have given up hope,'' Miss Cai said. 
''After all the events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, they think China missed its chance to modernize and become democratic. 
They are all very depressed.''
This background of tragedy makes Miss Cai's rapid adjustment to life at Wellesley, one of the most prestigious and affluent women's colleges, all the more remarkable.
In her first semester last fall, the 20-year-old Miss Cai managed to get three A's and an A-minus, in her classes in economics, chemistry and art, all this without any special help in English, which she was using in class for the first time.
''She's a very smart woman,'' said Prof. Karl Case, who taught her in a class on microeconomics, her first economics course. 
''I would hand out problem sets, and hers would be the best.''
 
Tiananmen Voice Recognized
Miss Cai's escape was engineered by one of her three older brothers, Cai Jinyong, a graduate student at Boston University. 
One day last May, watching the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on television, he overheard what he thought was his sister's voice broadcasting by loudspeaker. 
Amazed and worried, he called his parents in Beijing, who confirmed Miss Cai was indeed participating in the protests.
So when the crackdown took place, he went to Boston University's president, John Silber, to ask for help. 
Waiving its usual requirements, the school granted her admission and a $10,000 scholarship. 
Her brother then rushed this paperwork by Federal Express to Beijing. 
At the same time, Miss Cai persuaded a sympathetic faculty member at Beijing University to write a letter vouching she had not participated in the demonstrations.
Armed with these documents, she got an exit permit from the Ministry of Public Security and a visa from the American Embassy.
But when she arrived in Boston, Professor Case happened to learn about Miss Cai from another Wellesley graduate, who had heard she was a star basketball player. 
An inveterate basketball fan, Professor Case arranged for her to tour the campus and try out in front of Ms. Dale, the coach. 
''She canned three three-point shots, and we were convinced,'' Professor Case said.
But by then it was July and Wellesley's admissions process was closed. 
Complicating the situation, the school's president, Nannerl Keohane, was in Paris attending the 200th anniversary celebrations of the French Revolution.
 
Full Scholarship at Wellesley
So when Dr. Keohane returned, Professor Case greeted her at Logan Airport outside Boston with a report on Miss Cai. 
Soon Miss Cai found herself the recipient of a full $20,000 scholarship at Wellesley.
''It was very unusual, almost unprecedented,'' Dr. Keohane said of the school's action. 
''But with memories of Tiananmen so fresh in our minds, we thought it was well worth it.''
Now Miss Cai faced a difficult choice, which school to choose. 
She felt a moral obligation to Boston University, but since she had no money of her own, the Wellesley offer solved her financial problem. 
To try to compensate, she took flowers to the officials at Boston University who had helped her.
At Wellesley, Miss Cai joins a long list of distinguished students from China. 
The first arrived in 1906, after a visit by senior officials of the Qing Dynasty, who came to inspect the school at the order of the Empress Dowager. 
Then there was also Soong Mei-ling, who went on to become Madame Chiang Kai-shek.
