
Huang Gang, a Chinese literary critic, writer and party member in his late 60's, is a member of a party wing that holds that Communism's basic principles are being forgotten. 
He acknowledged that past crises, particularly the cultural revolution, challenged the party's integrity. 
But, he argued, those ''mistakes'' have been recognized.
On the changes in Guangdong province, where the Government is loosening its grip on economic activity: Marx is very crucial to those of us who study Marxism. 
The Central Committee has announced a policy of emphasizing reform and opening up, and emphasizing socialism. 
The phenomenon you see in Guangdong is the result of emphasizing only one of these elements. 
Of course the people down there don't bear any responsibility. 
It falls to us to propagate Marxism-Leninism.
On the Cultural Revolution and the Tiananmen incident, a wave of demonstrations memorializing Zhou Enlai after his death in 1976, that were broken up by the police on the orders of Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, who, with three associates, made up the ''Gang of Four: This is complex, but the truth is simple. 
The Cultural Revolution was a mistake, but those who corrected this mistake were communist party members. 
The Tiananmen incident - that was because people believed in Marxism. 
Of course these people were not Marxists. 
They were people educated under the Gang of Four. 
The downfall of the Gang of Four is tangible proof of the truth of the party's leadership. 
Of course Mao made mistakes, but those who came out to correct those mistakes were also in the Communist Party. 
Because of these mistakes, the party lost its appeal and prestige. 
For this reason, the party has talked about rectification.
On the popularity of a novel by Zhang Xianliang in which Marx appears as a ghost offering Western ideas about freedom of expression: This does represent a school of thought within Chinese literature. 
It is really not my duty to decide what is the scope and influence of this school and how to deal with it. 
But as a writer, I should make known my point of view and especially as a writer who is a member of the Communist Party. 
It is very difficult to do so. 
The reason it is very difficult is that it is difficult to get articles like mine published. 
It is absolutely impossible to get this point of view published. 
Articles in the People's Daily are all extremely one-sided.
I think we have an absolute difference over what Marxism means. 
I think the way to deal with this is to allow all schools of thought to discuss their ideas. 
On this issue, Comrade Mao Zedong said a long time ago that we should let one hundred flowers bloom and let one hundred schools of thought contend. 
He said Marxism is not afraid of being criticized.
On the fundamental principles of the party: The party requires consistency between words and deeds. 
Secondly, there must be close links with the masses instead of seeking selfish interests. 
And thirdly, once you make mistakes, you should submit to self-criticism and allow other people to criticize you. 
For example, it is obvious that Zhang Xianliang is mistaken and that he should allow criticism. 
There should be freedom to criticize and counter-criticize. 
If we do all these things, then there is hope and a future for Marxism.
