
HENRY N. NASS, a New York City businessman whose work frequently takes him to the Far East, realized late last year that something was missing in China. 
In a nation of one billion people ravenous for modernization - television, satellites, fast food - there was almost no sign of one of the most common consumer objects in the West: aluminum beverage cans.
''Everything's in bottles, which are re-usable,'' said Mr. Nass, president of Nass Communications, a company that specializes in organizing competitions. 
''In China everything is recycled.''
Some years ago the Chinese Government built more than a dozen factories to make aluminum cans, he said. 
But a sharp rise in the cost of aluminum, which China must import, made the cans too expensive for mass production.
As a result, Chinese factories turn out far fewer cans than their annual capacity of two billion, itself a relative trickle compared with the United States' annual production of 80 billion cans.
And that is where Mr. Nass, the businessman, saw an opportunity. 
If the Chinese could find additional uses for aluminum cans, he reasoned, it would become more economical to produce cans. 
But what can be done with a can after its beverage has been drunk?
So Mr. Nass, after signing an agreement with the Chinese Government to aid their can industry, decided to organize an event, the Can Do Aluminum Can Competition, to find ways for the Chinese to re-use aluminum cans. 
The competition will be limited to people in New York State and in Jiangsu, a Chinese province of 61 million people north of Shanghai that is pursuing a sister-state relationship with New York, he said.
The top prizes include trips to China for American winners and, for Chinese winners, 40,000 yuan, which is about $10,000, Mr. Nass said. 
The competition will be judged by a panel of Americans and Chinese, he said.
Mr. Nass advertised the contest in four Chinese newspapers. 
The response, he said this week, was immediate and enthusiastic. 
''I have 150 applications,'' he said.
Much of the interest is coming from cooperatives involved in light industry and from members of the Nanjing Kite Association, a club of kite builders whose members are excellent craftsmen and ardent hobbyists, Mr. Nass said.
Last week, to publicize the competition in New York he sponsored a can contest at a fraternity house at Columbia University. 
There, Pat Friday, a 22-year-old member of Phi Epsilon Pi, cut a single aluminum can into a 36-foot-long strip in 40 minutes, Mr. Nass said.
Hoping for more useful results, Mr. Nass said he plans to invite participants from the top science high schools in New York, as well as from 90 New York State colleges and universities.
So far, most of the ideas have focused on transforming the cans into toys, Mr. Nass said. 
But he said he was hoping the competition would result in some truly innovative ideas for utilitarian products.
For inspiration, Mr. Nass said, participants could look at the example of Patrick T. Platt 3d, who as a 12-year-old in Maryland nine years ago developed a room heater from aluminum cans.
''There are more efficient ways to use aluminum cans,'' said Mr. Platt, now a 21-year-old computer salesman who lives in Pittsburgh.
His heater, about the size of a window air conditioner, was made up of about 30 aluminum cans painted black and an electric fan. 
The idea, he said, was that sunlight is absorbed by black paint and aluminum heats extremely quickly. 
Once the cans were heated by the sunlight, the electric fan blew the warm air out into the room.
The idea never really caught on, but Mr. Nass is hoping for something of lasting value this time around.
''What George Washington Carver did for the peanut,'' he said, ''I would like my Can Do project to do for the aluminum beverage can.''
