
Two months ago the story would have provoked shouted inquiries to the President as he boarded his helicopter and hasty news conferences by members of Congress eager to take a stand. 
But on Aug. 
28, 1989, the report provoked only silence.
The State Department prepared special guidance for its spokesmen on the report, but when no journalists asked about it at the daily briefing, the department did not volunteer a comment.
The report was brief: The Associated Press said a student in Beijing had been sentenced to nine years in prison for allegedly spreading rumors to the Voice of America. 
Attributing the report to a Chinese newspaper, the news agency said it was the first sentencing of a student to prison for participating in the spring democracy movement.
Through television Americans survey a vast world from their living rooms. 
With every new crisis, their attention turns and last week's news begins to fade out. 
As democracy bloomed in Poland and the drug war exploded in Colombia, China seemed to fade out. 
What ever happened to American outrage over the repression of the democracy movement?
To begin with, the Chinese are learning the lesson of South Africa: what American news organizations cannot see, the average American will not feel. 
Although the arrests and repression in China today are far more sustained than the fleeting explosion of violence in Tiananmen Square, they are taking place beyond the glare of television cameras. 
It is hard for Americans to summon outrage from file footage.
''The Chinese will never make the mistake again of allowing television cameras to show their tanks running over people in Beijing,'' an Asia expert in the State Department said. 
''What is happening there today may actually be worse - the slow dribbling out of arrests and convictions -but it lacks drama. 
It's not on television. 
It's not in Beijing. 
It is people being arrested in the middle of the night.''
Indeed, television has both cultivated and reflected the very short attention span Americans have toward foreign news. 
Stories on television, unlike in real life, always contain bold dramas and quick endings. 
The viewing public has become accustomed to news packaged in this format. 
When it cannot be packaged this way, the channel gets changed.
China's democracy movement attracted Americans' attention as a rare glimmer of democratic possibilities, like Hungary in 1956. 
But such moments lack staying power. 
At best they become memories that inspire the long boring haul of reform and institution building, which make for good history and awful ratings.
There are other explanations. 
With China, Americans seem to be experiencing the humility that comes from discovering that a nation they thought they knew was actually a stranger. 
It was as though the United States awoke one morning and realized that it did not know China, that it was not, as many hoped, on a steady course toward Westernization.
Americans learned the hard way that they would have to wait for China to sort out its own path, that this regime has much more staying power than many would like to believe and that its leaders have no intention of paying for American friendship with their own power. 
As that became more apparent, the policy debate on China assumed a new modesty.
This was reinforced from above. 
No one has more power to shape a debate than the President. 
But instinctively, President Bush seemed to realize that the students were never going to capture power, so he dampened expectations about the democracy movement.
In addition, strategic interests dictated that he not abandon the implicit Chinese-American alliance against the Soviet Union simply because so many students were gunned down. 
So Mr. Bush flashed just enough anger to appease the momentary sense of outrage and to prevent Congress from legislating its own sanctions, but not so much anger as to break relations with China or to keep its drama in the headlines an extra day.
