
From a sunny second-floor suite of five offices, a copying machine and telephones that ring almost constantly, word has just gone out that the Bank of China is honoring its letters of credit and that most of China's ports, with the exception of Shanghai, are operating normally.
Since the bloody crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4, the Commerce Department's equivalent of a China desk, has served as a crisis management center for the more than 350 American companies that in the past 10 years invested $3.5 billion in China - more than a third of the total foreign investment there.
Among the investors are General Foods, which makes coffee products in Guangzhou; Gillette, razor blades in Shenyang; Ingersoll Rand, air compressors in Shanghai and Nabisco, bakery products in Beijing.
''Basically, we're telling them to sit tight, and if they were contemplating an investment to hold off for a while and see how things shake out,'' said Christine L. Lucyk, who is Commerce's top China hand.
Daily Contact With China
Other Cabinet departments - State and Treasury, and the Central Intelligence Agency - have their own experts, who concentrate on their department's areas of expertise. 
Mrs. Lucyk's team of seven keeps up on developments affecting American-Chinese commercial relations through daily telephone calls to commercial officers at the Beijing Embassy, principally Lyn Edinger, commercial counselor, and Tim Stratford, commercial attache, and through contacts with scores of executive suites.
This is not to suggest that Washington's clusters of China-watchers work in isolation. 
Over the last two weeks, at the urging of State's desk, Commerce's has been telling companies to get their American personnel out of China. 
There are 1,000 there now, as against 9,000 before June 4 .
''They were very reluctant to leave,'' said one of Ms. Lucyk's aides, David K. Schneider. ''They were concerned about the fate of their Chinese employees, and about what would happen to their business.''
''In some cases,'' he said, ''their Chinese partners were telling them they shouldn't go because there was nothing wrong. 
Now we're trying to help some companies develop approaches to their partners to explain to them why they had to leave.''
 
Advice to Companies
The Commerce desk has also been offering advice to companies on how to deal with shipments of machinery and other goods needed to keep plants operating in China or fulfill contracts under the more 600 joint ventures American companies operate with Chinese partners.
The desk has also focused on such day-to-day matters as the state of mail service (the main Beijing post office is open but many branches are closed) and transportation (Japan Airlines has just resumed service to Beijing but with reduced frequency).
Although corporate aides often have not been pleased with what they hear, they are not reluctant to praise the messenger. 
''They're doing an awfully good job for the task at hand,'' said Richard E. Gillespie, vice president of the U.S.-China Business Council, representing 300 American multinationals with China operations.
Before martial law was imposed late in May, Commerce had a number of diplomatic and other activities planned for China. 
On the commercial side, Roger Severance, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asia and the Pacific, was about to lead a delegation to China to take up a growing list of individual corporate problems with national and provincial leaders. 
These chiefly related to bureacratic interference in joint ventures and the inability of Chinese customers to obtain needed foreign exchange for payments.
 
Interrupted Operations
Also in July, the U.S.-China Joint Commission for Commerce and Trade, a high-level organization of the two governments created in the 1970's thaw, had been expected to meet to give new impetus to the commercial relationship.
This would have brought the Commerce Secretary, Robert A. Mosbacher, together for the first time with his counterpart, the Chinese Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Zheng Tuobin.
When China reopened to the West 10 years ago, many business leaders had romantic notions about the huge market, with visions of 1 billion Chinese buying tube socks or other American miracle products.
But with many projects canceled in 1982 and with economic retrenchment last September, Americans now have a ''much more realistic view of doing business in China,'' Ms. Lucyk said.
''In China,'' she observed, ''we long ago lost our innocence.''
