
FREEDOM IN EXILE
The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama.
Illustrated. 288 pp. 
New York:
A Cornelia & Michael Bessie Book/
HarperCollins. $22.95.
 
MY TIBET
Text by His Holiness
The Fourteenth Dalai Lama of Tibet.
Photographs by Galen Rowell.
162 pp. 
Berkeley: Mountain Light Press/
University of California Press.
  $35.
Perhaps the time has come when the world will lend a more sympathetic ear to the message of the Dalai Lama. 
His two main concerns for the last four decades have been the same: nonviolence as a way of relating to others - even to nonhuman sentient beings - and an attitude toward life that involves care for the environment. 
These were the messages he brought with him to the West to receive the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989; they are the messages he develops in ''Freedom in Exile,'' his autobiography. 
The world may be ready to listen because more people are convinced today that such messages are needed if the future of this planet is to be assured. 
The timing of the autobiography is perfect. 
What may have seemed too idealistic and naive in the past is now seen by many as the only way to assure peace and preserve life on earth.
The timing of this volume is important also because of the new euphoria over the freedoms acquired by many nations in Eastern Europe in the past year. 
There is a solid hope that this phenomenon of the human spirit reaching toward freedom is but a glimpse of the beginning of even more manifestations of ethnic, racial, national and religious aspirations. 
Could Tibet finally hope for new freedom too?
There is every reason to expect that world pressure will mount in that direction, even though some Western nations fear that China will be offended by such a move. 
The Dalai Lama's book is a political one. 
For three decades he has traveled the globe to keep alive the world's interest in his nation's plight. 
This book is a call for freedom.
Tibet's loss of freedom is the most dramatic event in the life of the 14th Dalai Lama. 
When he was born to a family of small farmers on July 6, 1935, as he explains, there was no way for anyone to know he would become the Dalai Lama. 
However, two years before his birth, the 13th Dalai Lama had died. 
Several years later, according to custom, a search party of high-ranking Buddhist monks, guided by the state oracle and acting on what they saw as special signs, fanned out through Tibet looking for a child whom they could recognize as the previous Lama's reincarnation (as the Dalai Lama says in his book, he is believed by his followers to be the reincarnation of all 13 of his predecessors, the first having been born in 1351).
His explanation of these matters is forthright. 
And the writing is remarkable in that he says at the outset that he wrote directly in English, a difficult task, he adds, since ''my ability to express myself in this language is limited. 
Furthermore, I am aware that some of the subtler implications of what I say may not be precisely what I intended. 
But the same would be true in a translation from Tibetan.''
His story of how he was recognized as the new Dalai Lama and of his installation in the mighty Potala Palace in Lhasa as his nation's leader is well known from the memoirs of several Europeans who were there at the time. 
But he has retained much of the freshness of the child's view of what was happening to him, and his account is moving. 
It is also often amusing, especially when he tells of his famous fascination since childhood with everything scientific and technical - a passion that has led him to become an expert at repairing watches since he was 8 or 9. 
It also led to a hilarious collision with a tree when, as a boy of about 13, he sneaked into the palace garage and took one of only four motor vehicles in all of Tibet out for a private joy ride.
He had not much more time for such carefree fun. 
After the Communists came to power in China in 1949, one of their first moves was to make a claim on Tibet. 
Tibetan officialdom ended the regency that operated the Government on behalf of the youthful Dalai Lama, and, at an age when most Americans are in high school, he became the absolute ruler of Tibet. 
His book tells an impressive story of the education of this young monk-monarch as he tried to negotiate with the Chinese and to save his country. 
Finally, in 1959, with Chinese forces lobbing shells inside the compound of his summer palace, he consulted his oracle, and then he and a group of his closest advisers made their way across the Himalayas into India. 
Through the years they were to be followed by more than 100,000 escaping Tibetans, and today they occupy the Indian town of Dharmsala, where the Dalai Lama has his headquarters, and 50 other refugee centers.
The enormous destruction of Tibetan religion and culture wreaked by the Chinese is well attested to by many refugees, and by visitors to Tibet. 
But there are things no conqueror can obliterate, as is immediately evident in ''My Tibet,'' a volume of photographs taken in recent years by Galen Rowell, with a text drawn from interviews with the Dalai Lama or essays written previously by him. 
Mr. Rowell has caught the natural beauty of that nation as no other photographer has done before. 
Its mystical qualities are a combination of ruggedness and serenity. 
The pictures also testify that the faces of the Tibetan people have not changed from past years. 
They remain fresh and wholesome, shy and inward looking, full of fun and hidden sentiments. 
Mr. Rowell's rich color pictures of the people can be profitably compared with the collection of black-and-white historical photographs to be found in another volume, ''Tibet: The Sacred Realm. 
Photographs 1880-1950,'' first issued seven years ago and recently reprinted by Aperture. 
The conditions of life for Tibetans may have changed, but the great human qualities of these people have not; they glow from the pictures. 
Mr. Rowell's photographs, whether of nomads or the abundant animal life or landscapes and town scenes, reveal changes but they also underscore the idea found in the Dalai Lama's comments on each one - that there are hidden and enduring truths to be found here.
In the three decades since his escape, the Dalai Lama has traveled throughout the world studying, teaching and conferring with members of many religions - and always seeking the world's help in restoring his country to its people. 
But even if more political freedom should come to it, the road to liberation for Tibet will not be an easy one. 
''Freedom in Exile'' shows that the author is aware of the cultural gaps between traditional Tibetan Buddhism and the scientific approaches of the West. 
The long isolationism of Tibet is now over, but the struggle to come to terms with the advances in science and psychology that have occurred in the world is only beginning. 
How much of the old ways can survive not only the Chinese Communist domination, but the scientific and psychological pressures of the whole of Western culture?
It will be more difficult to vindicate rule by oracles, for example, in an age that seeks psychological examination and scientific proof for all such phenomena. 
The rest of the world is unlikely to be convinced that a society and its government should be based on the search for reincarnations of the great leaders of the past. 
Though one admires the foresight of the Tibetans in the past, in raising up and training leaders from childhood, one is struck by the difficulty of combining this method with the democratic ideals that now permeate Western culture and that will continue to dominate the world. 
The Dalai Lama is aware of these problems; to his credit he states that he is not afraid to face them squarely. 
It is evident to him, as to everyone, that even if he is allowed to return to Tibet and lead his people again, there will be no return to the old ways. 
One would hope, however, that the Tibetan experiment of trying to relate the spiritual to the concrete political realities of the world today would come to benefit all nations and all cultures.
There are some trenchant criticisms in this book of the West, for its lack of spiritual roots like those that nourish Tibet, and it is wholesome for us to hear them. 
But there are also some acknowledgments that Buddhists, and especially Buddhist monks and nuns, have something to learn from Western religions about translating the contemplation of goodness into practical action. 
It is the wish of the Dalai Lama, and, one would hope, of all genuine spiritual leaders, that religion can continue to give to all human beings a sense of the value and dignity of life, of the need to treat the world as sacred and of the desire to live in peace and harmony. 
The vision he has brought down from the roof of the world to the world he is exiled to has been broadened, but not lost.
It is good that the Dalai Lama has found currents in the West, including Western monasticism itself, that are points of contact with his own culture. 
Although the anthropology and the concept of the deity that lie under the two kinds of monasticism are different, the concept that the inner workings of the human spirit must be a part of the full equation of what human existence is all about, and that the human person cannot rely totally on materialism and external stimuli for fullness of life, forms a common ground in all monasticism. 
And it is to be hoped that more contacts between these two traditions will take place. 
Those that have already occurred - I presided over the first international meeting of Catholic and Buddhist monks, in Bangkok in 1968 - have enriched members of religious communities on both sides.
On the other hand, the total domination of intellectual life by monasticism that so characterized old Tibet will, I can safely say, never return. 
Studies for all monks must now go beyond the philosophical and mystical to the scientific. 
By the end of his autobiography it is clear that the Dalai Lama recognizes, as many religious leaders in the West do, that the education of people whose lives are dedicated to religion must change greatly. 
The challenge, for him and the Tibetan Buddhists, as for us in the West, is to retain the best from the past and find new freedom for it to evolve.
 
'THERE IS TOO MUCH DEVOTION TOWARD ME'
The Dalai Lama wrote ''Freedom In Exile,'' his autobiography, ''to counter Chinese claims and misinformation they spread about Tibet's history, culture and religion,'' he says, ''and to tell the truth about Tibetan independence.''
In an interview this month at Middlebury College in Vermont, where he was attending a conference on religion and environment, the winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize said: ''Tibet has always been a separate, independent country from China. 
Sun Yat-sen, the father of Chinese democracy, considered Tibet a foreign nation, as did the Chinese Communists before their invasion began in 1949.''
Looking forward to a day when the Chinese occupation of Tibet might end, the Dalai Lama, who wants people to see him as ''a simple Buddhist monk,'' said he would step aside as ruler: ''If I return as the leader, it would be an obstacle to developing a genuine democracy in Tibet. 
There is too much devotion toward me. 
It would be better if I remained outside the Government.''
But, he added, the position of himself and other religious leaders, who traditionally governed the country, ''would be up to the Tibetan people.''
Soon after he fled Tibet in 1959, he wrote an autobiography, ''My Land and My People.''
But in the 1980's a British journalist, Alexander Norman, suggested it was time for a more complete account. 
They worked together on the book. 
Mr. Norman taped the Dalai Lama for several hours at a time and prepared a manuscript from the tapes, which they later rewrote together.
The Dalai Lama now has his headquarters in Dharmsala, India, where he tries to keep abreast of events in his country, in part by personally interviewing every refugee who manages to escape about the fate of families and villages under the Chinese occupation. 
He says there has been a massive deforestation as the Chinese have clear-cut millions of acres of Tibetan forests to sell lumber on the export market; and they are grazing dense herds of sheep on the fragile Tibetan grassland, causing rapid erosion. 
But more devastating has been the continuing oppression of the Tibetan people and suppression of religion and culture. 
Refugees say advocates of independence are routinely jailed and tortured, including many Buddhist monks and nuns. 
News of such events rarely shows up in the news media around the world, the Dalai Lama says. 
''We need to raise world awareness about Tibet, to tell the truth about what is really happening under the Chinese. 
An ancient nation with a precious culture is almost dying.''
DANIEL GOLEMAN
