
COME tomorrow, for the Chinese and some of our other friends in Asia, it will be another Year of the Snake.
I was born in China more than 70 years ago and each year around the time of the Chinese New Year, I become somewhat sentimental. 
Often I think about my boyhood days in Beijing. 
Celebrating the New Year in those days was the biggest event of the year, especially for the children.
I remember when I woke up on New Year's Day, I would find some money wrapped in red paper under the pillow. 
This was good-luck money put there by parents and grandparents while the child slept. 
It was a great thrill to open the red wrapper and find a few shining silver dollars.
But the next few days it got even better. 
Whenever you saw a relative or friend who was at least one generation older than you, he or she would give you a red wrapper with some money in it. 
In return, you would bow or prostrate yourself on the floor, wishing him or her a Happy New Year. 
It would become a game, involving physical contact: you trying not to accept the wrapper (it was only an act!) and the other person trying to prevent you from prostrating yourself on the floor.
It usually concluded with a happy ending, with you getting the money. 
Those were the good old days when silver dollars were plentiful in China. 
Beginning in the early 1930's, we got only paper money during the New Year holidays. 
But no one complained. 
In any case, the money usually ended up in a bank account opened by the parents and later used for the education of the children.
When my grandparents were living, there were feasts during the first few days of the New Year. 
Grandpa loved to see all his friends and relatives, and it was not unusual to have 20 or 30 people for dinner at our house. 
There was shark-fin soup, roasted duck, sauteed carp, red-cooked pork and many other delicious dishes. 
We children all wore new clothes and ate candies, fruits and cakes all day long!
The family fortune went downhill after my grandparents passed away, however, and with them also went the big feasts in the house. 
Now only memories linger.
The Chinese zodiac has a 12-year cycle. 
Beside the snake, there are 11 other animals in whose year you could be born. 
They are horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog, boar, rat, ox, tiger, hare and dragon. 
In 12 more years there will be another Year of the Snake.
If some Chinese tell you in which animal year they were born, you could generally guess their age, provided you remember the order of the animal years. 
For example: before snake it is dragon; after snake it is horse, and so on. 
If they tell you next year that they were born in a Year of the Snake, their age may be 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84 or 96. 
Generally you can tell which age would be most realistic for that person.
Among the famous people born in the Year of the Snake are the actress Brooke Shields, the architect I. M. Pei, John F. Kennedy and Imelda Marcos. 
Many people do not think kindly of the snake. 
Perhaps the Adam and Eve story gave the snake a bad name. 
Yet it has been said that people born in the Year of the Snake are considered to be gentle, tender and generous. 
They are also supposed to be compatible with people born in most of the other animal years.
I was born in the Year of the Hare and my wife in the Year of the Snake. 
We have been married for almost 40 years and, believe it or not, we have argued only three times. 
At least that's what I remember. 
But then, people born in the Year of the Hare are sometimes said to have poor memories. 
Don't you believe it!
