
OUT of the teapot comes more than the soothing or ceremonial cup. 
Tea can add subtle flavor and rich color to a variety of foods.
While Westerners generally think of tea only as a beverage, the Chinese have used it as a seasoning for centuries. 
And now as more American and French chefs are blending Asian flavors and techniques into their cooking, they too have discovered the pleasures of flavoring with tea.
Perhaps the most traditional use of tea in Chinese cooking is for tea-leaf eggs, a specialty often served on the Chinese New Year because eggs represent rebirth and good fortune.
After hard-boiled eggs are prepared, their shells are gently cracked all over but not removed. 
The eggs are then simmered for about an hour in a mixture of water, soy sauce, star anise and tea leaves. 
The dark, flavorful broth penetrates the cracked shells so when the eggs are finally cooled and peeled they have the look of marbelized porcelain.
Today tea is most frequently used for smoking poultry. 
Nina Simonds, the author of ''Classic Chinese Cuisine'' and ''Chinese Seasons'' (Houghton Mifflin, 1982 and 1986), said the smoking technique originated as a way to preserve foods in the warmer provinces of Sichuan, Hunan and Hubei. 
''A number of flavoring and coloring agents were used,'' she said in a recent interview, ''and among them were camphor, cyprus, bamboo and tea.''
She added that the use of smoke in China has evolved strictly as a flavoring now.''
Among the Chinese restaurants in New York that serve tea-smoked duck are Chin Chin on East 49th Street and Shun Lee West on West 65th Street.
Charles Palmer, the chef and a co-owner of Aureole in Manhattan, serves tea-smoked squab. 
''I do it differently from the Chinese,'' he said. 
''I don't cook the squab first. 
I smoke raw squabs for about 40 minutes, then roast them.''
Mr. Palmer said he first tasted classic tea-smoked duck at Chin Chin. 
''I liked the flavor because it was not as pungent as the taste you get from wood smoking,'' he said. 
''I didn't know exactly how the Chinese did it so I experimented.''
He uses branches of green Greek mountain tea that he buys in Astoria, Queens.
Ken Hom, an author and cooking teacher, said he saw a lot of young American chefs experimenting with tea smoking because ''it's new for them and different from using hickory chips.''
The type of tea used is extremely important. 
''It should be fresh, not old, so it imparts the best flavor and color,'' Ms. Simonds said. 
She prefers China black tea but also said that Lapsang souchong, which has a smoky taste, was very effective.
Not only are smoked foods more popular than ever, but the ease and simplicity of the Chinese technique adds to its appeal. 
It can be done on the kitchen stove in a wok.
The wok is lined with aluminum foil and in it are placed the tea leaves and, usually, some sugar. 
Some recipes also include raw rice with the tea leaves. 
Star anise, dried tangerine peel or cinnamon sticks may also be included for flavor. 
Whole duck, chicken or squab that has been steamed or poached in an aromatic broth is set on a rack over the tea mixture. 
The wok is covered tightly. 
Within minutes after the heat is turned on the tea mixture begins to smoke, seasoning the food and deepening its color.
After 10 to 15 minutes, the heat can be turned off and the food left in the wok to cool.
Occasionally tea leaves are used for stir-frying. 
A specialty of Hangzhou in southern China is stir-fried shrimp seasoned with fresh green dragon well tea leaves. 
In her book ''Chinese Cooking for the American Kitchen'' (Atheneum, 1976), Karen Lee includes a recipe for stir-fried beef with black tea. 
She also uses steeped black tea in sesame paste when making sesame noodles as well as in marinades for barbecuing.
Regardless of the cooking technique, Mr. Hom said it was important not to overdo the tea flavor. 
''It should add subtle depths but not overwhelm,'' he said.
Delicate teas can season rice. 
Yannick Cam, the chef and owner of Le Pavillon in Washington, sometimes uses jasmine tea instead of water for cooking rice to serve with Thai curries. 
In Elizabeth Andoh's first book, ''At Home With Japanese Cooking'' (Alfred A. Knopf, 1980), a dish of rice and chicken or fish is served moistened with hot green tea.
Tea even adds exotic perfume to desserts. 
Green tea has become a standard ice-cream flavor in Chinese and Japanese restaurants. 
Using tea in dessert is also popular among French and American chefs.
Jasmine is used to season a custard at Restaurant Troisgros in Roanne, France. 
Alain Senderens, chef and co-owner of Lucas Carton in Paris, steeps prunes in brandy and black tea. 
A parfait of tea and raisins with warm praline-champagne sauce is also on the menu at Beau Geste, a new French restaurant on the Upper West Side in New York.
In ''Chez Panisse Desserts'' (Random House, 1985), Leslie Remolif Shere includes a recipe for fruit poached in sauterne and seasoned with Darjeeling tea. 
Mr. Palmer uses jasmine tea and tangerine to add subtle flavor to ice cream.
''I think tea is an interesting flavor,'' he said. 
''There's such variation in teas. 
And the funny thing is I never particularly drink tea, but now I use it for cooking.''
 
A BROTH THAT ADDS SUBTLE FLAVORS
 
Tea and Anise-Flavored Chicken Livers
 
(Adapted from ''Chinese Seasons'' by Nina Simonds, Houghton Mifflin, 1986)
 
Preparation time: 20 minutes, plus cooling
 
Cooking time: 40 minutes
 
1 1/2 pounds fresh chicken livers
3 1/2 quarts water
1/2 cup China black tea leaves tied in a square of cheesecloth
1/4 cup rice wine
1/4 cup soy sauce
4 whole star anise
6 slices fresh ginger root, peeled.
1.Lightly rinse the chicken livers, drain thoroughly and separate the lobes.
2.Heat two quarts of water until boiling and blanch the livers for about two minutes. 
Drain.
3.In a heavy saucepan combine the remaining 1 1/2 quarts of water with the tea leaves, rice wine and soy sauce. 
Lightly smash the anise and ginger root with the side of a cleaver and add them. 
Simmer this mixture for 20 minutes.
4.Add the chicken livers and once the mixture returns to a simmer cook for 15 minutes. 
Remove from heat and allow the chicken livers to cool in the liquid.
5.Remove the cooled livers from the cooking liquid and slice them thin. 
Serve cold or at room temperature on slices of toast or in a salad.
Yield: 6 servings.
 
Tea-Smoked Squab
 
(Adapted from ''Bruce Cost's Asian Ingredients,'' William Morrow & Company, 1988)
 
Preparation time: 10 minutes plus marinating and cooling time
 
Cooking time:
One hour, 30 minutes, in stages
 
4 whole squabs
2 tablespoons coarse salt
2 teaspoons Sichuan peppercorns
6 star anise
2 2-inch cinnamon sticks
2 teaspoons dark soy sauce
1/2 cup uncooked rice
1/2 cup light brown sugar
1/4 cup black tea leaves
Peanut oil for deep frying.
1.Rinse and dry the squabs thoroughly.
2.Place the salt, peppercorns, star anise and cinnamon sticks in a dry skillet and toast by shaking over medium heat until the mixture begins to smoke and the salt begins to turn brown. 
Allow to cool. 
Discard the star anise and cinnamon and rub salt and peppercorns over the squabs, inside and out. 
Cover the squabs loosely and set in a cool place or in the refrigerator for eight hours or overnight.
3.Place the squabs, breast side down, on a heat-proof plate. 
Place in a steamer or a covered wok fitted with a rack and steam 30 minutes. 
Allow squabs to cool, then rub with soy sauce.
4.Cover the bottom of a wok with aluminum foil. 
Place the rice, brown sugar and tea in it. 
Place a rack in the wok and arrange the squabs breast side up on the rack. 
Line the cover of the wok with foil, cover the wok and seal the edge of the cover with dampened paper towels to keep the smoke from escaping.
5.Turn the heat to medium high and when you smell smoke leave the heat on for 15 minutes. 
Turn the heat off and keep the birds in the covered wok for 45 minutes.
6.In a large wok or deep fryer heat the oil, add the squabs one at a time and deep fry them for five minutes to crisp the skin. 
Pat dry with paper towels. 
Serve warm or at room temperature.
Yield: 8 to 10 servings.
NOTE: Instead of deep frying, the squabs can be roasted for 10 minutes at 450 degrees.
 
Green Tea Ice Cream
 
(Adapted from ''An American Taste of Japan'' by Elizabeth Andoh, Alfred A. Knopf, 1986)
 
Preparation time: 25 minutes plus freezing
 
Cooking time: 8 minutes
 
Y cup sugar
Y cup water
1/2 teaspoon mirin (Japanese rice wine)
2 teaspoons matcha (powdered Japanese green tea)
1/2 cup whole milk
1/2 cup half and half.
1.In a small saucepan, combine the sugar and water and stir over low heat until the sugar melts. 
Simmer 5 minutes longer, then stir in the rice wine. 
Remove from heat.
2.In a small dish, dissolve the tea in one tablespoon of the sugar syrup, then stir the tea mixture back into the rest of the syrup.
3.Stir in the milk and half and half. 
Chill.
4.When the mixture is cold, place it in an ice-cream maker and churn it until thickened and smooth. 
Transfer to a container and freeze for an hour or two to firm it.
Yield: 1 pint.
