
Li Ying raised her slender arms and lowered them slowly, gracefully, like a wave falling from its crest, as a flurry of lithe dancers swished back and forth and around her.
For the Chinese audience, accustomed to acrobatics and theatrical drama, it was unusual to see such gentle, understated movements. 
But the audience seemed to absorb this American-style ballet willingly, as they have welcomed many other things Western.
''You can't compare it with what we usually see,'' said a Chinese man who has been interested in ballet for nearly a decade. 
''But it's not bad.''
This work, a simple romance called ''In the Mountain Forest,'' was conceived by an American choreographer, Norman Walker, in what is probably the first cultural exchange between the United States and China since the military crackdown in Beijing on June 3-4. 
Public performances began Thursday and end today.
After the crackdown, the Chinese Government harshly condemned the influence of ''bourgeois liberalism,'' a code-phrase for things Western, particularly American, and several academic and cultural exchange programs were suspended.
 
Politics Is Put Aside
The visit by Mr. Walker, a dance professor at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I., risked being canceled, especially when money for it fell through last summer. 
But this exchange survived, partly because of the decadelong relationship between the Central Ballet of China troupe and Mary Yung Kantor, a Chinese-American who helped organize and pay for the visit.
Both sides have also been careful to leave politics out of any discussion of the exchange. 
''It's a pure cultural exchange,'' said Zhang Heqing, an official with the Central Ballet. 
''The technique is from the West, and the cultural style is from the West, but it's nothing political.''
Both Mr. Walker and Mrs. Kantor said there also was self-censorship on the American side. 
Mr. Walker has excluded sensuous or shocking movements that might offend Chinese artistic sensibilities. 
Moreover, the plot is simple. 
The first act begins with a magnificent spring, and the young girl and boy maturing into adults. 
The second act reveals a romantic summer night encounter between the couple, and finally, in the third act, they wed.
 
Talk of Return Visit
''Sensual ballets are not always received well here,'' Mrs. Kantor said. 
''We understand their needs. 
They needed to learn more movements and different pieces.''
Many artists have read the signs of tighter control of the arts, and it has been a cold, dry winter for most of them. 
But in the small circle of Chinese ballet, Mr. Walker's visit has brought new techniques and a new concept of ballet to the 44 dancers -two casts of 22 - who have been working with him since Dec. 
25, when rehearsals for ''In the Mountain Forest'' began.
The score, which concludes with a string of particularly unusual rhythms, has made it difficult for the Chinese dancers to master the ballet. 
But the dancers have absorbed the new techniques eagerly. 
There already have been discussions about having Mr. Walker return this summer.
''They have been trained in the Russian style, so the dance has a sense of presentation,'' Mr. Walker said. 
Thus, the Chinese dancers are accustomed to presenting their gestures in full view of the audience. 
Mr. Walker had to explain to them that their gestures can point inward, even away from the audience.
 
Other New Techniques
They have picked up other Western techniques as well.
''He teaches us to use the body to command the movements of arms,'' said Miss Li, a lead dancer. 
''In the past, when we wanted to raise the arm, the arm rose of itself. 
Now the body is directing the movements of the arms.''
Sometimes the Chinese dancers reproduced movements differently from the way Mr. Walker envisioned them, but the revisions were just as suitable. 
''They are capable of a lot of subtlety,'' he said. 
''Chinese people are not direct. 
There's a little bit of a turning away, of not presenting things so squarely. 
It's hard for Americans to get that subtle turn of the body.''
Indeed, Mr. Walker said he had discovered remarkable similarities between Chinese folk dance and American modern dance: the sense of the spectacular, the tricks, turns, leaps, falls and spirals.
Chinese acrobatics are popular, and there is a sense of the acrobatic in the dance as well. 
In another ballet choregraphed by Chinese, two dancers twirled for nearly a minute - a feat that brought an unusual burst of applause from the audience.
Officials involved in the program seemed encouraged by the blend of Chinese music and American choreography. 
The Chinese dancers said Mr. Walker's teaching had helped them develop their own sense of style, especially in an art that had been totally imported.
''He has his own peculiarity in choreography, his own style,'' Wei Tongsheng, a 23-year-old lead dancer, said of Mr. Walker. ''It is necessary to mix what is Chinese with something of the West to form our own.''
