
FEZZIWIGS
Thirty-five members of the Fezziwigs, a suburban New York-Connecticut-New Jersey branch of the International Order of Dickens Fellows, usually meet on the last Saturday of each month from September through June to indulge their passion for the works of Charles Dickens. 
Visitors will be welcome at the next session, which is scheduled from 1 to 3 P.M. Saturday in the French Parlor of Reid Hall at Manhattanville College in Purchase. 
Admission is free.
''In ordinary contact with people, you don't come across many who are avid Dickens readers,'' said Claire Davis, president of the chapter, ''and you like to talk to someone about what you read.''
Each year the three-year-old branch chooses a Dickens book to read and discuss under the leadership of Dr. Nancy Schaumburger, professor of English at Manhattanville. 
This year's project is ''Hard Times.''
Founded in London in 1902, the International Order of Dickens Fellows has a total of 80 branches worldwide - 30 in England, 20 in the United States and varying numbers in Canada, Italy, France, the Netherlands, Japan, New Zealand, Sri Lanka and Argentina. 
''Each branch chooses its own name,'' Mrs. Davis said, ''usually a character in one of the books.''
Fezziwig was the family name of the woman who jilted Scrooge in his youth.
In addition to the meetings, the chapters hold a Christmas party and a Dickens birthday party each year, raising money for charity. 
''Last year we gave to Hale House,'' Mrs. Davis said, referring to the Manhattan refuge for AIDS-infected babies.
The gift was given in compliance with one of the stated objects of the international fellowship: ''To knit together in a common bond of friendship lovers of that great master of humor and pathos, Charles Dickens. 
To spread the love of humanity, which is the keynote of all his work; to take such measures as may be expedient to remedy those existing social evils, the amelioration of which would have appealed so strongly to the heart of Charles Dickens, and to help in every possible direction in the cause of the poor and oppressed; to assist in the preservation and purchase of buildings and objects associated with his name or mentioned in his works.''
To that end the London fellowship purchased and established its headquarters in Dickens's home at 48 Doughty Street, where he wrote ''Oliver Twist,'' ''The Pickwick Papers'' and ''Nicholas Nickelby.''
Membership in the local chapter is $15 a year and includes meetings, parties and a newsletter. 
Call 939-4099 for more information.
 
CHINA CLASSES
Robert Hochhauser, retired director of human resources at Ciba- Geigy, was teaching English at Peking University when the Tianenman Square massacre erupted last May. 
''I was there for a month before it began, and I stayed for about 10 days afterward,'' he said. 
''I am going back in June at the invitation of the university to teach English and run a seminar on human-resource management for 10 weeks.''
He will discuss the events at Tianenman Square from his own perspective in a program sponsored by the White Plains Historical Society at 7:30 P.M. Monday in the White Plains Public Library, at 100 Martine Avenue.
His China connection began in 1945 when he was a field officer with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration's installation in Shanghai, dealing with both the Nationalist and Communist Governments. 
He returned to China in 1979 as a guest of the Ministry of Education to help start the English program. 
''After 40 years there were dramatic changes, and last year, when student demonstrations started in April, I felt that there was a possibility of a peaceful resolution - until the army was brought in from the south,'' he said.
''Everything we can do to keep the lines of communication open should be explored,'' he continued. 
''Once we go in the other direction, China will become isolated, and we may face more serious problems as a result. 
There is the potential for hostile developments. 
The Chinese are technologically quite advanced, having the atom bomb and the capability to go into outer space.
''How long the old men in power will be able to influence the philosophy of the younger people I have no way of knowing, but it's another reason to keep things open. 
My outlook is optimistic. 
We will go through some more difficult times and decisions, which I hope will be made with a long-range concept rather than short-range emotional reaction.''
 
DANCE GROUP
Susan Marshall and Company will perform as part of the State University of New York at Purchase Dance Series at 8 P.M. Saturday in the Performing Arts Center on campus. 
Since 1983, when the group was formed, it's reputation as a fresh and original addition to the dance scene has taken several incremental leaps.
In 1985 Ms. Marshal received a Bessie, the New York Dance and Performance Award for outstanding choreographic achievement. 
In 1988 she was the first recipient of the new American Choreographer Award, and in the same year she won the Brandeis University Creative Arts Citation.
The company began touring major dance festivals and theaters in 1985, performing in Austria, Japan, Israel, Los Angeles, the American Spoleto Festival, Jacob's Pillow in Massachusetts, the Brooklyn Academy of Music's ''Next Wave Festival'' and the State University's own Summerfare.
Tickets at $16 and $20 may be reserved by calling 251-6200.
 
FREE SPACE TALK
''Space 1990 - Blast Off to a Thrilling Decade'' is the subject of a free slide-talk geared for adults and children by Dr. Dinah Moche, author, lecturer and professor of astronomy and physics at the City University of New York.
At 3 P.M. today in the White Plains Public Library she will relate stories of her personal encounters with American and Russian astronauts and spacecraft experts, accompanied by slides from photographs of the planets, stars and constellations taken in outer space.
More than nine million copies of Dr. Moche's 20 books on astronomy, space and science for children and adults have been sold in seven languages around the world. 
A graduate of Harvard who received her doctorate from Columbia, she is a National Science Foundation Fellow and was a participant at the White House in the 1984 conference on America's future in space.
 
STUDENT ART
Art created by more than 100 high school students from 21 schools in Westchester, Putnam and Fairfield Counties will be on display today through next Sunday at the Katonah Museum of Art, at 28 Bedford Road, one block north of the Metro-North station in Katonah.
The museum provided a team of professionals to conduct workshops for the students in advance of the show, so that in addition to supplying the artwork, the students designed the catalogue, posters and invitations and installed the exhibition of paintings, sculpture, graphics, photography and metalwork selected by their teachers.
''Young Artists '90'' is the seventh annual high school art exhibition to be held at the museum in cooperation with area schools. 
Its purpose is to give young artists an opportunity to exhibit in a professional atmosphere and to acquire some expertise in displaying their work and dealing with the public. 
Hours are from 1 to 5 P.M. today, Tuesday through Friday and next Sunday, and from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Saturday. Admission is free. 
$90ELEANOR CHARLES
