
Although diaper delivery vendors may have gained some market share from disposables last year, American producers of cloth diapers did not reap much of the benefit. 
A surge in imports from China in 1986 all but drove American cloth diaper producers from the delivery market. 
Imports of heavy-ply cloth diapers from China climbed to 1.06 million pounds that year, up from just over 82,000 pounds in 1985. 
The bulk were purchased by delivery vendors.
Faced with the onslaught, American producers concentrated on the retail sale of cloth diapers. 
That $35 million business, which consumes four million dozen cloth diapers a year, is three times as large as the diaper delivery sector. 
Thanks to its distribution requirements, it is also harder for importers to crack.
Unwilling to forsake the delivery business entirely, however, American producers petitioned for import restrictions. 
But by the time they were granted in late 1987, the sole American supplier serving the deliverers was Soft Care Apparel of Pelzer, S.C., a subsidiary of Gerber Products.
The quota drew criticism. 
Environmentalists feared that it would lead to higher prices for cloth diapers, which they favor over disposables. 
Free trade advocates objected to protecting a single company in a tiny market.
In the final analysis, last year's quota of 1.34 million pounds proved of only modest value to Gerber, which markets its diapers under the Curity brand name. 
''The quota was set at such a high level that the Chinese could keep 70 percent of the diaper service market,'' said Dan Pezold, director of marketing for Gerber's children's wear.
Nevertheless, the quota helped Gerber hang on to most of its business while it designed a heavier diaper comparable to the Chinese imports. 
Orders have picked up since it introduced the new diaper last fall, Mr. Pezold said.
The quota has also encouraged others to enter the market. 
Dundee Mills, Gerber's main rival in the delivery market before withdrawing in 1987, has designed a new diaper of its own and plans to re-enter the market. 
''We are doing it in a limited way for now,'' said Clarence McMerty, Dundee's vice president of marketing.
Intera Ltd., a producer of adult diapers based in Cleveland, Tenn., told the annual meeting of the National Association of Diaper Services last week in Dallas of its plan to introduce a cloth diaper for babies.
Yet the outlook for imports is now less predictable than ever. 
This year diapers became part of the larger Infants Wear category for Customs purposes, enabling the Chinese to import five million pounds of infant wear in total.
''Now the Chinese may have to choose between things like diapers and infants' sleepwear,'' said Knox H. White, an attorney with Haynesworth, Marion, McKay & Guerard, of Greenville, S.C., who represented the American companies in the quota case. 
''We have no idea whether it will mean more or less diaper imports.''
