
As it sheds the chilly sandstorms and its wintry pall of coal dust, Beijing seems to go through a metamorphosis: the trees and grass in the parks and the bustling activity at temples and monuments and marketplaces light up the place the way color brightens up a drab black and white picture.
Ten million people, winding by on bicycles, jamming their way into buses, and eating noodles as they stand in the streets, is as much a symbol of this country as are the grand Ming palaces, the traditional garden houses, or the imposing memorial to Mao Zedong.
Much of China's precious art and many of its rare books were taken to Taiwan by the Nationalists after their losing war with the Communists in 1949. 
Over the next two decades, many of the capital's grand monuments were pulled down by the Communists or defaced in the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976.
A glance at the city's wide and barren streets and the scores of plain low-roofed buildings belies the grandeur of China's 4,000-year history. 
Behind some of the walls lies China's spiritual past: magnificent temples, grand old houses and the halls of the Chinese emperors. 
Tips of pagoda roofs peep out over their surrounding red walls. 
High arches and red-topped buildings dot even the smallest of public parks.
The central square, a vast plaza of gray pavement highlighted by large meeting halls and groups of statues, is not only the emblem of the state's power but also a reminder that this is a city with layers of history and a place that time and again has endured rampage and reconstruction.
China is not quite a land of plenty, but Beijing has some of the country's best museums, temples, imperial residences, hotels and restaurants.
As a city, Beijing appears to sprawl, but its design has the logic of a chessboard, with main streets running north to south or east to west. 
Tour buses are a convenient way to see the sights, which would otherwise take several days to cover in even a cursory way. 
Aside from the city's center, walking will not take a visitor to too many places.
Bicycling is the best way to see the life of the city. 
Many hotels rent bicycles, and the visitor should take time to ride through the back alleyways, where the people live and the children play.
 
What to See
In the central square is the imposing Tian An Men, or the Gate of Heavenly Peace, where Mao stood on the balcony and proclaimed the People's Republic of China on Oct. 
1, 1949. 
A large Mao poster hangs from the ledge near where he stood. 
For much of this century the square has been the focal point of China's political life, the scene of riots and political protests. 
These days the crowds are more likely to gather there to watch foreigners throw a Frisbee around than to start a demonstration.
From the square, the visitor should pass through the Gate of Heavenly Peace. 
Here, in the Forbidden City, the expansive, maze-like old imperial palace of the emperors, it is easy to lose oneself in time and space. 
Hundreds of thousands of laborers took 14 years to build the palace in the early 15th century.
Although many of the jewels and precious art objects were removed this century, the palace's 9,000 decorated rooms, the wide-open grounds and the traditionally ornate yet simple architecture are impressive. 
An exhibit on the last Emperor, Puyi, will last through the year. 
Admission to the Imperial Gardens is 54 cents, $1.35 for the Palace Museum. 
There are also small fees for other exhibits. 
The palace is open daily except Monday, 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. As with most such sites, visitors should carry small change.
Facing the Gate of Heavenly Peace, across the square, is the Mao Zedong Mausoleum. 
The hall is bordered on the southern side by the Front Gate. 
Free admission; open daily 8 A.M. to noon.
To the west side of the square is the Great Hall of the People, where the National People's Congress meets and where visiting dignitaries are entertained at banquets. 
If the congress is not in session visitors can take a look inside. 
Admission: $1.35; open daily 8:30 A.M. to 11 A.M., 1 P.M. to 3:30 P.M. Opposite the great hall are two of the city's largest museums on Chinese history and the Communist Revolution. 
Admission: 8 cents; spring and summer hours are 8:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., closed Monday.
South of the Front Gate is the Temple of Heaven, where the Emperor journeyed in procession from the Forbidden City to pray before the winter solstice. 
Admission: 27 cents.
On Yonghegong Street, in the northeast, is the Palace Temple, a large and elegant Tibetan Buddhist shrine. 
Built in the early Qing dynasty as an imperial residence, it was converted in the mid-18th century to a lamasery for monks from Mongolia and Tibet. 
In the last and largest hall, a four-story Buddha carved from sandalwood and draped in yellow satin towers over fruit offerings and yak-butter candlesticks that are lighted in ceremony. 
Admission: 27 cents; open 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., closed Monday.
Day trips to the Summer Palace and the Great Wall, outside the central city, are well worthwhile. 
Most hotels can arrange bus tours to them.
 
Where to Shop
Shopping in Beijing falls short of the delights of sightseeing, but by strolling through the handful of free markets, opened only in the last few years, the visitor glimpses a livelier side of Chinese society. 
Foreigners are supposed to use an official currency, called the foreign exchange certificate, which is different from the common renminbi used by the Chinese. 
Bargaining is possible in some of the free markets, but when discussing prices, remember that the certificates are worth up to 70 percent more than the renminbi.
Liulichang, southwest of the Front Gate, is a long street flanked by state-run antique shops where many travelers pick up a few Chinese-style vases or calligraphy works. 
Even window-shoppers may marvel at the thousand-year-old coins, the elaborate golden clocks or the watercolor landscapes. 
Fakes are said to abound, so the visitor should be careful, even if the shop offers certificates of authenticity. 
Prices are high and fixed. 
A seemingly simple calligraphy may cost $1,000.
Nearer to the Front Gate is Dazhalan, or the Big Fence, an old, narrow but lively street that used to be the only place where the local Chinese shopped for shoes, silk, toys, acrobat accoutrements, or just went to see the movies. 
The street has lost its monopoly as other stores around the city have opened up, but it is still full of crowds and color.
Wangfujing, the street east of the Beijing Hotel, has many specialty stores, as well as the city's largest department store, offering everything from scarves to shoes to furs, silks and candy. 
Similarly, the Friendship Store, on Jianguomenwai Street, near the Jianguo Hotel, sells wood carvings, paintings, books, chocolates and vases.
 
Where to Eat Beijing has some of the best restaurants in China, but visitors should remember that the Chinese tend to eat early. 
A hotel employee should be asked to write down the name and address of a restaurant in Chinese and visitors might have to pay the taxi driver to wait through dinner if they want a ride back to the hotel.
Travelers should not leave the city without tasting the famous Peking duck. 
Quanjude Duck House, 24 Qianmen West Street (701-1379), at the Peace Gate, is the best of its kind. 
A few side dishes can also be ordered, but menus tend to follow a set plan, with all parts of the duck - hearts, kidneys, livers, legs and tongues - offered as preludes to the main dish. 
The meal usually ends with candied apples and fresh oranges. 
Your hotel can make reservations for you in Chinese.
The spacious Dongfang Mingzhu Restaurant, also known as the Beijing Orient Restaurant, offers a modern atmosphere and the best variety of Cantonese dim sum (about $7 a person) as well as very good dinner dishes, mostly Cantonese (about $9.50 a person). 
The restaurant, 4 Zheng Yang Market, Qian Men West Street (301-6668), will help call a taxi for the ride home.
For delicious Shandong-style dishes in a classy thatched-roof setting, try the Beijing Du Yi Ju Restaurant. 
Shandong cuisine has influenced much of Chinese food as we know it today and this spot's manager is one of China's top chefs. 
Fixed menus are the custom ranging from about $16 to $150 a person. 
Reservations are recommended and the restaurant can order a taxi for your trip back to the hotel (Qi Jia Huozi on De Sheng Men Wai Street, tel. 
449-471 or 449-313).
Windows on the World, on the 28th floor of the Citic building on Jianguomenwai Street (500-2255), is also a delightful Cantonese restaurant where dinner costs about $10 a person. 
The fried milk is worth a try. 
For more elegance, taste the Cantonese food at Shang Palace at the Shangri-La Beijing Hotel ($15 a person; 831-2211) or the Sichuan dishes at Yuntai Restaurant at the Great Wall Sheraton ($23 a person; 500-5566).
 
Where to Stay
The new east wing of the Beijing Hotel (33 East Changan Street; 513-7766, extension 444), which used to be the only spot where foreigners were allowed to stay, is in a central location. 
A small double room costs $66.50, plus a 10 percent service charge, which all hotels in China customarily add. 
Standard rooms at the Zhaolong Hotel (2 Gongti North Road; 500-2299), in the northeastern area of the city, are $86. 
Double rooms at the Jianguo Hotel (5 Jianguomenwai Street; 500-2233), not far from the city center, cost $100. 
A short walk away is the Hotel Beijing-Toronto (Jianguomenwai Street; 500-2266), where standard rooms are $110.
The hotels with the best service (and the highest prices) are managed by foreigners. 
Standard rooms are $120 at the Holiday Inn Lido (Jichang Road; 500-6688), which is close to the airport, $140 at the Great Wall Sheraton (Donghuan North Road; 500-5566), and $165 at the Shangri-La Hotel Beijing (29 Zizhuyuan Road; 831-2211).
 
Night Life
Night life for the Chinese has recently centered around the television set, a new possession for many families. 
Chinese do not tend to drink much alcohol, but in the past year a couple of Chinese-run bars have opened up that offer imported liquors, beer and wine. 
Customers can also sing along to recorded music, Japanese-style. 
The Beijing Haiwei Wine Bar, on the third floor of the small shopping center on Hualong Street in the Nanheyan district, offers a modern sound and video system where many Japanese and Chinese go to sing their hearts out. 
Admission: $2.70; telephone 512-5146.
The Beijing Opera is still a popular spectacle among visitors, even though the drama of sing-song cries and whispers is a dwindling tradition among the younger generation here. 
Three opera houses cater to visitors: Changan Theater, 126 Changan Street, 655-915; Tianqiao Theater 30 Beiwei Road, Xuanwuqu, 330-513 or 330-300, and the Ji Xiang Theater, 14 Jinyu Hutong, 555-501. 
Schedules tend to be made known only at the last minute.
Most major hotels also have discotheques. 
The Cosmos Club is at the Great Wall Sheraton (cover charge $9.50; 8 P.M. to 1 A.M., closed Monday), Xanadu at the Shangri-La Beijing (cover charge $6.75; open every day 8:30 P.M. to 2 A.M.) and the Glass House at the Kunlun Hotel (cover charge $8.10; open every day 8 P.M. to 1 A.M.). 
Local Chinese are allowed only at the Kunlun.
Night markets have become bustling events, especially the one east of the Beijing Hotel on Changan Street, where even observers are pulled into the action by white-uniformed vendors trying to lure customers to their stalls for a dime or quarter snack. 
Whether it is spicy Sichuan noodles, fish ball soup, fried chicken legs or stuffed salty cakes, the local Chinese eat their fare standing up. 
Most foreigners tend to prefer the delicacies at more established restaurants, but the scene is lively.
The Great Wall, right, is a day trip from Beijing (Catherine Ursillo); Carved figures from the roof of the Forbidden City, above (Porterfield-Chickering); vendor in market near Liulichang, right (Sheryl WuDunn); palace just inside entrance to the Forbidden City (Porterfield-Chickering); a bicycle parking lot (Porterfield-Chickering); map of Beijing
