
In a remarkable combination of will, foresight and happenstance, what began as a swampy island only 85 miles from the Equator has been transformed into the most modern, efficient and simply the cleanest city of Southeast Asia. 
The last is not a bad attribute in a part of the world where sanitation is more talked about than practiced.
Singapore, a city-state of just 2.6 million people and possessing almost no natural resources except its harbor, rides along on a swift current of capital and financial services. 
It is, with Hong Kong, the most unashamedly materialistic society in the region - status conscious, a touch insecure, eager to taste, hear, see or drink what someone, usually in the West, has decided is ''the latest.''
So everything from Indonesian batik to Italian designers, from Chinese silk to the newest Japanese electronic devices, is available here, and usually at low, open-to-bargaining prices comparable to Hong Kong's.
A multiracial society of immigrants, Singapore's mosaic of Asian cultures can be enthralling, with significant contributions from the Chinese, the Malays and the Indians, who, respectively, make up 76 percent, 15 percent and 6.5 percent of the population. 
Conveniently for the American visitor, however, this variety is in the context of a largely English-speaking society, and people live amid a low degree of racial tension.
Altogether, then, Singapore is the easiest introduction any foreigner can have to Asia, a comfortable place with fine hotels, transportation and tourist services, with lots of stuff for the kids, restaurants of nearly every recognized cuisine and yet still the living embodiment of some of exotic Asia's most important cultural and religious influences.
Slowly, even a paternalistic Government obsessed with modernity and convinced that any problem can be solved by ''twiddling the knobs'' of social control has learned to try to preserve the city's cultural and architectural heritage - and just in time, too, before the last Chinese shop-house died for the 100th skyscraper.
Singapore's paternalism also has an element of social control and collective propriety. 
For the residents, this includes restrictions on the kinds of dogs allowed in public housing and fines for littering, not flushing the toilet or urinating in elevators.
For tourists, however, these are not normally major difficulties, though there are increasingly stiff restrictions on where one can smoke. 
In addition one risks the death penalty for drug use, and long hair on men has been sometimes known to create difficulties at immigration counters.
But the pleasures of picking at Singapore's contradictions, which are, of course, as fascinating as its felicities, can wait for a second or third visit.
It's a place where you can shop till you drop, eat till you pop and then plop into the swimming pool. 
Then you can do penance by seeing a Chinese temple or a Malay cultural show, or by taking the kids to one of the best zoos (cageless, in the modern style) or bird parks in Asia. 
The Singapore Zoological Gardens is on Mandai Lake Road and is open 8:30 A.M. to 6 P.M. daily. 
Admission: $2.65, $1.30 for children under 12; telephone 269-3411. 
The Jurong Bird Park is on Jalan Ahmed Ibrahim, open 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., with shows at 10, 10:30, 3 and 4, featuring swooping eagles, hawks, owls and even a condor. 
Admission is the same as the zoo; 265-0022.
 
Things to See
Two popular attractions, the National Museum and the eccentric Tiger Balm Gardens, a Chinese Disneyland built by the Aw brothers with their fortune from Tiger Balm, the the liniment, are closed for renovation, at least until the middle of next year.
Empress Place, one of the most successful renovation projects in Singapore, is worth a morning. 
It was built in 1854 as a courthouse, and has been carefully transformed into a museum and exhibition center. 
Until March the museum is showing artifacts from China's Qing dynasty, its last, on loan from the Shenyang Palace Museum. 
Open 9:30 A.M. to 9:30 P.M. daily. 
Admission $3.15; children $1.60.
Singaporeans love birds, and another nice diversion are the songbird cafes, which are less hokey than they sound. 
At the corner of Tiong Bahru and Seng Poh Roads is an unassuming coffee shop, its lot surmounted by poles. 
Handcarved wooden and wicker cages hang from them, while the songbirds inside go through their paces, apparently learning from their neighbors.
Don't forget to note the grasshopper vendor near the coffee shop who provides the birds' munchies. 
The coffee isn't great, but it's a nice way to spend part of a morning. 
The times are roughly 7 A.M. to 11 A.M.; Sundays at 8 A.M. there is a sort of concert.
 
Neighborhoods
Given Singapore's size, a standard city tour will provide good orientation and it barely takes a morning. 
Tours cost about $11, $6 for children; most include a sort of ''instant Asia'' cultural show. 
Ask at your hotel or the Singapore Tourist Promotion Board, Raffles City Tower, 250 North Bridge Road (339-6622). 
There is also a potted ''Contrasting Culture'' tour that will take you through what's left of the ethnic neighborhoods.
You'll see Arab Street, in the southeast, a Muslim sector, Chinatown and Little India, along Serangoon Road.
But go back on your own to chat and browse, particularly in Chinatown. 
On Telok Ayer Street is a favorite temple, Thian Hock Keng, the Temple of Heavenly Happiness, where new migrants to Singapore came to pay their respects to Ma Chu Poh, the goddess of the sea.
What began as a josshouse is now a relatively stately temple, with an iron gate imported from Glasgow. 
But the grounds also served as a place of rest and refuge for weary immigrants from Hokkien, many of whom used to smoke opium to relax after a long day of aching labor. 
They would smear opium on the mouths of the goddess's guardians, two statues that flank her own, and give them more to smoke.
Opium, like all such drugs, is illegal now in Singapore. 
Yet even today, what appears to be fresh opium is found smeared on the mouths of the guardians. 
Sometimes, in the evenings, from the rear of the temple grounds, comes the sickly smell of burning opium, tolerated still, or so it seems, for a founding generation quickly passing.
 
Getting Around
Singapore has a new subway system, called the M.R.T., or Mass Rapid Transit, and it is clean, quiet and cheap, with fares from about a quarter to 75 cents. 
It works with a magnetic ticket, rather like the Washington, D.C., subway. 
Sometime next year all 42 stations will be in operation.
Recently more stations opened on the east-west lines, so residential areas for the Malay community are accessible. 
One such district, on the east coast, is known as Geylang Serai. 
If you get off at the Eunos Station, you can look at the local market, a lively emporium where the prices are cheap, bargaining is good-natured (and hence serious) and the tour buses don't go. 
It's a good place to meet people and talk to them about their lives, while picking up some batik.
The bus system offers Explorer tickets good for one ($2.60) or three days ($6.30), available at hotels, tour agents and the bus authority (205 Braddell Road; 287-2727).
Taxis are also reasonable, and all are metered and clean. 
And in this carefully regulated city the taxi drivers are honest, or else.
 
Orchard Road
One of Singapore's most genuine sights, of course, is the area around Orchard Road, which is devoted to shopping, eating and people-watching. 
The place to start bargain hunting is the Tangs store at No. 320. Swiss watches, gold jewelry, perfume, cosmetics and electrical items are especially good buys. 
Also, surprisingly, Oriental carpets. 
Stay away from the cheap tailors - go to Hong Kong or even Bangkok for that.
It is perfectly legal, by the way, to change money with the many money changers, and the rates are better than at the bank.
 
Where to Stay
The days of ready discounts in Singapore hotels are over, at least until a lot more rooms are added in 1991. 
It's worth getting your travel agent to ask, but don't expect miracles. 
All hotels charge a 3 percent tax, soon to be 4 percent, and a 10 percent service charge on top of rates. 
They discourage further tipping but that doesn't mean you can't.
For Orchard Road shopping trips, the Hilton is almost ideally situated at No. 581 (737-2233). 
Doubles go for about $126, and it's a decent, well-run place. 
In roughly the same area and price category, the Hyatt Regency, at 10-12 Scotts Road (733-1188), offers doubles for $131.
Also on Scotts Road, at No. 22, is the Goodwood Park Hotel, a whimsical-looking building, formerly the German Club, that has pleasant public spaces and excellent Asian food.
The Shangri-La Hotel, 22 Orange Grove Road (737-3644), offers some doubles for $121. 
It's a fine hotel, but a bit far to walk from Orchard Road.
For a slightly cheaper stay: the pagoda-like Dynasty Hotel, attached to Tang's at 320 Orchard Road (734-9900). 
Doubles start at $110.
Bargain choices: The Ladyhill Hotel, 1 Ladyhill Road (737-2111), owned by the Goodwood Group, with doubles at $63, or the Cockpit Hotel, 67 Oxley Rise Penang Road (737-9111), with doubles at $74. 
The Cockpit has the sanction of Raffles Hotel, now closed for renovations until mid-1991, to make the original Singapore Sling, which is better than the imitations.
 
Where to Eat
For a good Malay meal in a cozy setting: Aziza's Restaurant, 36 Emerald Hill Road; 235-1130 or 732-9491. 
A meal for two with wine or beer: $40.
For Indonesian-Malay food, try the Sanur Indonesian Restaurant, fourth level, Centrepoint Shopping Center, 176 Orchard Road; 734-2192 or 734-2249. 
Meal for two: $20.
The Hyatt Regency has a nouvelle-American restaurant, Nutmegs, that can make a nice break from a long bout of Asian cuisine. 
Good crab cakes and ice cream, especially a mango sorbet of unmatched texture and perfume. 
Dinner for two, with wine and sorbet: about $95.
At the Goodwood Park Hotel, the Min Jiang is thought by many to be the best Sichuan restaurant in Singapore (about $50 for two, with beer). 
A new and elegant Shanghainese restaurant at the same hotel, the Chang Jiang, still has some teething problems, but a compelling menu (about $65 for two, if you stay away from shark's fin and abalone).
For excellent and inexpensive North Indian food, try Moti Mahal, 18 Murray Street (Food Alley); 221-4338. 
A meal for two with wine or beer: $25.
Merlion, the city's symbol (Porterfield-Chickering); a bird-singing contest (Porterfield-Chickering); government buildings, foreground, the harbor, Chinatown along the river (Porterfield-Chickering); flamingos at the Jarong Bird Park, which has daily shows that include a condor (Norman Owen Tomalin/Bruce Coleman); map of Singapore
