
Wintertime in Hong Kong is cool and clear and generally sunny. 
And while this is not a peak season for tourists, it is nevertheless a wonderful time to visit, because the colony is at its most festive, decked out in lights and flowers for Chinese New Year next month, welcoming performers from around the world for its annual arts festival, and adding special exotic winter dishes to its restaurant menus.
Indeed, while January brings some markedly lower hotel rates and big sales in department stores and boutiques, those savings don't signal a colony suffering from the winter doldrums. 
The Arts Festival, the centerpiece of the winter season here, has grown into an important cultural institution, which gets grander each year. 
The Festival, which opens on Jan. 
19 and runs through Feb. 
10, features Asian and Western performers. 
And as this is still a British Crown Colony -- until it reverts to Chinese control in 1997 -- British performers are always well represented.
This year's highlights include performances of Mozart's " Marriage of Figaro" with an international cast, produced by Stephen Lawless, who has worked with Sir Peter Hall on productions for the Glyndebourne Festival Opera. 
"Figaro" will be performed on Jan. 
19, 21, 23, 25 and 27. 
Britain's Royal Shakespeare Company will present its acclaimed production of "Les Liasons Dangereuses" Jan 20 to 25 and Cheek by Jowl, a noted British touring company, will present "Hamlet" from Jan. 
27 to 31. 
Music lovers can hear the City of Birmingham Orchestra from England, conducted by Simon Rattle, from Jan. 
30 to Feb. 
1, as well as a number of other groups, including the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra from New York (Jan. 
24 to 26), and the Early Brass Ensemble of Toulouse, France (Feb. 
4 and 5).
Asian offerings include the Shanghai Symphony Orchestra (Feb. 
4), Pro Musica Nipponia performing the classical music of Japan (Jan. 
27 and 28), and the Hong Kong Chinese Orchestra playing new works on traditional Chinese instruments (Feb. 
8).
This year's event also features a special U.S.A. 
Dance Series, including performances by the Joffrey Ballet (Feb. 
1 to 3) and the American Ballroom Theater (Jan. 
27 to 29), where beautifully costumed dancers glide, spin and boogie through a host of ballroom styles.
Many of the performances will take place in the colony's new Cultural Center, which sits on the harbor, just a block from the Star Ferry Terminal in Kowloon. 
Ticket prices range from a high of $64 (best seat for the opera) to $3.80. 
Tickets and performance information are available at a number of outlets, including the Cultural Center, and, on the Hong Kong side of the Star Ferry, at City Hall. 
For Festival booklets and information on ticket outlets, call the Hong Kong Arts Festival Society (529-5555) or the Hong Kong Tourist Association (801-7111; 35th Floor, Jardine House, 1 Connaught Place, Central District). 
In the United States, the association has an office at 590 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10036; 212-869-5008.
Chinese New Year is a three-day holiday, which this year (the year of the sheep) falls on Feb. 
15, 16 and 17. 
Anyone planning to visit Hong Kong should try to come before or after those days, as most Hong Kong stores and restaurants shut down then. 
The airport and the train stations are very crowded at that time, too.
 
Sights and Walks
The cool weather makes this an ideal time for hiking around one of the 236 out-islands that make up Hong Kong, and this year thousands of visitors will be making their way to Lantau Island to see what the Buddhist monks there say is the largest outdoor bronze Buddha statue in the world, a statue that is seven stories high and was just recently completed. 
Choose a sunny weekday (Lantau is jammed with day trippers on weekends), buy a first-class ticket at the pier in Central District ($2 round trip) and sit out on the deck and watch Hong Kong's fascinating harbor slip by.
Buses from the ferry terminal take visitors up a narrow winding mountain road to the Po Lin Monastery, a collection of traditional red buildings with ornate gold roofs set in a tranquil mountaintop garden. 
Visitors can take their own lunches and eat in the garden or share the monk's vegetarian meals -- the crispy egg rolls are legendary -- for just a few dollars. 
The Buddha, cast in bronze in China, is just up the road.
Twice the size of Hong Kong Island, but with only 16,000 people, Lantau has some breathtaking mountain and coastal views, and in spots, one can see real rural Chinese life in its little farming and fishing villages. 
There are miles of marked mountain trails and stone paths laid down by villagers hundreds of year ago; the remains of several 18th-century stone forts built to protect against pirates and opium smugglers; a tea plantation and a Trappist dairy farm that supplies milk to the Hilton Hotel in Hong Kong. 
Visitors can explore the island on their own or opt for a tour package offered by private operators.
Back on frenetic Hong Kong Island, new attractions include the towering Bank of China Building (1 Garden Road, Central) designed by I. M. Pei, all glass and glitter and angles, with two big radio antennas on top that help make it, at 1,034 feet, Asia's tallest building. 
The bank dominates the skyline, and is seen as a symbol of China's future dominance of the colony. 
The Chinese control access to the top of the tower, which is closed to the public, so for a sweeping view of the colony, the best place is still the top of Victoria Peak, just behind Central Hong Kong. 
The Peak Tram funicular is a bargain at $1.66 round trip. 
A free observation desk is in the Tram Station at the top of the Peak.
 
Hotels
The outstanding hotels here have put together some winter packages that unless indicated include tax and service charges. 
At the legendary Mandarin Oriental Hotel (5 Connaught Road, Hong Kong; 522-0111) a Winter Break package, at $466, consists of two nights in a superior double room, $202 for each additional night. 
Valid to March 31.
The Regent Hotel (Salisbury Road, Kowloon; 721-1211), consistently ranked as one of the top hotels in the world, is offering a special package from Feb. 
1 to March 3, with two nights in a double room at $400, extra nights $200 plus 15 percent service and tax.
The Ramada Renaissance (8 Peking Road, Kowloon; 311-3311) in the heart of the Tsim Sha Tsui shopping district is offering a two-night package for $294, and $130 for each additional night. 
Valid until March 31.
Budget choice: The Harbor View International House (4 Harbor Road, Wanchai, Hong Kong; 520-1111) is a clean, bright hotel not far from Central. 
It offers a double room with a harbor view for $83 a night plus 10 percent service charge.
The Y.M.C.A. 
(41 Salisbury Road, Kowloon; 369-2211) is a sparkling new building with one of the best locations in Hong Kong. 
A double room is $66.60 plus 10 percent. 
No room service or gym, however.
 
Restaurants
Hong Kong is justly famous for its food, and indeed is a place where dining out is the preferred form of entertainment. 
Generally, even the priciest places here are much less expensive than their New York counterparts. 
It is advisable to make reservations.
For a splurge, and a taste of Cantonese haute cuisine, try the elegant Man Wah Restaurant atop the Mandarin Hotel (522-0111). 
Special winter dishes include braised supreme snake soup ($11.50 per bowl) and a wintry hot pot that the restaurant calls Chinese fondue. 
That meal features 13 ingredients, including fresh prawns, scallops, crab claw and fresh vegetables, which you cook at your table, dipping them into a pot of hot broth, and costs $36 per person. 
Dinner for two with a glass of wine runs to about $70.
Cleveland Sichuan (6 Cleveland Street, Causeway Bay; 576-3876) is a comfortable restaurant with good spicy food and a number of sizzling dishes that the local Chinese love -- hot, hot metal platters of fish, meat or chicken that sizzle and smoke when doused in a sauce. 
The sizzling beef with spring onions and garlic is excellent. 
Dinner for two with drinks about $50.
Another fine Sichuan restaurant is the Red Pepper (7 Lan Fong Road, Causeway Bay; 576-8046) a plain, family run eatery with good spicy food like eggplant with hot garlic sauce, and chili and garlic prawns. 
Dinner for two with drinks about $40.
Spring Deer (42 Mody Road, Kowloon; 366-4012) is a homey, second-floor Peking restaurant justly noted for its delicious Peking Duck, which can be ordered on the spot. 
Dinner for two with drinks about $45.
Sun Hung Cheung Hing (45A Kimberley Road, Kowloon; 369-3435) is a real working-class restaurant that offers a Mongolian barbecue. 
Each table is equipped with a big metal hot plate. 
Order plates of chicken, beef and squid and prawns. 
They come with a half-dozen small plates of fresh vegetables, together with coriander, leeks and spring onions, great spicy barbecue sauce, soy sauce and oil. 
Pour oil on the hot plate, dip the meat in the sauce and throw it on the hot plate with the vegetables. 
Dinner for two with drinks about $25.
 
Shopping
January is the month of big sales, and one great bargain spot for women is the TakPac Shop (Room 301, Peddar Building, 12 Peddar Street, Central District), which offers Ann Klein II clothes at about a third less than in the United States, and in January, fall and winter clothes are marked down another 30 to 50 percent. 
A wool blazer, part of this season's line, sells for $64 to $128, while a longsleeved silk blouse is priced from $50 to $77.
For a man, no trip to Hong Kong is complete without a visit to a custom tailor, and there are literally hundreds. 
Seasoned travelers know to visit the tailor as soon as they arrive, so that the work can begin and the necessary fittings (a minimum of two for a suit) can be arranged. 
Prices for a man's suit begin at about $275, and the bargain part of the purchase is that you can select the fabric and style and have the suit custom fitted. 
At W. W. Chan & Sons Tailor (Burlington Arcade, Shop 2F, 9294 Nathan Road, Kowloon; 366-9738) a wool suit will run about $540, but the fabrics are beautiful, the selection of materials extensive and the quality and workmanship outstanding. 
For fine suits at very reasonable prices, De-Luxe Tailor (Room 704, Modest Building, 58 Stanley Street, Central; 522-9645) is a good choice. 
A wool suit here costs about $275.
For custom tailored shirts, David's Shirts offers a wide range of fine fabrics and excellent workmanship, with cotton shirts at $60. 
David's shops are in the Mandarin Oriental and the Wing Lee Building, 33 Kimberley Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon. 
William Cheng & Son (Han Hing Mansion, Eighth Floor, 38 Hankow Road, Tsim Sha Tsui; 366-0709) offers well-made men's cotton dress shirts for only $23, though his selection of fabrics is not as extensive as in some shops.
 
