
It is this time of year, as winter slips into spring and residents shed their furs and overcoats, that Hong Kong's eternal bustle accelerates a bit. 
Instead of hurtling about inside their office towers and shopping arcades, people careen along the sidewalks in their rush to get somewhere. 
The frenzy moves outdoors, to the markets, to the parks and to the harbor with its European yachts and Chinese junks.
Defining Hong Kong is a bit like defining a stew, for this is a territory with a bit of everything. 
Mirrored skyscrapers, sprawling mansions in the hills and spacious shopping malls with water-splashing fountains create a picture of modernism. 
I. M. Pei's stark, geometric monument for the mainland's Bank of China juts out in the skyline, as below, specks of white that are the yachts of the wealthy glide silently through the ''fragrant harbor,'' as Hong Kong is called in Chinese.
Just a few blocks away the image shifts to an older, poorer Hong Kong, where fish and vegetables are sold in the street, where fruit and meats are offered to the ancestral gods and where English is barely understood.
Hong Kong's 5.7 million people fit snugly onto this 413-square-mile territory off the southern coast of China, and yet while it is crowded - overwhelmingly so at times - it is a good spot for walking. 
Streets are small and the shops, which line them everywhere, make the streets more lively to walk through. 
A taxi can easily be hired, but it is more fun to walk and cars often seem to be too big for the roads one wants to go down. 
Buses are also convenient, and the subway system embarrasses the American varieties with its combination of efficiency and low cost. 
The cost of a bus or subway ride varies depending on the length of the trip, but it is generally between 20 and 85 cents.
Shopping is perhaps the prime activity in Hong Kong. 
But there are other things to do in the city, where the flavors of ancient customs still linger in the back alleys, the hidden temples and old teahouses.
 
Things to See
The Peak is far more than just a tall, pointy mountain. 
It is physically beautiful, even when the mist wafts in during the sunsets; on a fresh, clear day it offers one of the most expansive views of Hong Kong. 
By day, a sharp-eyed visitor may be able to see the New Territories to the north; by night the sparkling lights of the city glisten against the water in the still harbor below.
Such views have made the Peak one of the most coveted residential areas, a symbol for many of the rich local inhabitants that this is an enclave one attains through accomplishment. 
It is also a place where many foreign expatriates live and the home of elegant dinner parties, small private swimming pools and beautiful gardens.
For those who want to exercise, there are plenty of small roads that wind through small woods and grass. 
Try Mount Austin Road, where one can stroll - and perspire a little - and peer out over the mountainside at the expanse of the surrounding colony. 
The Peak Tram, more than 100 years old, will make you grab for a handle because of the sensation that the back is where the feet should be. 
The tram station is one block above the Hilton Hotel in the Central district, and the ride up, about every 15 minutes, costs around $1.70.
Hong Kong is divided into districts, among them Central, Tsim Sha Tsui and Wanchai. 
The subway, or Mass Transit Railway, stops at each of these places, but if you want to get to Tsim Sha Tsui from Central (or vice versa), take the Star Ferry. 
The stark contrast between the modern glass buildings and the strong, salty breeze during this short trip across the harbor is one of the hallmarks that keeps Hong Kong from being just another big city. 
The Star Ferry, which costs about 13 cents, leaves from the terminal by the docks in Central.
The south side of Hong Kong Island is very scenic, and its sandy beaches attract hundreds of people.
A visit to Stanley Market, Repulse Bay and Aberdeen would make a pleasant afternoon. 
Catch Bus No. 6 or 260 to Stanley at the Exchange Square Terminal in Central (a taxi would be a bit more than $6). 
Although Stanley is a residential area with long, sandy beaches, its main attraction for tourists is the sprawling street market. 
A patient shopper should enjoy walking through the narrow streets packed with stalls and stores, where famous-brand jeans (often less than $20), sweaters and all sorts of cheaper clothing are sometimes piled up on a counter. 
The clothes may be overruns, imitations or irregulars from the many factory outlets, so be careful.
One of the most interesting temples is the Wong Tai Sin temple, near the M.T.R. 
Wong Tai Sin Station on the Kowloon side. 
There on a weekend people can be seen praying to Taoist gods. 
It is a large smoke-filled complex, with several different halls, where people present all sorts of elaborately prepared meats and other offerings to the deities.
 
Shopping
It is often fun just to wander through the small shops or the large malls in Tsim Sha Tsui, or the Japanese department stores and clothing boutiques in Causeway Bay. 
Individual shops have their own business hours but generally close around 8 P.M. here, and after they close there is always the night street market on Temple Street, near Jordan Road.
A shopping guide is invaluable. 
There are several books on the subject, but the Hong Kong Tourist Association puts out a free publication, ''The Official Guide to Shopping and Eating Out,'' which lists shops as well as restaurants approved for membership by the association. 
Virtually anything can be found on sale, from Chinese art to Indian rugs to furs to computers to furniture to watches to jewelry.
Hong Kong is one of the world's major markets for diamonds and other gemstones, partly because there is no tax or duty on jewelry. 
In general, shoppers should be wary, especially when buying jewels or antiques, and it may be better to stick to the more reputable stores, even if their prices are a bit higher. 
The tourist association book is a good guideline, and make sure that the receipt shows a full description of the precious metal or gem. 
All the top hotels should have reliable jewelry shops. 
One good place to visit is Town and Country Jewellery (31 Queen's Road Central, in Central; 5225843).
Women's clothes are sold virtually everywhere. 
Some of the best buys can be found in the factory outlets upstairs in the Pedder Building, 12 Pedder Street, in Central. 
The shops across the street in the Landmark Building, and then farther east in the Prince's Building and Mandarin Oriental Hotel also have designer wear, at designer prices. 
For lower quality goods at rock bottom prices, try Li Yuen Street East and Li Yuen Street West, which brim with leather purses and bags, scarves, watches and blouses.
Hong Kong is full of tailors, most of whom specialize in men's suits. 
A tailored suit will cost somewhat more than a comparable suit off the rack at home, but the fit is usually much better. 
Tailors generally require a week and at least two fittings to make suits. 
Try A-Man Hing Cheong (unit M10, mezzanine floor of the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Central; 5223336). 
Wool men's suits at A-Man start at about $450.
 
Eating Out
Hong Kong offers both Western and Asian food, but naturally, Chinese food is its specialty. 
It is best to make reservations at the best places, and even so, one may have to wait. 
Cantonese food, stir-fried quickly at high heat, is the most widely available, but all kinds of Chinese cuisines are represented. 
Try the roast duck at the Grand House of Yung Kee Restaurant, which is usually full, even though it has floors and floors of space (36-40 Wellington Street, in Central; 5221624). 
About $12 to $15 a person. 
The seafood at Tai Woo Restaurant, just across the street, is very tasty (15-19 Wellington Street; 5245618). 
About $15 a person.
For some of the best Shanghainese cuisine try the Wu Kong Shanghai Restaurant (27 Nathan Road, Alpha House Basement, Kowloon; 3667244). 
About $10 a person. 
Cleveland Szechuan Restaurant is good for the spicy Chinese cooking - especially the sizzling prawns - from Sichuan Province in the heartland of China (6 Cleveland Street, Flat C, Causeway Bay; 5763876). 
About $13 a person.
For Cantonese dim sum, which are dumplings served at lunchtime, try the Luk Yu Tea House and Restaurant (26 Stanley Street, in Central; 5235464). 
This is a favorite spot for old Chinese. 
There are no carts, which is what many dim sum houses use to bring around the food. 
If there isn't an English-speaking waiter available you may have to point, but the culinary experience is worth it, and costs only about $6 a person.
For a quieter atmosphere, try the Rainbow Room at the Lee Gardens Hotel (Hysan Avenue, Causeway Bay; 8953311). 
About $13 a person.
 
Where to Stay
Accommodations are not cheap, but they are generally excellent. 
The two most convenient districts are Tsim Sha Tsui and Central. 
Hotel rates change frequently, and visitors should ask for special winter rates, which some places offer. 
Add a 10 to 15 percent service charge and 5 percent government tax to all regular hotel rates. 
All prices quoted are for a standard double room.
The Regent, perhaps the most luxurious hotel, is a clay-red modern building with a spectacular view of the harbor. 
Rooms are $190 without a view, $256 with a view (Salisbury Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon; 7211211).
Across the way is the grande dame of Hong Kong hotels, the Peninsula, oozing charm and history. 
Parts of it will be renovated this spring. 
Standard rooms are $276 (Salisbury Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon; 3666251); The Mandarin Oriental (5 Connaught Road, Central; 5220111) is often ranked among the top three in the world. 
Rooms run from $192 (standard) to $308 (deluxe). 
At the well-located Hilton, rooms run $185 (2 Queen's Road, Central; 5233111). 
For those who want to stay as close to the shopping as possible, and yet save some money, try the Royal Garden, where excellent accommodations are $135 (69 Mody Road, Tsim Sha Tsui East, Kowloon; 7215215).
It may be a little out of the way, but the newly opened Grand Hyatt offers standard rooms for about $140 (1 Harbour Road, Wanchai; 8611234). 
Standard rooms at the New World, by the harbor right next to the Regent, run about $154, but there are smaller, cheaper rooms for $101 (22 Salisbury Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon; 3694111). 
At the Y.M.C.A. 
(Salisbury Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon; 3692211) rooms cost $62. 
Book as far in advance as possible.
Budget choice: Harbour View International House (4 Harbour Road, Wanchai; 5201111) Rooms are $64.
