
As his two children run about his small apartment, dodging his easel and smearing their fingers across his palette, Song Bin paints ''Mona Lisas'' - more than 100 of them so far.
Nearby, in a studio about as big as a queen-size bed, two Chinese artists have been painting European masterpieces by the hundreds. 
Like many other artists who fled from China to Hong Kong, they have given up hope of painting masterpieces of their own and earn money by reproducing the works of others. 
It has become a local cottage industry - copying the tranquil countrysides of Winslow Homer, the Tahitian beauties of Paul Gauguin and the famous works of other well-known painters, to the dot, stroke and hue.
Each year this city, tapping a cheap army of talented artists from the territory of Hong Kong or the neighboring Chinese province of Guangdong, exports thousands of copies of European masterpieces to Europeans and Americans, who choose what they want in mail-order catalogues. 
Patterns and samples are toted across the border to Shenzhen or Canton, and the painted replicas are carried back.
Usually, the artistic result is an adequate replica. 
Buyers know they are not getting the real thing, and the paintings would not fool experts, but the replicas cost a tiny fraction of what the original would bring. 
And if an exact copy seems too kitschy, the buyer can ask the artist to add a tree or a road to tailor the scene to the local environment or even the living-room furniture.
''Americans like the Renoirs, van Goghs and Manets, and they like big paintings,'' said Daniel Chui, the owner of Ultra Art, a Hong Kong company that deals in commercial art. 
''In England, they like Constables or Turners. 
In Germany, they like small portraits and dark paintings of animals and still lifes of flowers.''
A few years ago ''Mona Lisas'' were extremely popular, but the demand seems to have subsided. 
Since last year demand for the great masters has been declining, restricted mainly to buyers in Europe. 
Meanwhile, interest in commercial art - anything from a picture of a puppy to a swirl of lines and dots - has risen, particularly among Americans.
This trend can prove disappointing for the young Chinese artists who may want to paint ''Mona Lisas''; if the buyers want California landscapes, the copyists' study of the old masters suffers. 
Xu Zhicheng, a 28-year-old artist who escaped from China to Hong Kong a decade ago, has been painting more replicas of American landscapes and seascapes than of Turner seascapes.
Copying masterpieces over and over may seem less peculiar to a Chinese artist than to a Westerner. 
It is what Chinese painters have historically done, painting tree after tree and waterfall after waterfall to develop an artistic style. 
On the other hand, artists trained solely in traditional Chinese methods and esthetics might find it difficult not only to adapt to oil paints and Western brushes, but also to understand the enthusiasm of European artists for biblical scenes, fruit, Gothic churches and even nudes. 
Still, they tend to adapt quickly.
''When you look at a masterpiece for the first time, you won't know how to paint it,'' said You Zhong-Ping, who shares the cramped workshop with Mr. Xu. But painting a piece the second time around is much easier, Mr. Xu chimed in, adding that he often retouches the first copy: ''I don't completely understand their way of thinking or their ideology. 
I just paint until it looks right.''
Song Bin believes that an artist must understand the subject he or she is painting. 
Life in Wenzhou, the eastern Chinese city where he was born, differed fundamentally, of course, from the Western life style. 
He studied traditional Chinese painting and woodcut engraving at the Zhejiang Arts School in eastern China and graduated in 1966, on the eve of the Cultural Revolution, an upheaval that eviscerated the country's artistic expression for a decade. 
He came to Hong Kong in 1978.
Now 45, he still tries to bone up on the mores of the European upper classes and the history of the Renaissance and reads library books on art. 
He asks for the best possible pictures of the paintings he is to produce and scours the galleries of Hong Kong for original oil paintings in order to pick up tips on brush strokes, texture and blends of paint. 
''My training in watercolors didn't help much,'' he said.
Having painted the ''Mona Lisa'' so often, Mr. Song said he has learned how to apply the subtle touches of color for her face: a light layer of red, then a bit of yellow highlight and then a thin layer of white, which brings out a slight glow in her cheeks.
The corners of her mouth, he said, are still the hardest to portray because her smile has a feminine and maternal quality that is hard to capture. 
''You can't paint her smile too broadly,'' he said. 
''It's got to be delicate and subtle. 
You must understand her status in society, her personality.''
Copy artists are paid by the piece, according to the type of painting and the quality produced. 
Mr. You explained that a medium-size painting might take three to five days and bring about $200. 
Prices also vary according to genre. 
''French Impressionist paintings are cheaper than the Michelangelos,'' said Song Bin, ''even though the Impressionist works are harder to paint.''
Mr. Song, who calls himself a modern realist painter and relies on copying to support his family, earns about $960 a month, producing about 10 copies a week. 
But it takes him at least a week to paint a ''Mona Lisa,'' he said, and longer if the customer wants a good replica. 
He earns about $250 for a ''Mona Lisa,'' which is sold in Europe or America for much more.
The Hong Kong artists have faced stiff competition recently, as companies have gone directly into China to recruit artists for less money. 
An artist there can earn the equivalent of a month's salary in a week by copying.
Moreover, those artists, too, are eager to learn the Western style of painting. 
Only at China's best academies are artists encouraged to express their emotions and feelings, and to develop a personal style in their art. 
Any training in oil painting is generally scanty.
''They learn about light, color and shading as a set of rules,'' said Wang Yang, the director of the Institute of Chinese Painting and Calligraphy at Shenzhen University, ''but actually it should not be thought of in those terms.''
By copying masterpieces, he said, his students are forced to try to understand the thinking and the spirit of the original artist. 
''The original artist interpreted nature in a certain way. 
By copying, the Chinese artist must also delve into his mind and his own personality to re-create the work.''
Mr. Wang said he also tells his students that although they must absorb Western methods, they must be prepared to discard them in order to create a style of their own. 
Nevertheless, many artists who have been copying for a while acknowledge that though they tire of masterpieces they have painted dozens of times, they are drawn to the European tradition. 
After months or years of immersion in bright yellows and oranges, cathedrals and ballet dancers, copy artists turning to their own work find it hard to revive the simple line and form of the Chinese style and to tone down the brilliant colors favored by Western schools.
For Mr. Song, the daily mimesis of a masterpiece reminds him constantly that his work is not an art but a trade. 
Yet he said the Western style is already so much a part of him that he couldn't abandon it and return to traditional Chinese styles. 
Thedeep colors and splashes of light of Western art challenge him more than does Chinese painting, with its reverence for the line.
''Someday,'' he added, ''I'd like to be able to bring together the drawing of the line with the technique of light and shade.''
