
The wife of one of China's most prominent dissidents says the authorities have evicted her and her sick daughter from the family home, leaving her nowhere to live.
The woman, Zhang Fengying, wife of Ren Wanding, a 48-year-old accountant who is serving a seven-year sentence for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement, said she returned home on Wednesday to find her apartment door nailed shut. 
She had been away since January trying to seek medical treatment for her teen-age daughter.
"They're shutting me out of my house so that now I'm homeless," Ms. Zhang said. 
"Who can live without shelter and food?"
Mr. Ren's work unit formally dismissed him after his arrest, and since it owns the apartment, it wants to force Ms. Zhang out, presumably so it can reassign the place to another worker. 
In China an eviction is far more serious than in the West, because nearly all housing here is assigned by employers, and there is almost no rental housing available to individuals.
 
Human-Rights Campaigner
The eviction reflects the difficulties endured not only by Chinese dissidents but also by their families. 
Wives, siblings and children of dissidents sometimes encounter discrimination in getting jobs, in getting permission to go abroad and in finding a place to live.
Ms. Zhang said that she is now living temporarily with friends but that she cannot stay for long. 
She said she has no steady income -- she has no Beijing residency permit and thus no right to work in Beijing -- and no idea what she will do.
Ms. Zhang said the authorities would not even allow her to remove her money and other belongings now locked in the apartment.
Her husband, Mr. Ren, was one of the first Chinese to emphasize the need for human rights, as distinct from democracy. 
In the winter of 1978-79, he was a leader of the Democracy Wall movement in Beijing and consequently served four years in prison -- where he held out against pressure to repent, writing voluminous protests on toilet paper, the only paper he could find.
In late 1988, Mr. Ren re-emerged in the public eye, giving interviews and drafting essays calling for more democracy and attention to human rights. 
He is now serving his prison sentence in Beijing No. 2 Prison, sharing a cell with three ordinary criminals who reportedly sometimes take Mr. Ren's food from him.
 
Limits on Visits and Food
In another sign that the authorities are putting pressure on family members of political prisoners, the wife of another prominent dissident says jailers are cutting back on her visiting hours and the amount of food she can give to her husband.
That woman, Hou Xiaotian, the wife of Wang Juntao, who is serving a 13-year sentence for supposedly masterminding the 1989 Tiananmen Square movement, said jailers were also cutting the food supplements that her husband is allowed because of the hepatitis he suffers.
Ms. Hou said that when she visited her husband last Monday, jailers told her that her monthly visits would be limited to 30 minutes and that she could not bring more than 4.4 pounds of food for her husband. 
Prison rules dictate that visits be half an hour, but the guards had previously allowed longer visits.
The reason for the crackdown, Ms. Hou said, is that the authorities are trying to punish her for suing the court system and Qincheng Prison for illegal confiscation of property and for infecting her husband with the hepatitis. 
The courts have not processed her lawsuits, and there is no indication they ever will, but the Government was apparently still angered and embarrassed by her audacity.
The authorities have also repeatedly denied Ms. Hou a passport to travel overseas. 
In November, after Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visited Beijing, Chinese leaders gave assurances that those with no criminal record would be allowed to travel overseas. 
Chinese Foreign Ministry officials insist that the assurances still hold but do not explain why Ms. Hou and others have not yet been given passports.
