
China is mounting a high-pressure campaign to lure back foreign businessmen who fled after the military crackdown on the democracy movement this month.
But while some executives are trickling back, many are wary of returning and are afraid of being used as pawns in the Communists' propaganda campaign to prove that everything is normal.
These fears were compounded today when a Chinese Government agency invited foreign businessmen in Beijing to a meeting to hear what was advertised as an important announcement. 
But there was no announcement, a West German businessman said.
Instead, the participants were filmed by a Chinese television crew, apparently for use on a Chinese news program to prove the Government's contention that life has quickly returned to normal after the army's killing of demonstrators and onlookers in central Beijing this month.
The meeting was sponsored by the State Administration for Industry and Commerce, which licenses foreign businesses. 
A similar meeting has been called for Wednesday by the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade, and some American business executives say they will stay away from it for fear of being used.
 
'Don't Want to Get Caught'
''A lot of American businessmen don't want to get caught in this situation,'' said Lucille A. Barale, the president of the American Chamber of Commerce of Beijing.
''A lot have been told by their companies not to get caught,'' said Ms. Barale, a lawyer for Coudert Brothers, the New York-based international law firm. 
She returned to Beijing on Monday after fleeing two weeks ago to Hong Kong with her two children.
Beijing's effort to draw foreign businessmen is critical for China, both to stabilize its suddenly troubled economy and to prove that Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, is right in proclaiming that the Communists can simultaneously repress students and maintain their open-door policy.
Before Mr. Deng began his economic initiatives in 1979, China's foreign trade was negligible. 
But it has grown enormously in recent years, and now accounts for nearly a third of China's national income, a high proportion for so big a country. 
Mr. Deng has counted on foreign investment and technology to help achieve his goal of making China a modern state.
But in recent months China has been hit by both inflation, running at an annual rate of nearly 30 percent, and by a severe credit shortage. 
One sign of how this credit squeeze may affect foreign trade came last weekend when a Government-owned corporation, China National Metals and Minerals Import and Export Corporation, aborted its purchase of New Zealand's largest steel maker, New Zealand Steel Ltd.
 
A Flurry of Calls and Telexes
Diplomats here and in Beijing say the Communist leadership has given the highest priority to getting foreign businesses back to China. 
The Foreign Investment Leading Group, a high-level Communist Party agency, has been charged with the task of enticing or coercing businessmen to return, the diplomats say.
A result has been a blizzard of phone calls and telexes to offices in Hong Kong, where many of the executives of the 175 American companies that have offices in China fled. 
The message has been simple: The shooting is over.
As an added allure, some companies have been promised meetings with Chinese officials who had been unavailable for months or offered favorable new terms.
Jamie Horsley, the managing partner of the Hong Kong office of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, said one of her firm's clients had ''miraculously'' received a telex last week saying their contract to manage a hotel in China had been approved. 
Chinese agreement on the deal had been stalled for a year.
There have also been threats. 
One large American company was called by a Chinese Government ministry and threatened with a lawsuit if its executives did not return to China promptly, a businessman involved in the dealings said.
The Chinese campaign has divided American business executives here, posing difficult financial and ethical questions. 
Many executives are anxious to return, worried about contractual obligations, the size of their investments and the fate of their Chinese employees.
 
Decade of Thinking Is Shattered
But after a decade of thinking China had broken its pattern of political convulsion and repression, these businessmen were also shattered by the shootings. 
The offices of Citibank, Combustion Engineering, Coca-Cola and Occidental Petroleum's $650 million joint venture coal mine were all shot up by the Chinese Army.
A Chinese colleague of Eric Kalkurst, a consultant who has been doing business in China for 15 years, was shot dead by soldiers when he went out early one morning to the local communal toilet near his house in an area of Beijing reserved for officials.
Mr. Kalkurst is now advising his clients to stay away from China. 
''I'm not sure there is a government there to really deal with,'' he said.
''If they can lie about the killings, what is to stop them from lying to businessmen?'' he asked, referring to the Communists' version of the shootings in central Beijing.
The Dow Chemical Company, which has four representative offices in China, withdrew its six foreign managers by company order and is keeping them out because of the continued State Department advisory against travel to China, a spokesman in Hong Kong said.
The company is also ''worried about the tense state of U.S.-China relations,'' with the possibility for something bad to happen, like a kidnapping, the spokesman said.
 
Depends on Nature of Business
Companies' reactions also depend on the type of business they were doing. 
Those companies engaged only in trade, buying or selling in China, have not been badly hurt yet. 
But with China's shortage of foreign exchange and the slowdown in production over the last month in many factories because of the turmoil, some traders may start looking to buy goods like toys or textiles in Southeast Asia, businessmen here say.
Those companies just starting to negotiate ventures in China may now be more cautious, and some companies with small investments have been inquiring over the last week whether their political risk insurance allows them to pull out entirely, an American lawyer in Hong Kong said.
But the larger operations, like Occidental's coal mine in Shanxi Province, are too expensive to just stop. 
Occidental withdrew the dependents of its 40 foreign employees at the mine, a 30-year joint venture with the Bank of China, but the managers and engineers stayed on.
Last week a Chinese television crew turned up to film them.
 
BUSINESS COUNCIL COMMENTS
WASHINGTON, June 20 (Special to The New York Times) - Small numbers of American corporate officials are going back into China, chiefly technical representatives sent to maintain quality control and otherwise keep plants from grinding to a halt, the vice president of the U.S.-China Business Council says.
The official, Richard E. Gillespie, whose organization represents 300 American multinationals with China operations, noted that Japanese companies are sending their officials back in greater numbers.
The American companies are worried that the Chinese ''will propagandize the issue,'' and that the return will be looked upon unfavorably in the United States, where there is Congressional pressure for additional sanctions, Mr. Gillespie said.
''Although some Americans are going back in, it won't be business as usual for some time,'' he said.
