
Throughout China's vast countryside, it is often not so much democracy that stirs emotions as it is the desire to procreate, and few policies cause more heartbreak than the Government's family planning measures.
These days there are signs that the one-child policy will be carried out more rigorously. 
The number of women of child-bearing age is climbing dramatically, leading China to exceed its population targets, and the Government is now calling for tougher enforcement of family planning measures.
 
'Many Women Are Scared'
Here in Sichuan Province, as in most of the nation's countryside, population control has caused a mixture of anger, support, frustration, enthusiasm, deviousness and pain. 
Many Chinese intellectuals endorse the policy and believe it has given new hope for their country's long-term development, but it has also ruined marriages, intensified sexist attitudes and led to murder, bribery, abandonment and countless battles between mothers and daughters-in-laws.
"Sometimes the women cry, sometimes they don't," said a woman from Chuan Shi village, here in Guangan County, as she described the pressure on women to have abortions. 
"They dispatch more than a dozen people to your house all at once. 
They don't beat you, but they scold you, and many women are scared and just go to the hospital."
The case of Qi Yongxin, a peasant in Donglou village in Henan, shows how deep passions can run. 
When his wife became pregnant a year ago with his fourth child, a neighbor reported her to the authorities. 
The officials then pressured her to abort it, and Mr. Qi, his father and sister were so enraged that they beat the neighbor to death and crippled his wife and three-year-old child.
Mr. Qi was sentenced to death in March, according to the Peasants Daily, which reported the incident.
There have long been criticisms abroad of China's one-child policy, and the United States has suspended its contribution to the United Nations Family Planning Program because of allegations that the program was bolstering a coercive policy in China.
But the family planning policy has made substantial progress over the last dozen years, with the average number of babies per woman dropping from five or six in 1970 to two or three now. 
Without population control, 240 million more Chinese babies would have been born over the last two decades, official reports say.
Soaring populations and insufficient farmland are a major problem in many developing countries, and supporters of the program say that China has come to grips with the problem better than most -- giving its present and future generations a greater opportunity to rise above the poverty and misery that traditionally was often their lot. 
Most urban Chinese now seem to accept the idea that they can have only one child, and even in the countryside people desire fewer children than their parents had, although they still frequently want more than the Government allows.
Some Chinese describe the policy in terms that Americans might use about the income tax: fundamentally necessary, but they would rather it not apply to them personally. 
Still, others say that in many rural areas, where people are less educated, the policy is simply unpopular.
 
2.25 Children Per Woman
The one-child policy is a misnomer in many cases, because there are many exceptions and Chinese women have, on average, 2.25 children. 
Partly because the average is so much higher than one, the Government has had to abandon its original projections.
China is now expected to break the 1.2 billion barrier by 1995, and to approach 1.3 billion by the year 2000, the official newspapers announced in April. 
In contrast, the Government originally planned to keep the population below 1.2 billion by the year 2000.
China's population is now about 1.14 billion, in a territory slightly larger than the United States, but with far less arable land.
Will the missed targets prompt a new crackdown?
So far, the Government has called for tighter controls, and there seems to be a greater attempt to raise fines for evasion and to limit the number of cases where second and third children are allowed.
Official press reports have also called for more spending on family planning, which currently receives less than one percent of the central budget. 
But so far officials deny that a new crackdown is imminent, and there is no sign of another "high tide" of the kind that a decade ago led to many forced abortions in Chinese villages.
Peasants, officials and others interviewed during a weeklong tour of Sichuan Province, and in other parts of China in recent months, said that it was quite rare for the authorities to drag a woman to the hospital to undergo an abortion, but that it still happened.
"Last year there was a forced abortion in my village," said a young woman from Hongjiang Village in Sichuan. 
"More than a dozen cadres went to the woman's house and forced her to go to the hospital for the abortion."
Officials do not disclose national statistics on forced abortion, but Zeng Jian, the director of family planning for Guangan, said that in 1990, the county had "about 100 forced abortions."
This represented about 3 percent of 3,200 abortions that took place in the county in 1990. 
The phrase in Chinese that Mr. Zeng used normally suggests compulsion or physical force, rather than simply pressure tactics.
He added that last year, Guangan, with 1.09 million people, had only 200 unauthorized births, compared to 15,000 within the plan.
 
Other Government Tactics
Peasants also described other tactics, such as demolishing houses, confiscating furniture or electrical appliances, or beating the husbands of those who violate the policy.
"They dig a hole in the wall of your house, stick your head through and beat you on the backside," said a peasant from a Shandong Province village wih about 600 families. 
"It happened twice this year in my village."
In recent interviews, Chinese from Sichuan, Anhui, Shandong and Fujian Provinces all reported that demolition of houses was one method that officials sometimes used to deal with peasants who would not or could not pay the heavy fines for breaching the policy.
"It happens every year, but not that much," said a 23-year-old woman from Qingkang village in Guangan County.
Both officials and many peasants, however, say such methods are used infrequently. 
Indeed, visits to villages in many parts of China suggest that unauthorized children are far more common than destroyed houses. 
It is common in some rural areas to see couples with three children, occasionally even four, and local officials are often willing to charge a fine and look the other way.
 
Pursuasion, More Than Force
"If they refuse to pay the fine, their radio set and TV may be taken as mortgage -- yes, I've seen this in some places, but it is quite rare," said Shen Guoxiang, the spokesman for the State Family Planning Commission in Beijing. 
"It is quite common to persuade a woman not to have another baby when she wants to have it. 
But it is rare to drag the woman by the hand and force her to have the abortion."
The most common way of persuading couples to have fewer children is simply to offer a series of incentives and fines, and if these fail, to turn to pressure tactics aimed at making people feel guilty if they breach the policy. 
Here in Sichuan, which has a population of 108 million, one-child families get a wide range of benefits. 
These vary but can include monthly subsidies of $1, higher retirement pensions for the parents, greater allocation of land, lower grain taxes and easier access to good schools.
A fine for a child born out of the plan can amount to up to two year's income, but villages tend to set their own fines. 
Some even offer installment plans for families that cannot pay the fine in one lump sum.
 
Monitoring System
The incentives are linked to an efficient monitoring system -- which includes about 13 million volunteers -- intended to detect pregnancies as soon as possible. 
In Guangan, villages and townships keep lists of all the women of child-bearing age, and oblige them to undergo gynecological check-ups every three months -- apparently to insure that no one conceals a pregnancy.
One of the most effective methods of preventing unauthorized pregnancies is obligatory sterilization of couples who have already had two or more children. 
But it is common for mothers to flee their villages when they are summoned for sterilization or when they are expecting a baby outside of the plan.
In Guangdong's Wuhua County, last July's census workers discovered that over the years nearly 38,000 children had secretly been born and not registered with the authorities, according to a recent report in the Nanfang Daily.
The most common reason for couples to breach the policy is that they want a son, to continue the family name and ancestry. 
In Chinese tradition, daughters are married out of the family, while sons remain to care for their parents in their old age. 
So parents often keep having children until they have a son.
In some areas, family planning is loosely implemented because the officials themselves do not consider population control a priority or because their family members protest. 
Some peasants say that local officials set an example of evading the family planning controls, so that no one else wants to adhere to the rules either.
In Sichuan's Bai Mao township, Liu Anxiu, the 26-year-old daughter of the village Communist Party leader, acknowledged that she had given birth to two children -- she had to pay a fine of $153 after the second one. 
Ms. Liu's father was in a tough position to urge other villagers to have only one child.
Then, because her children were both daughters, Ms. Liu considered trying again for a son. 
Eventually her relatives dissuaded her, saying it would reflect badly on her father if she had a third child.
"They kept telling me that the children of officials shouldn't have more children," said Ms. Liu. "So I had to listen to them."
NEXT: Millions of baby girls are missing.
 
