
It is the prospect of increasing business with China that brings more foreign companies here each year, and it is the threat of China's eventual dominance over business that drives away their potential employees.
Finding and keeping Chinese employees is developing into a major problem as companies with offices here seek to strengthen ties to China.
''We've said goodbye to a lot of people,'' said Robert J. Schmitt, regional marketing manager at the Digital Equipment Corporation in Hong Kong. 
45,000 Emigrated Last Year Some 45,000 Hong Kong Chinese emigrated last year, out of a labor force of about 2.8 million - worsening the problem of an unemployment rate that is so small it can barely be calculated. 
Many Hong Kong Chinese leave because of concern about what will happen to the territory after 1997, when Hong Kong returns to Chinese rule. 
Most people expect the numbers of emigrants to grow, particularly among white-collar professionals who are not convinced that the Chinese Communist Party will keep its promises to let Hong Kong continue its capitalist ways.
On the other hand, with economies in Asia expanding and costs rising in other financial centers like Japan, companies are moving support staff to Hong Kong, or fortifying or relocating their regional headquarters here.
Yet, as their offices here grow, banks, software companies, accounting firms and other corporations are watching the pool of skilled Chinese professionals shrink. 
They are seeing a territory once famed for its cheap, hard-working labor turn into an expensive auction house for bright Hong Kong professionals.
 
Measures to Combat Emigration
While some employers do not think there are any measures to combat effectively the tide of emigration, others have revised their compensation systems, enhanced company perquisites and replaced manpower with machines.
The Hong Kong offices of some American companies are advertising in newspapers in the United States and Canada, not for Americans or Canadians but for skilled Hong Kong Chinese who have already emigrated.
''If someone has another passport, that is an added positive aspect in the total evaluation of the person,'' said Eoghan M. McMillan, regional managing partner at Arthur Andersen & Company in Hong Kong.
Knowing that companies value a foreign passport highly, the Chinese who return to work in Hong Kong can command higher salaries as they shop for employers.
 
'Incessant Job Hopping'
''The marketplace is characterized by the most incessant job hopping I've seen here in the region,'' said Vangell Rafael, managing director of Paris-based Econocom Far East Ltd., which sells computer software and hardware.
In some cases, companies are paying as much as 50 percent more than last year in salaries for trained experts or middle-level managers.
Mr. Rafael said that a few months ago when he was at his former company, he hired a computer analyst with a United States passport at a salary of $50,000. 
A year earlier, he would have paid about $35,000.
''We bite the bullet and pay more money,'' Mr. Rafael said.
 
Creating a Buffer
Companies also try to hire 10 percent to 15 percent more employees than they actually need to create a buffer against people who leave on short notice.
Technology, finance and engineering companies have been experiencing turnover rates as high as 25 percent a year. 
More significantly, those who emigrate tend to be critically important employees with five to eight years' experience.
''In general, the quality of systems might have gone down,'' said Stephen Lau, a member of the Hong Kong Computer Society. 
Mr. Lau, who is director of information technology at Citicorp in Hong Kong, said that as a result, work is sometimes shifted to other offices in the Pacific Basin.
 
Working Through Headhunters
To lure employees, some companies are working though headhunters, while others are plucking talent directly from competitors. 
The incentives include service awards and prizes, intensive training and preferred mortgage rates.
''Some companies are using financial incentives like the 1997 handshake,'' said John C. Wilson, managing director of Russell Reynolds Associates Inc., a New York-based executive recruiting firm in Hong Kong. 
''A multinational would say to someone that if you stay with us until 1997, you will receive 'X' amount of U.S. dollars.''
Citicorp in Hong Kong said it is trying to raise morale by adding merit badges and monetary prizes pegged to performance and by improving training of junior employees.
 
Transfers to Other Locations
When possible, companies transfer or rehire Hong Kong Chinese in other locations. 
Digital Equipment, for instance, has 44 former employees from Hong Kong in its Toronto office.
