
Zhang Quan slipped out of work several times earlier this month to join pro-democracy rallies, and he donated $27, two-thirds of his monthly salary, to the student demonstrators.
But like tens of thousands of other workers, he bowed out of Sunday's demonstration. 
He said he was too busy.
''The students and the citizens are tired,'' the 23-year-old cake seller said. 
''The movement has lasted for so long and we citizens have done our best to support the students. 
We have given them bread rolls, clothing and quilts. 
But as ordinary citizens, we are not rich. 
We are exhausted and we are disillusioned.''
The challenge for China's university students is to reawaken the enthusiasm of workers like Mr. Zhang. Such workers added a new dimension to the movement and vastly increased its scale, but now many seem to be settling back into silence.
 
Fear and Exhaustion
For a brief moment two weeks ago, workers and citizens, like Mr. Zhang, by the hundreds of thousands, seemed to come out of nowhere to support the hunger-striking students. 
But since martial law was declared nine days ago, the citizens seemed to be steadily disappearing from the streets.
The first few nights after martial law was imposed, citizens poured out in waves to block the troops from entering the city center. 
But during the week, many large work units have issued stern warnings against taking part in demonstrations, or even watching them, and some units have apparently promised bonuses for workers who stay inside and deductions for those who do not.
This seems to have frightened many workers, especially those with families to support. 
Mr. Zhang has no wife or children, but he still lives at home with his parents, who constantly urge him not to go out to the square.
Mr. Zhang says that the nature of his work often takes him out of the office, so that marching with the students was not that difficult. 
But as the papers and errands piled up he fell behind in his work.He spent Sunday settling his accounts and clearing up paper work.
 
'They Were Not Selfish'
Nonetheless, Mr. Zhang has not abandoned the movement. 
In fact he has been the most active of the workers in his unit.
''One reason I supported the students is that they were not selfish,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
''They don't stand to gain anything for themselves, like food, drink or jobs, from the movement. 
Why did they stage it?
For the citizens. 
And the movement has awakened our people.''
Mr. Zhang went to Tiananmen Square for several demonstrations, but after martial law was declared, he passed all his evenings except one at home.
Now, he says that the movement is at a lull, that thus far it has failed and dampened the spirit among the citizens and workers. 
But he says he expects the tide of protest to rise as June 20 approaches, the date when the standing committee of the National People's Congress, China's legislature, is scheduled to meet.
 
'Shall I Continue to Donate'
Still, like so many others, he is willing to take part only if the masses do, and so when a smaller crowd of students shows up for a demonstration, as happened on Sunday, he is hesitant about risking his job. 
And if there are going to be arrests, he said, the police will arrest citizens before students.
''I've already donated $27 of my April salary to the students,'' said Mr. Zhang, who says he only makes about $40 a month. 
''And now, I'm wondering, shall I continue to donate?
What's the point?''
Mr. Zhang insists that he has not switched sides, and opposes a crackdown by the Government. 
But as he listens to the rumors about the downfall of the Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang, and the apparent rise of Prime Minister Li Peng, he insists that the Government under Mr. Li cannot last for long since it does not have the support of the people.
 
Not Organized Enough
But at the same time, he acknowledges that the people are not organized enough to make a difference.
''The problem with Chinese is that we are not so united. 
About 30 percent would simply prefer to stand on the sidelines with their arms folded, and about 20 percent simply don't care. 
The remaining 50 percent want do something, but they still have a hard time uniting among each other.''
The fundamental problem, he said, is that Chinese are simply too tolerant.
''We Chinese can tolerate almost everything,' Mr. Zhang said. 
''As long as we have something to eat and to drink, we will not rebel unless there is nothing left for us to eat but leaves.''
