
Not only a call for democracy, but also anger over inflation and corruption, seemed to impel the tens of thousands of workers who joined students today in demonstrating in Tiananmen Square in the center of the capital.
So far most of the workers seem bitter enough to be willing to join the students, but not so angry that they will stage demonstrations or strikes of their own.
In interviews today, many of the workers said that while they believed in the students' cause, they are reluctant to join formally in the march for fear of losing their jobs.
Many workers said their supervisors had warned them not even to watch the demonstration for risk of punishment. 
But the workers' dissatisfaction with pocketbook issues, and in some cases the lack of democracy and freedom of the press, carried them into the streets today to shout and shove alongside their junior comrades.
 
'The Economic Risk'
''Workers won't dare march by themselves because the economic risk is too great for the ordinary man,'' said a factory worker who was taking part in the demonstration. 
''If they fail to appear at their factory in the morning, they won't get their day's bread.''
Few seemed to care deeply that today's march also marked the 70th anniversary of the nationalist demonstrations that later influenced democratic and radical thought in China. 
Some complained that the real lesson of the demonstration was that the demands for democracy were still unrealized after seven decades of struggle.
Many called for freedom of the press, seeing news organizations as a way to supervise Government officials, whom they see as members of a new privileged class.
''It's a problem with the system, because those in power are not under any effective control,'' said Z. Z. Pi, a 34-year-old technician. 
''There is no mechanism, such as the media, to supervise them.''
''If this movement can push political reform forward, then I think it will be a success,'' Mr. Pi said. 
''Essentially, it is a matter of redistribution of the benefits of economic and political power.''
''Any reform won't be successful until the masses receive benefits,'' said Wan Zhicheng, a 25-year-old factory worker. 
''We say we oppose corruption, but ultimately, it is the entire system.''
''Before an earthquake, small animals know it and run for cover,'' he said. 
''They are the intellectuals,'' he said, referring to the thousands of Chinese who have gone abroad to study and perhaps live. 
''And a great earthquake isn't far away.''
''A corrupt country calls for help,'' Mr. Wan said. 
''Its end is near.''
Onlookers cheering from the window of a building in Beijing as demonstrators marched by yesterday (Reuters)
