
ORDINARY Chinese must be wondering what could have happened in their country to have sent the Hong Kong stock market bouncing to new heights this week. 
For while their markets, in the cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen, were creeping downward, the Hong Kong market rose to a new record, mostly on the news from China.
The prime shaker in the Hong Kong exchange is not a central bank. 
It is a coterie of elderly men, most in their 80's, who rule China and who with a cough or a stumble can send the markets reeling. 
They essentially determine the pace of China's economic growth -- the direction is invariably up -- and therefore the action in Hong Kong.
Last week, the action was in the Hang Seng index, which surged to a peak of 6,329.12 on Thursday, dropped by 66.58 points on Friday to 6,262.54, but even so was up 277.21 points, or 4.6 percent, for the week.
Underlying the market's rise is a change in perceptions about Hong Kong's relations with China. 
For years, Hong Kong's proximity to China and its scheduled return to Chinese control in 1997 have provoked anxiety, dampening investor confidence and lowering price-earnings ratios in Hong Kong.
But these days, a growing number of investors see China as an opportunity, rather than a threat. 
They argue that Hong Kong companies are able to participate in one of the greatest economic booms anywhere, and that the boom will continue for many years.
"Hong Kong is always a proxy to China," said Wai-keung Wan, sales director at the Jardine Fleming brokerage house. 
"China is embarking on a long-term growth trend. 
In the 1990's, any country that can produce economic growth can reasonably command a premium. 
Therefore, people feel very positive about China."
Hong Kong's stock exchange, once a wayward cowboy market of which Americans were wary, has been rising on and off since the beginning of this year. 
A buying frenzy in Hong Kong seized investors last week because they thought China had cleared a number of political and economic uncertainties.
Investors were reassured by the new leadership team that the Communist Party announced a week ago, feeling that the seven members of the new Politburo Standing Committee are reform-oriented. 
In fact, the appointments were largely expected, but the market seized upon the news to leap ahead.
In the process, the market ignored some bad news: China's Communist leaders criticized and snubbed Hong Kong's new Governor, Christopher Patten, signalling that relations may become tougher between Hong Kong and China. 
Mr. Patten had come to China to discuss his proposals for broadening democracy in Hong Kong and for financing a $16 billion airport. 
"On the face of it, it was quite negative," said James K. Osborn, assistant director at Baring Securities (Hong Kong) Ltd. 
"But on sheer fact, it was not a worse surprise than what was expected."
On Friday, however, after Mr. Patten departed for Hong Kong, China said it would retaliate if Mr. Patten's proposals for democracy and the airport were implemented without Beijing's consent. 
China's comments are certain to influence the direction of the market next week. 
Disappointment with the trip -- coupled with profit-taking -- accounted for the market's fall on Friday.
The underlying reason for the Hong Kong market's euphoria recently has been the 14th Communist Party Congress, which culminated Monday with the announcement of the new leadership team. 
The congress declared that China would develop a "socialist market economy" with the emphasis on "market."
Moreover, China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, who is 88 years old and holds no posts, appeared on public television on Monday. 
Investors took that as good news -- dispelling fears that he was virtually on his death bed -- instead of focusing on the fact that his health seemed much worse than the last time he appeared on TV, in February.
Mr. Deng exerts the greatest influence in the country, and now he is determined to lock China onto a course of building a market economy. 
The congress hailed him and his commitment to economic reform.
The previous week also brought news that lifted the market. 
Chinese and American trade negotiators broke a stalemate in discussions over American exporters' access to the Chinese market. 
The result was that China agreed to import more American goods, thereby avoiding punitive duties on as much as $3.9 billion worth of Chinese exports to the United States.
Money has been pouring in these last couple of weeks from the United States, as well as from Asia, analysts said. 
Although trading is conducted in Hong Kong dollars, the currency is pegged at a rate of about 7.8 Hong Kong dollars to the United States dollar. 
"One beauty of the Hong Kong stock market is that it is really a U.S. dollar market because of the peg," said Allan Ng, a senior analyst at S. G. Warburg Securities (Far East) Ltd. 
"No matter what happens, there's not currency risk."
Many of Hong Kong's large companies have shed the undeserved fly-by-night reputation they had a decade ago. 
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation recently acquired the British bank Midland Bank P.L.C. 
Among the major China plays in the market are Hopewell Holdings Ltd., a construction firm building a highway in China.
Not surprisingly, most of the buying focused on blue chip companies, such as the Hong Kong Bank, and on Cheung Kong, Hong Kong's largest conglomerate, run by its richest man, Li Ka-shing.
