
Cable and Wireless P.L.C., the British-based telecommunications company with a presence in 50 countries, pleased investors earlier this month when it reported pretax profits up 15.5 percent for the fiscal year ended March 31. 
And this in a recession year.
Moreover, more than 60 percent of the company's revenues are dollar based, so the strong rally of the dollar in the last five months sent analysts back to their calculators to raise their earnings forecasts for the current fiscal year. 
Although its headquarters are in London, the company's heart is Hong Kong where the currency is tied to the dollar. 
Cable and Wireless has a 58.4 percent controlling stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications, which provided 43 percent of the company's revenue and 59 percent of its profit last year.
Company officials, including its group managing director, Gordon M. W. Owen, and finance director, Rodney J. Olsen, crowed about these numbers on a recent visit to New York City. 
They waxed enthusiastic about the company's global digital "highway," including an American link with US Sprint. 
The highway is a fiber-optic cable system linking major financial centers and offering business customers such things as high-definition television and video-conferencing, high-speed data transmission and faxes. 
Cable and Wireless also owns Mercury Communications, the first and only competitor to British Telecommunications, the Government-owned phone company.
Despite its good looks last year and prospects in the current year, there are questions about Cable and Wireless which, at current prices, make the stock less attractive.
The stock's volatility reflects some of this uncertainty. 
In June alone, its price fell to 490 pence ($9.08 at Friday's exchange rate) and then rallied to 560. 
It closed Friday at 529. 
The company's American Depository Receipt which trades in New York has moved from a low of 24.875 to 26.875. 
It closed Friday at 25.50.
The stock already trades at a 13-to-20 percent premium to the British market as a whole, based on earnings projections.
Then there are the questions about the quality of Cable and Wireless' earnings. 
The company has had a good stream of average earnings over the last decade, but the yearly numbers are subject to big hits from exchange rate moves. 
Last year, for example, the company estimated that pretax profits would have doubled to 31 percent if the dollar had not been so weak. 
Now the high hopes for the current fiscal year are based on the current strong dollar retaining its strength.
Some of the pretax profit last year was based on special factors that should vanish this year. 
One was the sale of a managing director's house in Hong Kong that added 9.2 million pounds ($16 million) to the books.
In addition, the sale of 20 percent of Cable and Wireless' stake in Hong Kong Telecommunicatons to the Chinese Government reduced the company's borrowing needs in 1991, dropping the bank loan level from 59.9 million pounds ($104.2 million at the end-of-March exchange rate) in 1990 to 16.3 million pounds in fiscal 1991. 
Company executives acknowledge that borrowing will pick up again this year.
Such things accounted for a swing in the company's net-interest and other-income line from a 46.9 million pound deficit in 1990 to a 31.2 million pound surplus the following year. 
The 78.1 million pound shift accounts for all but 3.7 million pounds of the increase in profits before taxes.
All of these considerations must be weighed against larger questions about the future of Hong Kong, which reverts to the control of China in 1997. 
Hong Kong Telecommunications is not only Cable and Wireless' main business but also a source of money needed to expand Mercury back home in the United Kingdom, enhance the global digital highway and eventually make the company much less dependent on Hong Kong.
Cable and Wireless, as well as analysts like Robert B. Morris 3d of Goldman Sachs in San Francisco, are not worried about the takeover by China. 
Mr. Morris is more concerned, at least in the near term, about how a tax increase in Hong Kong will eat into Hong Kong Telecom's earnings this year.
"The investment program we have in Hong Kong would not be going on there unless we had confidence," said Mr. Owen, the group managing director for Cable and Wireless. 
But Hong Kong's future will still hang over the company and the stock for some time.
Finally, there is the fallout from recent government decisions about how the British telecommunications industry should be regulated. 
Analysts have generally concluded that the new regulatory approach gives breaks to both Cable and Wireless and British Telecommunications. 
But how they sort out to the bottom line in the next few years is still being debated.
Negative interpretations, like that of Partick Wellington of County Natwest Securities in London, emphasize that new costs Cable and Wireless could incur for access to the B.T. network and the price restructuring that will enable B.T. to lower prices to business customers could hurt the company. 
Postive views, like that of Michael Armitage of Morgan Stanley & Company in London, conclude that what is good for B.T. is good for Cable and Wireless.
