
As the Bush Administration gingerly moves to repair economic ties with China, the World Bank seems likely to soon resume lending programs suspended after the crackdown on pro-democracy protesters in June, say officials of the bank, the United States and foreign governments.
To resume its lending, the bank needs formal approval from its 152 stockholders, including the United States, which holds 20 percent of the shares. 
The bank and Administration sources say the loans could be made as early as next month.
 
A Step Toward Approval
The Administration officially insists that its policy against World Bank lending to China remains unchanged. 
But the lifting of some American sanctions against China on Dec. 
19 was seen as a step toward Administration approval of such lending in the near future.
''That's the kind of talk we're hearing around the bank,'' said a senior World Bank official. 
A World Bank mission has just returned from two weeks in China.
Criticism of any new China loans is likely in Congress, where some members are seeking tougher sanctions against Beijing because of what they consider continued represssion of human rights.
But Administration officials plan to argue that new lending should encourage liberal forces within the Chinese leadership pressing both for a greater opening to the outside world and more respect for human rights, an Administration economic official said.
The China director for the World Bank, Shahid Javed Burki, a Pakistani, has just returned from his second mission to China since June. 
In an interview, he said that projects are ready to begin in areas like agricultural development, rural road building and thermal power generation.
Asked when the programs might start, he referred to a statement made Dec. 
14 by the bank's president, Barber B. Conable Jr.: ''It is our hope that in the not too distant future we can resume lending to China, but we do not have a specific date.''
Mr. Conable had also said the bank would be guided by China's economic performance, not political considerations.
 
Others Would Also Make Loans
Because of the World Bank's prestige as the biggest lender to the third world, approval would encourage lending by others, like the Manila-based Asian Development Bank and Japanese commercial banks, which also stopped loans after the June crackdown on dissent.
The World Bank, which is based in Washington, has provided $8 billion to China since 1981. 
It suspended $750 million of loans last June.
Since fall 1988, Beijing has moved toward central planning and away from the market-oriented policies that over the decade had attracted $14 billion of investment from industrial countries, of which $3.5 billion came from the United States.
An Administration official said Washington is trying to use a promise of World Bank lending to get the Chinese back to market-oriented policies.
Last Tuesday, the Adminstration announced that it had decided to approve the export of three American-built civilian communication satellites to China, all built by the Hughes Aircraft Company, and to lift bans on lending to China by the Export-Import Bank, an agency that provides financing for American exports.
Within 48 hours of the American action, Beijing announced plans to lift some restrictions on foreign investors. 
It said it would provide guarantees against confiscation, give investors the right to choose the chairman of a joint enterprise and end rules on the length of time a foreign project may operate in China. 
Previously, all joint ventures were for fixed periods, often 20 or 30 years.
Administration officials said the reaction indicated China's keen interest in maintaining economic links.
In defending his actions both in easing the sanctions and dispatching high-level missions to China after the crackdown, President Bush, a former ambassador to China, told a press conference Thursday, ''I know how China works.''
He added that the Administration wanted to ''see what we can do, make a representation on how strongly we feel against the human-rights abuse, but see what it's going to take to go forward.''
 
Cloudy Prospects
Business representatives said that despite the recent moves by both sides to improve the climate, the prospects for business remained cloudy.
''Nobody wants to pull out,'' said Roger W. Sullivan, president of the United States-China Business Council, ''but companies are operating at a lower level than before.''
The council represents 300 American multinational companies that do business in China.
Mr. Sullivan, a former State Department China specialist, said that American business was now most concerned about China's ''backtracking on enterprise reform.''
He said that the Chinese had previously wanted enterprises to respond to market forces, but they now have upgraded political and ideological control, giving party functionaries greater authority in factories.
''Faith in the inexorable progress of China has been badly shaken,'' he said. 
''Companies can't deal predictably anymore.''
Although the Export-Import Bank had been barred from making loans to China until the Administration's action earlier this week, the bank, which makes loans to finance American exports, continued to study China projects.
Since June it has made preliminary offers on four projects totaling $108 million of exports. 
Loans totaling $39 million are in the final stages of approval.
