
The World Bank today approved the first loan to China since the student uprising last year that goes beyond the confines of meeting basic human needs.
The approval of the $114.3 million loan marked the first time in more than a year that the Bush Administration did not object to other than humanitarian assistance to China.
The World Bank's approval of the loan for technological improvements in rural industry had been expected for weeks, but it was uncertain whether the United States would vote against it. 
Such a move would have been largely symbolic, because both the European Community and Japan have resumed normal economic relations with China and both supported the loan.
 
Bush Met With Beijing Aide
The decision comes less than a week after President Bush met last Friday for the first time since the crackdown with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen. 
The meeting occurred a day after China abstained, rather than opposed, a vote by the United Nations Security Council authorizing the use of force to expel Iraq from Kuwait.
While the World Bank is owned by 155 member Governments, an American has headed it since it was founded in 1945 and the United States has a 20 percent vote on all major issues. 
The bank makes loans and helps countries in other ways to strengthen broad economic sectors by building such projects as dams, fertilizer plants, irrigation works, ports and highways.
Before the military crackdown on the democracy movement in June 1989, China had been receiving World Bank loans of more than $2 billion annually. 
Largely at the insistence of the United States all loans were initially blocked to China as part of a sanctions package.
 
Hostility on Capitol Hill
Since then, World Bank loans to China had shrunk to $650 million, primarily in the form of rural credits and assistance to small cooperative business enterprises in towns and villages.
The American position against non-humanitarian aid reflected opposition from Capitol Hill, where many lawmakers had been hostile to Beijing. 
But that opposition has been steadily softening since Iraq took over Kuwait in August and the Bush Administration began reaching out to a wide range of allies and other nations for support in challenging the invasion.
The package approved today consists of a $50 million loan and $64.3 million in credit.
Attila Karaosmaonoglu, the World Bank's vice president for Asian Affairs, said that other loans by the bank toChina were being prepared.
