
Literature is like groceries, says Ma Feng, the earthy ''old revolutionary'' who is China's new literary czar: in both cases the government should encourage what is nutritious and ban what is poisonous.
These days it is largely up to Mr. Ma, a lean man of 68 who joined the Communist rebellion in 1938 at the age of 16, to enforce that regulatory vision. 
It is a formidable task because many authors loathe the regime and develop a writer's block when they are asked to ''serve socialism.''
This leaves Mr. Ma in an awkward position as the effective head of the Chinese Writers Association. 
He comes from a different world - the countryside of north-central China - and he made his name writing short stories and film scripts about peasants who brim with decency and enthusiasm for the Communist Party. 
Nothing could be further from the urban frustration and alienation that inspire many Chinese writers today.
''I don't like Beijing - too many people,'' he chuckled the other day while puffing on his beloved Zhongnanhai cigarettes in an interview. 
Mr. Ma was living in his native Shanxi Province, 260 miles southwest of Beijing, when the crackdown on democratic impulses came last year and led to his summons to Beijing.
Early this year, Mr. Ma was formally named vice chairman and party secretary of the Chinese Writers Association, meaning that he would take charge of it. 
The nominal chairman, the writer Ba Jin, lives in Shanghai and is 86 years old and infirm. 
He had few responsibilities even before he lost his influence by supporting the student demonstrators seeking democracy.
 
Not Just a Club
There is no parallel to the Chinese Writers Association in the West, for it is far more than simply an authors' club. 
In China, the association is the work unit of the country's 3,500 authors: it is the employer, the source of housing and salaries, the organizer of political study sessions and the arbiter of who can travel abroad. 
Chinese publishers pay royalties, but these are less important than the association's salaries, and in any case it is difficult to be published without the association's blessing.
Mr. Ma sounds a conciliatory line, asserting that Chinese writers can write about whatever they choose, but they must not criticize their country or subvert Communism. 
His catechism is taken from the works of Mao Zedong, who argued that art is inseparable from politics and must serve the proletarian revolutionary cause.
''Writers should serve socialism and they should serve the people,'' Mr. Ma said, adding that authors should leave the ivory tower to understand the land they write about.
''If you write about society, you must study it,'' he said. 
''If you write about a factory, you should work in a factory. 
If you write about the countryside, you should spend time in a village, rather than sitting around the house writing blindly.''
 
Justifying Curbs
In the last few years, a group of young writers very different from the ''old revolutionaries'' has won prominence and acclaim for their attempts to probe the spirit of post-Mao China, but Mr. Ma asserts that they had only a small following. 
Asked about Bei Dao, a highly respected poet who was one of this circle of younger authors, Mr. Ma said he found such writers unimpressive.
''They had an impact on some younger arts circles, but if you go to a factory in Shanxi Province, no one will have heard of them,'' Mr. Ma said, adding that ordinary people do not want to read such books.
''They were just a small group of people,'' Mr. Ma said. 
''Many good writers are needed by the people, but in the late 1980's only their writings could be published. 
Now we want to publish books needed by ordinary people in factories and farms.''
 
Talk of Revenge
Many others see it differently and believe that the ''old revolutionaries'' behind the cultural purges - leaders like Vice President Wang Zhen and Acting Culture Minister He Jingzhi as well as Mr. Ma himself - now are relishing the opportunity to strike back at those who in recent years looked with contempt at their orthodox Marxist view of culture.
''It's revenge and it's petty,'' said Geremie Barme, an Australian scholar who recently visited China.
One Western diplomat said he thought the general attitude toward someone like Ma Feng was one of contempt. 
He said that Mr. Ma had stuck to his ideological line for many years and suddenly been vindicated, and that he was an opportunist turning that to his own advantage.
Some other diplomats and Chinese are not so harsh, portraying Mr. Ma as a decent man placed in an impossible position. 
They say he is among the better revolutionary writers but that he has never been an intellectual, in the sense of possessing a doubting or inquiring mind, and that he is out of touch with the main current of writers today.
 
A Conciliatory Sound
Mr. Ma, well aware of the antagonisms in the field, takes pains to sound a conciliatory line. 
He even explained the ousting of Liu Binyan, a dissident who was vice chairman of the association, not on the basis of Mr. Liu's heretical views but on the ground that Mr. Liu is in the United States and does not seem likely to return soon.
''In our association, some people took part in the turmoil,'' Mr. Ma said. 
''They won't be punished; they will be educated. 
I'm sure they will change their minds.''
''We've received many manuscripts for publication, criticizing various writers,'' Mr. Ma added. 
''But we don't want to publish them and crush the writers. 
We want to join forces with them and help them write more things that people want to read. 
If we criticize them, who will write for us?
What will be left of the Writers Association?''
 
The Purge Proceeds
Still, the authorities are going ahead with their purge in cultural circles. 
The top executives of several publishing houses and journals, including the most prominent, People's Literature, have been replaced. 
Some writers reportedly may not be published, although Mr. Ma denies the existence of any blacklist, and others have had trouble going abroad. 
And there has been a yearlong process of investigations, self-criticisms and political study sessions to return writers to the straight, narrow and sometimes winding path of Marxist orthodoxy.
So far this crackdown has had mixed results. 
In general, there is less experimentation and less writing about the problems of urban, alienated young people and about political discontent. 
But some works, like Harvest, a Shanghai literary journal, are still remarkably bold, and recent books are probably more lively and interesting than the leaders might have in mind.
''The new policies have had the effect of making people miserable and angry, and it's harder to get things done,'' said a Western diplomat. 
''But at the end of the day similar things end up being written and published.''
 
A Broader Effort
The selection of Mr. Ma to head the writers' association appears to be part of a broad effort to evoke the glories of the Communist Party in its heyday in China in the 1950's and early 1960's. 
To read People's Daily, watch television or listen to official speeches is to find a resurrection of the themes that emerged in Maoist days. 
Lei Feng, a model Communist and heroic soldier, is again an object of official adoration; songs like ''Good Socialism'' have been re-released, and industrial heroes like ''Iron Man Wang'' have been dusted off and hailed in the newspapers.
Mr. Ma fits neatly into this backdrop. 
After joining the Communist revolution at the age of 16, he won fame in 1944 with a novel about Communist troops, ''Heroes of Luliang Mountains.''
While his father was a scholar who won success in the old imperial examinations, Mr. Ma's characters are largely simple, decent peasants who evoke tu - the earth and an agrarian charm that goes with it. 
One of his books, a collection of short stories, has been translated into English.
These days, however, Mr. Ma says he is too busy to write any new stories.
