
Qian Likun is a model university student, the kind of diligent scholar-athlete who joins in foot races, excels in his studies and is never distracted by a woman's short skirt.
Mr. Qian is also five times older than most university students. 
He is 102 years old, and while ordinary students study the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 and the fall of the Ching Dynasty in 1911, Mr. Qian has no such problem: he remembers them.
The University for the Aged, where Mr. Qian studies, has 8,000 students here in Wuhan, a major city on the Yangtze River of central China. 
Founded five years ago, it is part of a network of more than 800 such institutions for the elderly in China, all founded in the last eight years.
China has traditionally revered the aged, and this nation's programs for the elderly are very impressive for a developing country. 
Some Chinese villages have a special "house for the aged," where senior citizens can live if they have no children to depend on, and most cities have a range of physical fitness, entertainment and educational programs for retired citizens.
 
Questions for the U.S.
One question that Chinese often ask Americans is why families sometimes put their parents in institutions, why such a rich country cannot do more for its elderly. 
The questions include a hint of reproach, but mostly wonder at the breach of filial piety.
"We want to help the elderly help themselves, so that they can reduce their dependence on their families and on society," said Lu Jianye, the vice president of the Wuhan University for the Aged. 
"We also want to help them increase their contribution to society, and to develop hobbies such as art, calligraphy or even massage, so that they can enjoy their later years."
The university here, which charges tuition of less than $5 a term, offers courses in 123 subjects. 
These include painting, disco dancing, calligraphy, bridge, cooking, English, literature and health care for the elderly.
 
Canes Beside the Chairs
Most people in Wuhan are literate, but the university also arranges classes in some neighborhoods to teach reading and writing to the elderly, mostly women who never went to school.
China, with a population of 1.1 billion, has some 115 million people over the retirement age, which is normally 60 for men and 55 for women. 
The proportion of the aged will rise sharply in coming decades as baby boom generations grow older and family planning policies reduce the number of young people.
On a recent visit, the classrooms of the Wuhan University for the Aged were full of animated students, some with canes beside their chairs, enthusiastically commenting on each other's paintings, reciting standard phrases of English and dissecting ancient poetry.
"We don't want to get senile," said Yan Bin, a 56-year-old woman who retired recently as a professional singer. 
She was sitting around a table with three partners, working on her skills at bridge, the card game favored by Deng Xiaoping and countless other elderly Chinese.
"I never studied bridge before," said Mu Youqing, a silver-haired woman of 64 years who is a retired doctor. 
"But it's very highbrow and cultured, and it has a long history in China."
 
A Boost for the Brains
The baby of the foursome, 56-year-old Shao Kanfu, a lean, tall man who retired early, added, "I wanted to look after my health and give my brains a boost."
Most elderly people in China live with their children, and often they are responsible for caring for their grandchildren. 
So the University for the Aged holds classes in the midmorning and again in the early afternoon, when the students' children are at work and their grandchildren are at school.
In addition, because some of the old people cannot get around easily, the university has set up 13 branches around the city in residential areas. 
The university depends for money on tuition fees and also on generous grants from the city government. 
The faculty consists mostly of professors at nearby universities who are delighted to moonlight for a small fee.
"The teaching level isn't as high as at a regular university, and we don't go into as much depth as we would with younger students," said Zhou Wu, a junior high school instructor who teaches Chinese literature on the side at a branch campus of the University for the Aged. 
"But some of the older folks bring a good deal of enthusiasm as well as diverse experience to the classroom, so it's often more interesting to teach them than to teach my regular students."
 
Along for the 'Fun Run'
One of Mr. Zhou's most diligent students is Mr. Qian, the 102-year-old. 
A retired agricultural researcher, Mr. Qian diligently prepares for each class session and offers some pointed views.
"This poem isn't very good by Tang Dynasty standards," he said the other day as Mr. Zhou dissected a poem on the blackboard. 
"But it's better than anything we have today."
Mr. Qian manages to walk to the class on his own, and he hears and sees well enough to follow the teacher most of the time. 
The first class he took was on health care for the elderly, and he says he found it very useful in looking after his wife, who died a few months ago at the age of 100, and his daughter, who is 81 years old and in fading health.
When the university held a "fun run" this spring, some 300 old people ran about 2.3 miles to complete the race. 
Mr. Qian was ong them, but the university staff acknowledges that his pace was more of a hobble than a jog.
A lover of traditional poetry, Mr. Qian scarcely paused when asked for a few lines of his favorite poem. 
The room fell silent as he recited from memory this ancient Chinese poem:
The clouds are wispy this morning, the breeze is light.
As I pass the pond, I see flowers and willow trees.
The passers-by don't know the joy in my heart.
I'm like a kid at play.
