
In a tiny electronics shop in this coastal Chinese town, on the poor side of the thin stretch of water called the Taiwan Strait, the proprietor is exploiting the longing to be like the Wangs and the Chens across the waterway.
His lure is a video of a young woman singing into a microphone, her gown rippling as she dances, and it seems to work. 
A crowd gathers inside the shop, eyes fixed on the singer, whose style and dress shows that she is from Taiwan.
As with many stores in this special economic zone, a Taiwan signature helps draw business, just as it has helped transform this once-backward tiny island of Amoy, as it used to be called, into a bustling metropolis.
But in a back room of the electronics shop, away from the music and the Taiwan glitter, a handful of Chinese explained their feelings about their Taiwan compatriots, revealing sentiments that were not entirely loving.
 
'Dregs of Society'
"They may be rich, but they aren't very polite," said a customs official who was helping the shop owner. 
"Lots of the Taiwanese who come here are the dregs of society. 
They bring over the worst of their world, and when we see them smuggling or going out with hookers, naturally we're turned off."
Xiamen is absorbed by the love-hate relationship that many Chinese feel toward their Taiwan brethren. 
Mainland Chinese and Taiwan Chinese may share the same forebears, but with more and more Taiwan residents visiting the mainland, the clash of ideologies, styles and levels of wealth has created headaches for Chinese leaders.
"It is true that the local people resent us a bit," said a Taiwan businessman who has been in Xiamen for several years. 
"The smugglers and boatmen came over here before the businessmen, and they were very crude people. 
This left a deep impression on the locals."
Tsay Mingshan of Taiwan, who is senior manager at a wholly owned Taiwan enterprise called Eupa, said: "Many Taiwanese thought that this was a 'yellow earth,' a new playground that you could dig into as you pleased. 
They didn't realize that if they came over here, people would watch their behavior and form opinions."
Trade between China and Taiwan for the first 11 months of last year reached $5.15 billion, up 41 percent over the same period in 1990, according to Taiwan statistics. 
Taiwanese investment in the mainland was $840 million for the first nine months of last year, nearly as much as for all of 1990, Chinese statistics show.
The relationship, which is much closer than it has been for most of the four decades since Chiang Kai-shek and his army fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing the civil war to the Communists, seems bound to get better. 
China is thirsty for Taiwanese capital, just as Taiwan is eager to use the mainland's cheap labor and raw materials. 
China is also trying to forge closer ties as a means to bring Taiwan back under its territorial domain.
The Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, visited Xiamen in December to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the special economic zone. 
Many businessmen say this was partly to impress the Taiwanese. 
But his visit also seems to have unleashed a spirit of expansion in Xiamen, which has lagged somewhat behind China's four other special economic zones.
"If Deng Xiaoping called for faster development, now that would be even better," said Zhang Zongxu, the Deputy Mayor of Xiamen, referring to the Chinese leader. 
Mr. Zhang, a former Chinese Consul General in Houston, said that Taiwanese investment had certainly helped Xiamen develop, but added that the audacity of some Taiwanese behavior rubbed him the wrong way.
"They play around with women, or one week they go around with one secretary and the next week it's another one," he said. 
"Or they go eating and drinking at the nightclubs. 
Afterward, they walk over to the singer and stuff a big tip into her bra."
Local residents have been overwhelmed in the last three years by the flood of rich Taiwan visitors. 
Some of the businessmen have come flashing their thick wallets and expensive tastes. 
These are the very "bourgeois" influences that China accuses Westerners of spreading and that, in fact, the Taiwan Chinese are probably even better at disseminating because of the common language.
 
Taiwan's Influence Is Strong
Moreover, to the Government's dismay, the island is an enclave for prostitution and smuggling. 
Scores of boats go back and forth across the strait, often carrying contraband like cigarettes, videotapes, books and other goods from Taiwan. 
Last year, security officials caught more than 200 people involved in prostitution rings, Mr. Zhang said.
Xiamen's economic development is still at least two decades behind that of Taipei. 
But Taiwanese investment is the fastest growing source of foreign capital, and when the Taiwan Government approves direct air and shipping links, perhaps in the next couple of years, Xiamen could become, in many ways, a virtual colony of Taiwan.
Meanwhile, Taiwan music, videos, books and fashions have almost become a way of life here. 
Multisystem televisions, which enable viewers to receive Taiwan stations, are among the hottest purchases.
Residents here speak the same Chinese dialect as about 80 percent of the people in Taiwan, and half a million Taiwan tourists have visited the island in the last four years. 
"Xiamen is turning into a Little Taipei," said a Chinese involved in trade with Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao.
Until the middle of last year, the Chinese military still broadcast Communist propaganda from the tip of Xiamen through a dozen huge loudspeakers aimed at nearby Taiwan-controlled islands.
Taiwan doubled the decibels, broadcasting its Nationalist propaganda from at least two dozen loudspeakers on the nearby island of Quemoy. 
Today, the Taiwanese speakers are still there, but the Taiwan Government seems to have discovered a more effective means of propaganda: they often play Taiwan pop songs.
