
The only solution to her family's problems, Wan Ziyu said glumly, was for her to die.
"Every day I live is a burden for my son," said Ms. Wan, her white hair and wrinkled face betraying her 80 years. 
She looked down at her four-inch long feet, bound and crippled when she was a child, and said, brooding, "It's better for me to die as soon as possible."
The family has always lived on the edge of poverty; what pushed them over was a disastrous flood in eastern China in the summer of 1991. 
The flood, the worst in 100 years in Anhui Province, killed more than 5,100 people, caused $14 billion in economic losses and disrupted the lives of 220 million people.
 
Resilience Amid the Debris
The Chinese authorities promptly banned foreign reporters from the area, so the flooding attracted little attention around the world. 
But even now, 15 months later, in what local officials say is the first visit by a Western journalist, it is obvious that the area was devastated and that many peasants will not be able to recover for several more years.
The flooding is also testimony to the legendary resilience of the Chinese peasantry, for some villages are resprouting from the mud and will soon be sturdier than ever. 
International aid experts give the Chinese authorities good marks for organizing relief efforts, and there were no epidemics of disease among the tens of millions of people who lost homes.
Still, that is small consolation for Ms. Wan. She lives with her son and grandson in a mud hut that was supposed to be their temporary quarters to get them through last winter. 
It will have to shelter them this winter as well, and the family has no idea when they will have the $2,000 needed to build a brick home.
 
House Is Beyond Reach
"It's far more than we can afford," said her son, Wang Daoyun, who is 44. 
"There's no way we can build a permanent home until my son grows up."
The problem, Mr. Wang said, is that he has less than one-sixth of an acre and he is the only able-bodied person to provide for his mother and his child.
That was bad enough, but then the floods destroyed his home and virtually everything he owned. 
Now even an education for his son, a fourth-grader, is becoming a luxury.
"Already, the boy's school fees are 70 yuan a year," Mr. Wang said, "and next year it'll be 100 yuan. 
I can't pay that much."
(Seventy yuan is equivalent to about $12.75.)
Flooding is an integral part of Chinese history: one of the earliest names in the fog where history emerges from legend is the Great Yu, a heroic emperor who supposedly tamed a great flood in the 23d century B.C. the most capricious river is the Yellow River, which silts up and overflows the dikes to find a new course to the ocean.
When nonstop rains beginning in May 1991 made it clear that flooding in Anhui was inevitable, the Government opened floodgates and cut through dikes so the worst damage would be absorbed by villages like this one rather than by big cities downstream.
This almost certainly minimized the cost in lives, but it also meant that those who suffered most were those who had the least to start with.
"The flood left my rice paddy covered with sand, so that all I can plant is sweet potatoes and rape seed," Hu Changcui, a woman of 56, said as she stood in a crude brick shelter that serves as living quarters until the family can rebuild a home.
"And my son is 23 years old and not yet married!
Of course, we'll have to wait until we can build a house before he can think of getting married."
 
The Money Is Running Out
Throughout Anhui Province, 600,000 people are living in temporary housing: straw shacks, mud huts, brick shelters or canvas tents. 
About 700 clinics have yet to be rebuilt, along with 300 schools.
"We still have plenty of needs, but we're about out of funds," said Ye Ruqiang, deputy director of Anhui Province's flood disaster office.
The Government almost certainly could have attracted more foreign aid if it had allowed foreign news coverage. 
But instead the authorities seemed embarrassed, and chose to turn the floods into a huge propaganda effort to improve the image of the army, whose reputation had been sullied when it fired on crowds of pro-democracy protesters around Tiananmen Square in 1989.
The People's Liberation Army played a central role in flood relief and unquestionably saved thousands of lives, and special television programs hailed the soldiers' heroism.
Some families have already bounced back and seem in better shape than ever.
 
Now, Let's Find Wives
Miaoqian, a village of 8,000 in in an old lack bed in northern Anhui, has risen anew less than a mile from the old site.
"This is much better than my old house," Li Decao, a 36-year-old peasant, said as he showed off his new two-room house, with a pig and a few hens in the back yard.
Yang Chuanzao, the 30-year-old Mayor, said that soon after the disaster, the number of marriages dropped, because local people could no longer afford to hold a wedding festival and set up a new house. 
But he figures local youths will have more luck finding partners once they are settled in their new homes.
"It's definitely a bit easier for the young men to find a wife now," he said. 
"You're more attractive when you live in a brick house than when you live in a grass shack."
