
A year after soldiers shot dead his only son, the father's own odyssey through faith, heartbreak, bitterness and disillusionment with the Chinese Communist Party still leaves him confused and fearful.
The atmosphere in his shabby, simply furnished three-room apartment changes from bickering and laughter, when the 14 family members and relatives gather together, to a ghostly quiet, as memories turn to the son of this house and that time during the June 4 military crackdown when his life ended at 21 years as he rode a bicycle to his part-time job in a garage.
While most of the dead were killed while protesting against the attacking troops, this young man was shot in the back while bicycling to work on a side street four miles from Tiananmen Square. 
People who saw the shooting told his family that a small group of soldiers was on the street and apparently shot him at random. 
Neither he nor his family was active in the democracy movement, and family members agreed to be interviewed on condition that they not be identified, for fear of reprisals from the authorities.
Long Silences at Dinnertime
The father, a Communist Party member, is 61 now - his newly graying hair betrays the real aging that has taken place over the last 12 months - and the immediate despair over his son has faded into long silences at dinnertime. 
He tries to fend off the memories by channeling his energies into raising the 18 pigeons he keeps in a large cage outside his living-room window.
Since the day his son was cremated and the appropriate certificates turned over to the authorities as proof of his son's innocence when he was killed, no one from the Government has sent a letter of acknowledgment or sympathy or even come to ask about him, either to brand him a counterrevolutionary rebel or a martyr.
''The Government never said we were counterrevolutionaries or not,'' one of the son's relatives said. 
''They never said we were good or bad. 
They never asked us.''
Throughout Beijing and the rest of the country, hundreds of families are remembering their loved ones who were killed on June 4 last year, when troops opened fire on crowds of demonstrators in the center of Beijing.
Last year, the Government said it would compensate the families of victims innocently killed in the crackdown. 
It also prepared a list of the victims for possible release, but then said it would not release the list because of objections from the families.
 
No Compensation Evident
Each time such announcements were made, the father waited for a visit, but so far, he has received neither compensation nor consultation on the release of his son's name. 
The Government did not disclose how much the compensation would be, and apparently has not paid it to any of the victims' families.
It is this silence from the authorities that stirs anger in the father, the mother and four sisters. 
Some families have received visits by the authorities, especially if the victims were students who took part in the movement. 
This family does not even know if the son has become a statistic.
''This child was too young,'' the father said. 
''He wasn't even old enough to make his contribution to the nation. 
He had just started working. 
Such a small life, terminated, just like that. 
Such a loss.''
For the father, the death of the son was especially distressful. 
The son had pleaded with the father not to venture out, but the father adamantly insisted on going to work that early morning on June 4. 
The son followed the example, setting out to work on his own.
 
Fury Replaced by Fear
Yet, for the father, the fury has subsided slowly, and in its place is more fear than cynicism or courage borne out of pain. 
He has not complained to his ''work unit,'' where he is partly retired, and he has not tried to contact the authorities. 
He rarely speaks against the Government, only sometimes around family members.
His distance from the party has grown considerably, since the early days when his hope for China lay in the party, and he did not take part in any political study sessions during the year. 
The party is carrying out its nationwide re-registration for its members, and those whom it deems unsuitable may be expelled. 
The father says he will not officially resign from the party, nor will he officially re-register.
Like many Chinese whose anger over the crackdown has blended into their daily lives, the family is waiting for the Government to change, but in the meantime, their disaffection is turning into indifference.
''They are too busy to come see us,'' the father said, his voice soft and calm. 
''For a common man like me there is only patience and hope.''
Later, he added, ''The time of hope has already passed.''
The mother has taken to fits of craziness, talking in a rambling manner, family members say, and they have removed all of the son's belongings from the house because of the memories they inspire. 
She retired late last year, and then sought a part-time job after two weeks at home. 
She was spending her time at home thinking about her son.
 
His Ashes Are Visited
In honor of the son, the family has followed a Chinese tradition of burning fake paper money many times in the last year, and it has refrained from setting off firecrackers, because they symbolize happiness. 
Now, his ashes are kept at a state funeral parlor, and the family often goes to pay its respects.
''We go there to burn paper money and to burn the things he used to like to eat, like shrimps, apples, oranges and fish,'' said the mother, a thin woman, whose coarse, wrinkled skin makes her look older than her 51 years.
When a classmate of the son stopped in to pay his respects and to ask about visiting the funeral parlor, the parents jumped up to tend to him. 
The father returned to the living room, his face showing a mixture of pain and appreciation.
''My spirit is better these days,'' he said. 
''But I dread the visits of his classmates.''
