
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived here today for a three-day visit that is intended to cement economic ties with China and reassert a working relationship that was thrown into doubt by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the abandonment of Communism there.
"We have to open a new era in relations between Russia and China,"
Mr. Yeltsin told reporters after he and his entourage of 100 Russian officials stepped off three private jets at a Beijing airport this morning.
Mr. Yeltsin will meet with the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, but he comes to China as an economic broker, not a political one, and as a head of state, not as a Communist Party leader. 
His task is to boost economic relations, beginning with plans to sign about 20 agreements that seal cooperation between Beijing and Moscow in a range of fields, from military matters and nuclear power pacts to cultural and scientific exchanges.
The last Russian leader to visit was Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who arrived in May 1989 to mark the formal end of the three-decade-long Chinese-Soviet split. 
Mr. Gorbachev's visit was particularly significant because it came during the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, which welcomed him as a hero.
 
Past Criticism of Yeltsin
Indeed, Mr. Gorbachev's visit gave a new stimulus to the democracy movement. 
The Chinese Army crackdown a few weeks later, and the rise of the hard-liners in Beijing, led to the resurgence of mutual suspicion between Moscow and Beijing. 
Chinese leaders have been especially scathing -- in private -- about Mr. Yeltsin's role in the disintegration of Soviet Communism.
Today, however, Mr. Yeltsin does not represent a bubbling democracy for young Chinese intellectuals and students, as Mr. Gorbachev did. 
While some Chinese admire him, others regard him as a symbol of the dangers of overthrowing a Communist system. 
When they look at Russia today, they see not so much freedom and democracy as chaos and economic decline.
For now, China is much more economically robust than Russia, and Mr. Yeltsin is likely to press Chinese officials for greater financial assistance, more weapons purchases and ample supplies of meat, shoes, warm coats and other consumer goods.
The nominal centerpiece of the visit is the signing of a joint declaration that will lay down the principles of the new friendship. 
No longer will the relationship be based on Communist brotherhood, but rather on a more pragmatic interaction between two governments.
China is expected to extend a small loan of tens of millions of dollars during the trip. 
Russian officials have also said their Government plans to continue selling weapons and other military equipment to China. 
The Chinese have already paid $1 billion for two dozen SU-27 jet fighters and are reportedly interested in MIG-31 jets, Kilo-class submarines and bombers.
Among the most visible signs of the growing economic relationship is the increase in trade, which totaled $3.9 billion for 1991. 
In Beijing, for instance, Russian entrepreneurs crowd the free markets jams as they stroll along the streets with their giant bags stuffed with clothing.
