
Saying he needed to "restore order" and protect the reformist core of Russia's Government, President Boris N. Yeltsin cut short his visit to China this morning and headed back to Moscow.
His new Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, whom Mr. Yeltsin chose this week after parliamentary pressure forced him to abandon acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, was on his own visit to Kazakhstan, and Moscow itself seemed quiet early this morning.
But Mr. Yeltsin, who has a flair for the dramatic gesture, announced that he had been informed overnight of a concerted effort to replace the reformist core of Mr. Gaidar's team of young, Westernized economists, some of whom accompanied Mr. Yeltsin to China.
"They have begun too early to fight for portfolios, to pull apart the Cabinet, and so the master must return and restore order there," Mr. Yeltsin said at Beijing airport.
 
Core Must Remain
"Gaidar brought his own team with him, his young inner core," Mr. Yeltsin said. 
"The new prime minister wants to bring in his own team but the core of Gaidar's reformers must not under any circumstances be pulled apart."
Some Cabinet posts can be changed, he said, but most of Mr. Gaidar's team must remain.
Out of 30 people or so in the Cabinet, Mr. Yeltsin said, "three, four or five can be replaced."
But "the rest of the main figures" must remain, he said.
Earlier, China's official Xinhua News Agency mentioned Mr. Yeltsin's early departure, citing only his "busy schedule at home."
He was scheduled to leave later today in any event. 
The statement added that Yeltsin's visit to China "has been very smooth and successful."
There have been reports in Moscow that Arkady Volsky, the lobbyist leader of the main opposition grouping, Civic Union, had said on a visit to Tokyo that he was pushing Mr. Chernomyrdin to replace Mr. Gaidar's team with more conservative economists closer to industry. 
But Mr. Volsky said on Friday that he had been misquoted.
But there was a sense on Friday that Mr. Chernomyrdin was trying to make a fast start. 
He began making good on his promises to help industry in just the manner Western economists feared, proposing to a compliant Russian Pprliament an additional 200 billion rubles (about $480 million) in immediate credits to the energy sector he used to run.
Before flying to Kazakhstan for talks to promote better cooperation with Russia, especially in oil and gas, Mr. Chernomyrdin added an amendment to the 1992 budget law calling for the new credits this year. 
The Supreme Soviet, which had approved the budget law in principle earlier this week, passed it Friday with the new funding, pushing the budget deficit to 1.17 trillion rubles ($2.8 billion) for the year.
Finance Minister Vasily Barchuk had argued that the higher deficit would increase inflation and could damage Russia's ability to pay for needed imports.
Mr. Gaidar has encouraged his "team" of young, Westernized, like-minded economists to remain in the Cabinet if they could pursue and protect economic reform, and Anatoly B. Chubais, the deputy prime minister in charge of the crucial privatization policy, has already agreed to stay on. 
He extended the period in which Russians may pick up their free privatization voucher, with a face value of 10,000 rubles, another month, until the end of January.
 
Gaidar Team Open to Staying
In Beijing, where he was accompanying Mr. Yeltsin, another deputy prime minister, Aleksandr Shokhin, told Interfax that the Gaidar team would not "slam the door" if Mr. Chernomyrdin wanted them to stay on. 
But they wanted assurances about "the core of the Government and its policies."
Mr. Shokhin said he was encouraged that Mr. Chernomyrdin did not campaign to be Prime Minister and got the job "unexpectedly."
While Mr. Chernomyrdin "is a very experienced economist who worked in a key branch of the economy," Mr. Shokhin said "it is one thing to be a director and quite another to be a Prime Minister."
On Friday the Russian President announced that Moscow and Beijing had agreed in principle to cooperate on military and technological projects as part of an array of accords intended to deepen the relationship between the two countries.
The agreements, though overshadowed by Mr. Yeltsin's assertion that he would meet with President Bush next month to sign a new strategic arms reduction treaty, appear to broaden Russia's contacts with China, a former adversary, and sweep aside ideological differences in the relationship.
On the second day of what was to have been a three-day trip to China, Mr. Yeltsin and his entourage signed 24 agreements covering cultural, trade and scientific exchanges, food credits, the construction of a nuclear power plant and the reduction of troops along the Russian-Chinese border.
"An important step has been made in the development of bilateral relations and a new page has been opened in our friendly relations," Mr. Yeltsin told reporters tonight at a press conference. 
"Let's talk less and do more."
The two sides cemented their budding new relationship with the signing of a joint declaration of friendship, renouncing the use of a nuclear first strike against the other country and pledging not to enter into treaties "prejudicing the sovereignty and security interests of the other party."
Mr. Yeltsin said that at the last-minute insistence of the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, the two sides signed a memorandum of understanding that laid down the general principles for closer cooperation on military and technological projects.
Mr. Yeltsin would not say what kinds of projects would be covered under the arrangement, but he said a "real agreement" would be worked out within a month by the two countries' defense ministers.
China would not comment on the agreement on military cooperation. 
It did, however, make public the text of the joint declaration, which says that China and Russia will set up exchange programs that will help build "cooperation in the military field."
A Russian Deputy Prime Minister, Aleksandr N. Shokhin, said that Moscow would extend a long-term $2.5 billion credit to finance the building of a nuclear power station that would conform to international standards. 
He added that restrictions on the secondary transfer of the technology would be very strict. 
The loan for the power plant, which is to be built in the northeastern province of Liaoning, would be spread over 10 to 12 years.
Mr. Yeltsin said that China had agreed to extend a credit worth about $52 million, mainly to allow Russia to buy food and feedstock. 
He added that China planned to sell 10 million tons of grain to Russia at world prices.
