
The United States announced today that it would ban American exports of almost $1 billion in high-technology goods to China over the next two years to punish Beijing for selling sensitive missile technology to Pakistan in violation of international arms-control agreements.
An official said the trade restrictions could be greatly widened, to $3 billion to $4 billion worth of goods a year, if intelligence agencies concluded that China had sold Pakistan whole missiles, and not just missile components.
The Government said the ban announced today would not affect Chinese exports to the United States or China's preferred trading status, which President Clinton extended in May despite concerns about China's human rights violations.
 
Sanctions on Pakistan
Michael McCurry, the State Department's spokesman, said the United States would also impose economic sanctions on Pakistan, although the amount of banned exports would be small.
Chinese officials have repeatedly denied that their country has violated the Missile Technology Control Regime, an agreement China has not signed but has agreed to abide by.
Mr. McCurry said the sanctions would prevent American companies from receiving export licenses to sell China advanced electronics equipment as well as technology for space systems and military aircraft. 
He said the United States now sells China between $400 million and $500 million of such technology each year.
 
A Cost for U.S. 
Companies
"They will not be able to conduct that business," he said in a news briefing, referring to American companies. 
"That's a significant cost that we pay. 
But it, again, reflects the seriousness with which we look at the issue of proliferation, which we consider one of the, probably the most important, arms control issue in the 1990's."
According to the State Department, the area that will be hit hardest is space satellites, both satellite sales to China and the practice by which United States companies pay China to send their satellites into space. 
The United States had already barred sales of most military-related high technology items to China after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989.
On Tuesday, American officials disclosed that sanctions would be applied to China, but they did not describe them in detail. 
American export-control laws required the Government to impose the sanctions after it determined that China had shipped components that would help Pakistan build M-11 missiles, whose technology was developed in China and which have a range of 300 miles and can carry nuclear warheads.
One official said American intelligence agencies had concluded that China has sent missile parts to Pakistan, but he added that intelligence officials might yet find that China had shipped complete missiles. 
In that case, he said, the sanctions could be expanded to restrict Chinese exports to the United States.
The United States imposed the sanctions after China repeatedly rebuffed requests to answer questions about the shipments to Pakistan. 
In news briefings and interviews today, State Department officials seemed ambivalent about the sanctions, on the one hand saying they were angry about the shipments and China's refusal to own up to them, but on the other hand signaling that they had been pushed into the sanctions by highly specific laws.
State Department officials said President Clinton had reviewed the decision before it was announced.
"It's obviously a serious issue," said a senior Administration official, who insisted on anonymity. 
"We would not have taken this step if it weren't. 
We tried to clarify this issue with both China and Pakistan before moving. 
We reached a point where we didn't get the clarifications needed, and under the law we had no choice but to go ahead."
The official indicated that the United States hoped to move ahead with China on other issues, like human rights and trade.
Hughes Aircraft of Los Angeles is one of the companies that will be hit hardest. 
It has contracted to sell China one satellite and a ground station for $80 million and was negotiating to sell two other satellites. 
In addition, China has indicated that it might buy up to 10 satellites from Hughes by the end of the decade.
"Obviously we're concerned about the impact this will have on our business," said David Shea, a Hughes spokesman. 
He said his company was worried that European manufacturers like British Aerospace or Aerospatiale in France might seek to sell their satellites to China if Hughes cannot.
United States officials said they were concerned that the sanctions would hurt American companies, but Lynn E. Davis, Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, said, "When you make this determination, the law specifically states you can't take into account the effects of the sanctions."
She said the European countries, unlike the United States, do not have laws that impose trade sanctions when the non-proliferation agreements are violated. 
But she said that those nations "share our goals for non-proliferation of missiles," and that the United States planned to urge them not to let their companies take advantage of the American move.
Experts on China called the sanctions moderately tough, since the Administration could have announced sanctions and then waived them. 
State Department officials indicated that they were seeking a proportional response, in effect banning all exports to the two Chinese agencies responsible for the sale to Pakistan: the Defense Ministry and the Ministry for the Aerospace Industry.
In the Presidential election campaign last year, Mr. Clinton vowed to take a tough stance toward China over its human rights violations. 
Nonetheless, in May he announced a one-year extension of China's most-favored-nation trading status, with any further extension conditioned on China's improving its human-rights record.
