
A dozen prominent intellectuals today formally petitioned China's parliamentary bodies to conduct an independent investigation into corruption in the Chinese leadership.
The surprisingly bold step by a group that includes two former top editors of The People's Daily, the official Communist Party newspaper, represents a significant challenge to party leaders as they prepare for the death of Deng Xiaoping and an unpredictable period of political transition.
The petition appeared as more than 4,500 delegates to the parliamentary bodies are assembling for their annual sessions at a time when there are tensions over trade and human rights with the United States.
The presentation of the 2,000-word petition marks the first time in a year that an organized group of scholars, writers and former Communist Party members have joined together to call openly for sweeping democratic reforms. 
Their assertions indicate that despite continuing repression, advocates of democracy remain determined to press political reforms on the collective leadership that has been installed by Mr. Deng, China's paramount leader.
The petition says the only permanent solution to corruption is the establishment of a constitutional democracy with independent legislative and judicial branches that would supervise government operations and police the conduct of the Communist Party.
"Corruption, in the form of trading power for money, has become the principal affliction causing great public resentment and capable of leading to social upheaval," the petition states.
Citing government statistics showing that Communist Party officials annually spend billions of dollars in public funds giving banquets for one another and billions more buying luxury cars for private use, the petition said an "absence of values" and a "collapse of faith" had led to a "poisoning of the nation's soul by political corruption."
The list of signers includes Wang Ruoshui and Wu Xuecan, both People's Daily editors removed for their pro-democracy views. 
It also includes Chen Ziming, a leading dissident who was released from prison in May under pressure from President Clinton and who is now under house arrest.
Western diplomats here, many of whom express consistent alarm over growing corruption, said the 12 signers had taken a substantial risk of arrest and persecution given the repressive political climate as China awaits the death of Mr. Deng, who is 90 and whose health has declined significantly in the last 12 months.
Repression in China is expected to be debated next month in Geneva at the United Nations Human Rights Commission, where the United States and the European Union are co-sponsoring a resolution criticizing Beijing's human rights record. 
China is seeking to block the debate.
Corruption has become a pervasive problem in China at all levels of government. 
In August 1993, President Jiang Zemin opened an anti-corruption drive, warning that "the corruption phenomenon is a virus that is invading the healthy flesh of the party and state institutions."
Many Chinese were cheered when Mr. Jiang told the Central Discipline Inspection Committee then that "if we lapse into soft-heartedness, if we allow it to run rampant, it could spell an end to our party."
But with few exceptions, the 18-month-old campaign has conspicuously exempted high-level party and military officials from the target lists of prosecutors. 
Yet there are widespread popular perceptions of corruption among senior party cadres and their children.
"The anti-corruption campaign has been sacrificed in the name of party unity," a Western diplomat said.
The dissidents' petition was delivered this weekend to the National People's Congress and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. 
The two bodies are presided over by Qiao Shi and Li Ruihuan, respectively, both members of the ruling Politburo's standing committee.
Copies of the document, written in Chinese, were provided to foreign news organizations in Beijing and Hong Kong.
One of the signers said today in an interview that the group had decided to press its petition because they perceived Chinese leaders to be showing less tolerance to calls for political reform.
"If every social problem is put off until Deng dies, the problems will become too severe to solve," said the signer, who did not want to be identified. 
"The party should take to heart the lesson of 1989 on the necessity of having a dialogue with society."
He was referring to the large pro-democracy demonstrations that overwhelmed Beijing for six weeks in the spring of that year and led to the Government's decision to mount a machine-gun and tank assault on the protesters.
"Right now, if the authorities take our suggestion and start a dialogue with all levels of society, it will be helpful for social order and stabilityI," he said.
The petition admonishes the Chinese leadership that the only way "to pull out corruption by the roots" is to replace the current system with a constitutional democracy in China over the next three to five years.
"We believe that the reason why the repeated injunctions of the ruling party have gotten only minimal results -- the reason why corruption is getting worse the more it is opposed -- is because the existing anti-corruption measures lack systematic restraints on, and supervision of, the ruling party itself."
Other signers included Xu Wenli, a close associate of China's most well-known dissident, Wei Jingsheng; Bao Zunxin, former editor of the respected magazine Reading; Liu Xiaobo, a writer and trenchant critic of Communist Party abuses against personal liberties, and Min Qi, the former editor of Chinese Social Sciences magazine.
The others were Chen Xiaoping, a legal scholar; Zhou Duo, a sociologist; Liao Yiwu, a poet; Jin Cheng, a magazine editor, and Sha Yuguang, a veteran of the 1978 democracy movement.
Since the military crackdown in 1989, China's intellectuals have seldom spoken out as a group. 
A year ago, seven leading scientists and scholars jointly petitioned the Communist Party to stop its "punishment of people for their ideas, speech and writing."
Their protest came after the Chinese authorities detained Mr. Wei for meeting with the State Department's top human rights official, John Shattuck. 
Since then, most of the 1994 petitioners have spent frequent periods under house arrest or close surveillance to prevent them from meeting visiting foreigners.
The petition argues that China's future can be best insured by breaking the monolithic lock of the Communist Party and empowering the Chinese with the "sacred right of freedom of speech," freedom of the press and truly independent legislative and judicial bodies.
