
China's Justice Ministry approved the opening of offices by 16 international law firms today, reflecting a brighter climate in Chinese-American business relations now that trade disputes have been put aside.
With foreign companies pouring into China in recent years, the need for business-related legal work has grown tremendously. 
Yet China has tightly limited the number of law firms allowed to fully operate.
Today's new licenses were the first granted since early last year, bringing the foreign law firms in China to 73. 
Many more are waiting for approval. 
Of those approved today, five are from the United States and the others are from Japan, Hong Kong, Britain, Italy and Jordan.
This round of license-granting was apparently delayed until a favorable moment in China's relations with the United States. 
American officials have been pushing hard for better market access for legal, insurance and banking firms.
The moment came, several foreign lawyers said, after Chinese and American trade negotiators reached agreement in Beijing last week on how to fight piracy of intellectual property. 
One of China's threatened retaliatory measures against prospective sanctions was to suspend the allotting of new business licenses for American trade and service companies.
Until today, only one American law firm, Davis Wright Tremaine of Seattle, had been approved to operate an office in Shanghai. 
Today, two were added: Altheimer & Grey of Chicago and O'Melveny & Myers of Los Angeles, where Secretary of State Warren Christopher was a partner before assuming his current post.
While several lawyers applauded the Chinese move as a step in the right direction, some complained about the confusion and difficulties of working in a semi-open market.
"Technically, we're not supposed to be here until we're legal," said an American lawyer who insisted on anonymity. 
The firm he works for was not approved today, though it operates an unofficial office in Beijing anyway. 
"But we can't become legal unless we're here, wining and dining Ministry of Justice folks, and showing how serious we are about the China market," the lawyer said.
In practice, dozens of similar firms operate preparatory offices in Beijing, Shanghai and other cities, where they act as consultants, keep low visibility, and generally answer telephones by saying "Hello?" rather than announcing the names of their firms.
Xiao Hongmin, an official at the Lawyers Affairs Division of the Justice Ministry, said there was no set schedule for approving new foreign legal firms, many of which applied as long as three years ago. 
More than 130 law firms have applications pending, Mr. Xiao said.
"The whole process of approval has become ultra-selective," said Louis B. Goldman, a partner at Altheimer & Grey, which will open an office in Shanghai. 
"Over 50 major American firms were competing for these slots, and 5 got in."
On the long list of things that Altheimer & Grey did to win favor with Chinese officials, Mr. Goldman said, was running a preparatory office in Beijing for two and a half years, inviting Justice Ministry staff members for visits to the United States, where meetings were arranged with business and political leaders, and advising Chinese officials on developing their legal profession.
The Justice Ministry is expected to soon issue a set of regulations on how the Chinese offices of foreign law firms will be supervised, the New China News Agency said yesterday.
 
--------------------
Kantor Calms Indonesians
JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 26 (Dow Jones) -- The United States Secretary of Commerce, Mickey Kantor, minimized differences with Indonesia today over its national-car program, stressing trade links instead.
After meeting here with the Minister of Industry and Trade, Tungki Ariwibowo, Mr. Kantor said:
"We want to see a growing and healthy economy in Indonesia. 
Part of this includes a healthy auto industry."
But he added that Indonesia must abide by international trade rules.
The national-car program grants import-duty and luxury-sales-tax exemptions on cars that use Indonesian brand names, are produced by Indonesian companies and are developed with domestic technology, engineering and designs. 
The United States, Japan and the European Union have called the program discriminatory.
Mr. Kantor, who is on an Asian tour that also includes South Korea and Thailand, is scheduled to meet with President Suharto on Thursday morning.      
Correction
