
Two Republican senators who are Presidential hopefuls cautioned Hillary Rodham Clinton today against going to China in September to attend an international conference on women.
Responding to a question on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Bob Dole of Kansas said, "I think it would be a mistake for the First Lady to go as long as they're retaining an American prisoner there, Harry Wu, and as long as there's other human rights abuses."
Mr. Dole said that he had written Mrs. Clinton a letter with this advice and that he had submitted an amendment to the same effect, although "Democrats blocked it on the Senate floor."
Of the proposed visit he said, "I don't see any useful purpose."
Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican who is a former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, struck a more reserved note on the NBC News program "Meet the Press."
"My own view is that Mrs. Clinton probably should not go," he said.
But Mr. Lugar prefaced this with the observation that "I suspect it would make no difference to the Chinese," adding, "The Chinese find that whole conference troublesome."
Mr. Lugar said that the issue of Mr. Wu's imprisonment formed part of his reasoning, but that if it were up to him, "I would decouple the human rights issues from the political issues and the economic issues."
Mr. Wu, an American citizen and human rights campaigner who was born in China, was arrested in June while trying to enter the country from Kazakhstan and has been charged with spying.
His case is one of a number of nettlesome issues that have arisen between the two countries recently. 
Others include Chinese military exercises near Taiwan; a private visit by President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan to Cornell University in June, and Washington's contention that China has shipped ballistic missiles to Paskistan in violation of a commitment not to do so.
Mrs. Clinton has been named honorary chairwoman of a large United States delegation scheduled to attend what is to be the Fourth World Conference on Women, and she has expressed a strong desire to go. 
She has discussed this wish with Secretary of State Warren Christopher and other senior Administration officials. 
The White House has said a decision on her attendance will be made in the next two weeks.
      
