
Taking aim at the network of alien smugglers who have brought hundreds of illegal Chinese immigrants to New York in recent years -- and who often use kidnapping, torture and extortion to bolster profits -- Federal prosecutors said yesterday that they had smashed a violent organized-crime gang that had terrorized Chinatown for years.
In a series of arrests this week, the authorities said they had captured 35 reputed members of the gang, known as the Fukienese Flying Dragons, including its top commanders in America. 
But the officials acknowledged that 25 other suspects had escaped the dragnet and that the gang's two indicted bosses had fled to China.
Of the 64 men indicted altogether, prosecutors accused about half of involvement in smuggling immigrants. 
Gang members also committed robberies and ran extortion schemes and protection rackets, and sometimes resorted to murder to enforce their grip, according to prosecutors.
Eight racketeering indictments unsealed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan charged that since 1992, the gang had smuggled more than 350 people into the country from China at a price of about $30,000 a person. 
More than 150 of the aliens, officials said, were held for ransom and tortured until their relatives or friends in the United States and China paid the full amount.
Federal officials said the sweeping indictments had crushed the last remaining powerful Chinese organized-crime gang in the region. 
But an expert on Chinese gangs in America, Ko-lin Chin, said he doubted that the latest crackdown would prevent new gangs from emerging quickly.
"It's too optimistic to say this is the end of organized crime in Chinatown," said Mr. Chin, an assistant professor of criminology at Rutgers University in Newark and the author of two books on Chinese gangs. 
"There is a strong demand for gang services -- like protecting illegal gambling places, massage parlors, collecting loans, settling disputes among individuals and fraternal organizations and smuggling immigrants."
Announcing the latest indictments, Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of the state, said the Fukienese Flying Dragons preyed mainly on immigrants and merchants from the Fukien Province in China who now live in Chinatown, Brooklyn, Queens and in New Jersey.
Two accused gang members were charged with kidnapping a young woman at knifepoint from a street in Flushing, Queens, in December 1994, raping her and holding her captive until her relatives paid a $38,000 ransom. 
In battles for control of extortion and other protection rackets in Chinatown, the Fukienese gangsters were said in the indictments to have murdered two members of the rival Fuk Ching and Ghost Shadows gangs.
The gang members also were charged with committing nine robberies and extortions of four businesses and restaurants in the city, New Jersey and in Albany that generated about $200,000.
Ms. White, speaking at a news conference with about 50 Federal and state law-enforcement officials whose agencies participated in the year-long investigation, said that more arrests were imminent. 
"We believe," she added, "that we will break the back of the Fukienese Flying Dragons and are on the verge of finally freeing Chinatown from the grip of the violence and lawlessness that has plagued it for decades."
She declined to give details of how the gang was infiltrated or how evidence was obtained in the tightly knit group. 
But Ms. White noted that residents and merchants were becoming increasingly cooperative in reporting criminal activities and testifying against suspected gang members.
Ms. White said that the Fukienese gang brought in 200 immigrants in a boat that arrived off the coast of New Jersey in 1993. 
More than 100 were immediately taken hostage by the gang and kept in apartments in Chinatown and Brooklyn until ransoms of at least $30,000 for each person were paid, she said.
In 1992, Ms. White said, the gang had tried to slip 100 immigrants into the country from a ship, but the vessel was intercepted by Federal agents off the coast of Hawaii. 
The gang posted bail for about 50 of the illegal immigrants and then held them hostage in the city for ransoms, Ms. White said.
Chauncey G. Parker, the lead Federal prosecutor in the Fukienese gang case, said that the top leaders of the gang, Lee Shou Pao and Chen Guo Ren, were named in the indictments, but both are believed to have returned last year to China. 
They cannot be forcibly returned to face charges here because the United States does not have an extradition treaty with China, Mr. Parker said.
Mr. Chin of Rutgers University, who is doing a study on illegal immigration, said Chinese gang smugglers had apparently stopped using ships as a major method of entry. 
He said that many Chinese immigrants were entering illegally through Mexico or flying into the United States after obtaining fraudulent visas.
But he said that despite the indictments, the gang problems in Chinatown were likely to continue. 
Since the mid-1980's, Mr. Chin noted, Federal and state prosecutors have convicted more than 100 Chinese gangsters with pronouncements that the authorities had dismantled the notorious Ghost Shadows, Fuk Ching, Tung On, Hakka and the original Flying Dragons groups. 
"It does not matter how many gangs you wipe out," he added in an interview. 
"Sooner or later new ones will spring up to fill the vacuum."
Man Bun Lee, a former president of the Chinatown Consolidated Benevolent Association, the neighborhood's largest civic organization, said the Fukienese gang was viewed by many community leaders as the fourth largest criminal gang to spring up in the last decade. 
"It could be the last one," he said in an interview. 
"Who knows?"
