
The superlatives are swirling around the "Turandot" that will be mounted this September in a 500-year-old courtyard of the Forbidden City here.
With Zubin Mehta as conductor and artistic chief, the Chinese filmmaker Zhang Yimou as director and a colorful temple where emperors once offered sacrifices to their ancestors as a backdrop, this production is sure to be an Event.
"Turandot," the story of a cruel princess who finally succumbs to love, was Puccini's idea of a Chinese fairy tale, and not a few impresarios have imagined it among the splendors of the Forbidden City. 
But this is the first time anyone has managed to fight through Chinese red tape and pull it off. 
Eight performances are scheduled, from Sept. 
5 to 13.
The production will have a budget of $15 million, Michael Ecker, the Switzerland-based co-producer, said at a news conference on Wednesday on the old palace grounds.
Mr. Mehta and Mr. Zhang, the filmmaker known for "Red Sorghum" and "Raise the Red Lantern," had a trial run with the production last year in Florence. 
The producers would like to attract up to 20,000 fans from abroad and are hoping companies will buy blocks of seats.
Still, Mr. Ecker said he expected that most viewers would be Chinese, adding that prices would be cut for local residents at two performances. 
The production will be broadcast on television in much of the world.
Mr. Mehta, speaking by television hookup from Munich, said that acoustics presented a challenge in the outdoor setting, but that he was confident that the sound engineers could create opera house quality.
The Florence Opera/Maggio Musicale Fiorentino will provide the orchestra and chorus, as it did last year. 
Chinese artists will design the sets, Ming-style costumes and choreography; a Chinese ballet company, children's chorus and 500 extras will complete the cast.
Turandot will be sung by Sharon Sweet, Giovanna Casolla and Audrey Stottler; Liu by Angela Maria Blasi, Barbara Frittoli and Barbara Hendricks, and Calaf by Lando Bartolini, Kristjan Johansson and Sergej Larin.
Each performance can be attended by 4,200 people. 
Tickets start at $150, but those including a gala dinner with the performers cost $350, and "sponsors" will pay $1,500.
At the news conference, Mr. Zhang wore his usual doleful expression until Mr. Mehta appeared on the television hookup. 
Mr. Zhang's face came to life as he waved to the camera, exclaiming, "Maestro Mehta, it looks like you've lost some weight!"
Mr. Zhang said he hoped to create an atmosphere of fraternity through the production and join people of different countries in a "spiritual and emotional exchange."
The official embrace for "Turandot" contrasts with the debacle of "The Peony Pavilion," which was not mentioned at the news conference. 
A Shanghai company was to perform the classic Chinese opera at the Lincoln Center Festival in New York this month, but a cultural official stopped the company from leaving China, saying the production was pornographic and violated tradition.
