
In the free markets of the new China, young men are coming to realize that there is something even more precious than a new car, an electronic pager or a Swiss-made watch.
And that rare commodity -- an unmarried woman -- is becoming harder and harder to find.
There are not nearly enough of them, a situation that is creating anguish for millions of Chinese men and has at least the potential of revolutionizing the status of women in this traditionally sexist society.
"What sort of woman do I want?" said Xu Wenyuan, a lonely 30-year-old who agreed to dress up in a sky-blue satin suit and to warble a few bars of "Song for the Motherland" on a television matchmaking show in Beijing. 
"It doesn't matter."
If he had hoped to prove his desperation in the search for a wife, Mr. Xu succeeded in those two minutes in front of the cameras. 
"Women are so hard to find now," he explained. 
"And I just want one."
For Mr. Xu and other Chinese men in search of love, the offerings of the Chinese State Statistical Bureau are downright heartbreaking. 
The 1990 census showed that of a total population of 1.2 billion, about 205 million Chinese over the age of 15 are single. 
And of those, there are nearly three men for every two women.
A 3-to-2 ratio might seem bad enough to most men. 
But the numbers suggest that the situation becomes far, far bleaker for a Chinese man the longer he stays unmarried.
The Government's figures show that while the vast majority of Chinese adults marry by the time they turn 30, eight million people in their 30's were still single in 1990. 
And in that age group, the men outnumbered the women by nearly 10 to 1.
There is an ugly explanation for the relative scarcity of unmarried women: the desire among many Chinese couples for boys at almost any cost.
The preference for boys has meant that millions of Chinese girls have not survived to adulthood because of poor nutrition, inadequate medical care, desertion and even murder at the hands of their parents.
China's strict rule of one child per family, imposed in the late 1970's and meant to defuse a population time bomb, has only worsened the insistence on having male heirs. 
Ultrasound machines and ready access to abortion have made it relatively simple for parents to guarantee that their one child is a boy.
 
Nature's Revenge
But after generations of tampering with nature, nature has begun to exact its revenge. 
The numbers suggest that tens of millions of men alive at the turn of the century will be lifelong bachelors because there will not be enough women available as wives.
"Of the young people who come into this office, at least 70 percent are men," said Li Xiaotong, a Beijing social worker whose Government-sponsored computer dating service is swamped by eager men searching for a mate.
"The girls are very happy with this service," Ms. Li said, "because they can set their standards very high for a prospective husband -- intelligence, education, money -- and then have a good chance of finding a man who meets their standards."
Her grin suggested that there was some justice in all of this.
"The men always ask for beautiful girls," she said, "and I tell them that they must be realistic. 
The goals they set must not be too high, because there are not enough women."
Apart from having their pick of prospective husbands, Chinese women may find another silver lining in the numbers churned out by the Government's demographers.
In a China newly receptive to capitalism, people are being reminded that in the free market, scarcity equals value. 
And so it could be for Chinese women after centuries in which the supply of potential brides equaled demand, and they could be -- and were -- treated as chattel.
"I do think that to some extent this shortage of women will play a positive role in improving the status of all women," said Guo Daofu, a senior economist for the State Statistical Bureau. 
"I think this will lead to changes in society. 
Men will have to become more open-minded."
He said a new open-mindedness could be of particular benefit to older unmarried women, who have traditionally had almost no hope of finding a husband. 
Custom here holds that a man should marry a woman at least several years younger, and that the bride should have less education. 
A result is that even after the age of 30, women, especially educated ones, have few prospects.
"There is a saying in the countryside that a man who marries a woman who is three years older has found a bar of gold -- that he can benefit from her maturity," Mr. Guo said. 
"Now, I think many more men will act" on this proverb.
There are several theories about how a badly lopsided sex ratio would affect -- and probably improve -- the status of Chinese women. 
A Western diplomat who has studied the situation said the Government might be forced to offer incentives, like educational benefits and tax breaks, to encourage couples to have girls.
"If this Government made it not only acceptable but in some cases preferable to have girls, you'd see a huge change in the way women are treated throughout society," he said.
While China's leaders tend to welcome anything that will limit population growth in the world's most populous country, there is alarm about the consequences of so many single men in a society that values the family above all else.
Chinese sociologists and journalists have suggested that with men unable to find wives as sexual partners, there could be an increase in prostitution, rape and -- among men -- suicide.
"This discrepancy between the sexes is a matter of serious discussion among our Government leaders," said Wang Wei, a professor of ethics at the People's University in Beijing. 
He pointed to a series of kidnappings in which city women have been abducted by bounty hunters who deliver them to rural farmers desperate for brides. 
"You could see more of that," he said.
Although the problem is more serious here if only because of its vast population, China is not the only country facing a crush of single men.
Figures compiled by the United Nations show that the world's second most populous nation, India, with nearly 900 million people, has nearly 133 single men for every 100 single women. 
As in China, Indian custom demands that couples produce male heirs.
In the industrialized world, the ratios are much smaller, and in some countries single women outnumber single men. 
According to the 1990 census in the United States, there were more unmarried American women than unmarried men, about 54 percent of unmarried adults to 46 percent. 
A similar ratio was found in Japan in a 1985 survey.
Perhaps no one knows more about the scarcity of unmarried women than China's best-known matchmaker: Yang Guang, the host of "We Meet Tonight," the popular matchmaking television show.
 
Bachelors Get Bold
For 20 minutes every Friday night, Ms. Yang invites a group of single men and women to make a televised pitch for a mate in a cross between "Dating Game" and a talent show.
"We receive very few applications from young women who are willing to appear as contestants," said Ms. Yang, whose show takes credit for 274 marriages since it went on the air four years ago. 
"The men are much more bold about agreeing to appear. 
And they are bold because they have to be."
During the show, viewers are invited to write in for a date, and the plight of China's single men becomes all the clearer when the mailbags begin to arrive in the studio the next day.
"Maybe a man who appears on the show will get 30 letters," Ms. Yang said. 
"But a woman will get over 50, sometimes 60. 
Sometimes many more. 
Our record-holder is a 24-year-old woman who got more than 500 letters."
Many Chinese men are being driven to look at what are, certainly by Chinese standards, unconventional ways of finding a bride.
The first computer dating service, the Great Wall Information Company, opened in Beijing in 1989, and others have followed. 
Some provincial and city governments have stepped in with their own matchmaking services. 
But whether high-tech or traditional, the marriage brokers all suffer from the same problem: a dearth of available women.
 
Lonely Hearts on Street
The quandary of the lonely Chinese male is evident in the hangdog looks of the young men who gather on Saturday afternoons to watch the passing crowds along Wangfujing Street, the heart of Beijing's central shopping district.
Rows of these lonely hearts lean against the storefronts, hoping that some young woman will return their stares. 
It rarely happens, they say with a moan.
"Sometimes the girls are very stuck up, very choosy about whether they will consider a boy for a husband," said Wang Jian, an engineering student who, at 22, worries that he may never find a mate.
His friend Meng Yuchang, 23, was even more inconsolable. 
"Without enough women, maybe we will all become monks," he said, kicking the toe of his sneaker against the sidewalk. 
"This whole generation of Chinese men will become monks. 
And maybe then the women will feel sorry for us."
