
The sons of President Jiang Zemin of China and one of Taiwan's most powerful men broke ground last week on a $1.63 billion computer-chip plant that will be freighted with as much political symbolism as commercial potential.
Many people say the factory -- a cooperative venture between Mr. Jiang's son, Jiang Mianheng, and Winston Wang, the son of Wang Yung-ching, chairman of Taiwan's largest private industrial company, Formosa Plastics -- will herald the gradual shift of the Asian computer industry away from its base in Taiwan to China.
But the plant will also be an emblem of the eventual economic integration of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait that some people say will pave the way for political unification.
Though China and Taiwan remain separated by a half-century-old civil war, Taiwanese businessmen have pumped about $50 billion into the mainland. 
That growing economic bond could become the bridge for a political settlement between Beijing and Taipei, much as Hong Kong's economic dependence on the mainland facilitated the former British colony's return to China three years ago.
Never has there been such a public step toward that goal than the recent cooperation. 
The two men symbolically began construction of the plant, the most public step yet toward economic integration between China and Taiwan, in a field east of Shanghai last week amid the cacophony of a dragon dance and a soaring flock of helium balloons.
"It expresses the wish that Taiwan and China can advance together by joining hands," said Henry Huang, a Taiwanese who will run the plant's production planning department. 
He said both of the famous sons "share a dream that China will be a stronger country in the next century."
China's fast-growing market for computer chips, together with its well-educated workers who work for lower wages, and its plentiful land, makes the country a natural base for the world's semiconductor manufacturing, much of which is now concentrated in northern Taiwan.
Since a devastating earthquake shut down tremor-prone factories in Taiwan a year ago -- sending chip prices surging worldwide -- semiconductor makers have been looking for less-vulnerable manufacturing sites to satisfy customer demand for more-diversified sources of supply. 
Chip users also worry that hostilities between Beijing and Taipei could cripple the industry.
China already has six semiconductor foundries, factories that make the circuit-etched silicon wafers at the heart of computer chips. 
NEC of Japan built a $1.2 billion joint venture silicon wafer fabrication plant in Shanghai two years ago. 
And Motorola is building a $1.9 billion wholly owned silicon "wafer fab" and computer chip assembly plant in the northeastern city of Tianjin.
None of the products from those plants compares with the modern chips produced in Taiwan, But the new plant will make eight-inch wafers etched with circuits that measure just 0.25 micron across. 
A micron is one-millionth of a meter. 
That is still several generations behind the latest 12-inch, 0.1-micron technology elsewhere in the world, but is enough to make the plant the most advanced of its kind in China.
The plant is the first of four that Mr. Jiang and Mr. Wang plan to build on a 60-acre plot in the Pudong development zone in Shanghai. 
Plants built in the future will have even more-sophisticated technology, factory officials said.
Already, a third of Taiwan's personal computer hardware is made in mainland factories, and China will soon overtake the island as the world's third-largest manufacturer of personal computer hardware, behind the United States and Japan.
Yet, almost all of the chips used in PC's assembled in China are imported from abroad. 
That is something China wants to change.
The trend concerns Taiwan officials. 
Worried that its negotiating position over any eventual reunification will be compromised by economic dependence on the mainland, Taiwan's government has banned investments in China of more than $50 million and forbidden its citizens to put money into strategic sectors like high-end chip making on the mainland. 
For that reason, neither Mr. Jiang nor Mr. Wang will officially hold any equity in the Shanghai Grace Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation, the wholly foreign owned company that will build the planned Shanghai plant. 
Mr. Jiang will serve as the company's vice chairman and Mr. Wang as its president and chief executive officer.
But the company's name reflects its association with Mr. Wang's Grace T.H.W. 
Group, and much of the investment will come indirectly from Taiwan. 
Most Taiwanese investment on the mainland is made through offshore shell companies, many based in Hong Kong.
Two mainland companies associated with Mr. Jiang, meanwhile, own a combined 10 percent stake in two other companies that Mr. Wang has established in Shanghai.
Growing economic ties are "creating great psychological pressure in Taiwan," acknowledged Mr. Huang. But, he added, "investors have to look to the future."
