
As the old fable tells us, sometimes slow and steady wins the race.
While some designers make a big splash with their first collections and then fade away when they can't follow through, others start quietly and work their way up to a breakthrough collection. 
By the time success comes, these slow starters have proved that they have more than one idea and don't have to play the same note over and over again.
It took Han Feng eight years to achieve her breakthrough. 
It happened at her fall show last month when she made the leap from being a maker of pleated scarfs and dresses to becoming a designer of coats, tailored suits, evening dresses and furs.
"I wanted to show I could do fitted clothes as well as pleats," she said last week in the showroom she maintains in her apartment on the Upper West Side.
Her business office is in the garment center, but 30-odd blocks uptown, retailers can see and touch the clothes in a round room with light streaming in from three big windows. 
It's a peaceful oasis where the designer serves freshly brewed mint tea while her birds chirp in the background.
Han Feng studied graphic design, not fashion design, in China, where she was born and lived until 10 years ago.
"I was born during the Cultural Revolution, and we had no fashion," the 32-year-old designer said. 
"But I wanted to be a designer. 
I got a T-shirt and jeans and grew my hair long so I would stand out."
To stand out in New York, she now wears her hair in a crew cut.
"I don't have formal training in designing and I don't know what traditional styles are, so I design what I like," she said. 
"I like a small silhouette, very simple, with covered-up legs and breasts and unexpected slits on the sides or in back. 
I like to play with shape. 
I don't sketch. 
I play on the mannequin, drawing on the body to show the pattern maker what I want."
All her clothes are made in New York. 
The fall collection is based on curves. 
There are curved seams that bring jackets close to the body, curved collars that frame the neck, curved backs that give a cocoonlike shape to pleated silk evening jackets and velvet coats.
She used silk duoppioni for the jackets, silk velvet for the coats, silk and wool blends for coats, silk satin for shirts and tunics, silk georgette for evening dresses and silk organza for ball-gown skirts that are poufed with little ribbon ties.
Han Feng's love of silk goes back to her hometown, Hangzhou, near Shanghai, in an area noted for silk and green tea. 
She met her husband, Stuart Schonberger, while she was a student at an art school in Hangzhou and he was teaching English there.
"He grew up in Westchester and went to China after college because his parents had traveled there and wanted him to see it," she said. 
"When we came to New York in 1985, I knew no English. 
I studied English for six months and got a job as a saleswoman at Bloomingdale's.
"My husband got his M.B.A. and worked in a bank for five years, then went back to China. 
He runs an auto repair school in China now with his partners, an Israeli and a Chinese, but he travels back and forth to New York."
Han Feng said she always knew she would come to this country. 
"A psychic in China told me that when I was born, everything was facing America," she said. 
"So I had to come here."
Han (pronounced HAHN) is her Chinese surname and Feng (pronounced FANG), which means red leaf, is her given name, but she always uses the two names together. 
"To help people remember, I tell them to think of 'have fun,' " she said, "and they remember."
Like many hopeful designers, Han Feng started by making clothes for herself. 
After leaving Bloomingdale's because her limited English kept her from a promotion to buyer, she worked for S. Shamash & Sons, a silk importer in New York. 
There she cut swatches and dealt with some of the company's small customers. 
When people admired clothes she made, she took a pleated skirt and top to a shop in SoHo, which bought them and offered to buy anything else she made.
"I quit my job and started making clothes for the shop, but it went out of business six months later and I was left with all this fabric," she said. 
"So I made scarfs and took them to Henri Bendel and Barneys, to Bergdorf Goodman and Neiman Marcus."
When she went to Chicago for Bendel's to make a store appearance, the buyer asked her to make a blouse for the holiday selling period.
"I made two," she said. 
"Dramatic blouses. 
And the buyer reordered. 
So I decided this was a quicker way to make money than scarfs. 
I made six pieces for spring and they sold out."
By 1993, she was ready for a show, albeit a small one, just 20 pieces modeled at the Alternative Museum in SoHo. 
In April of last year, she graduated to the Seventh on Sixth shows in Bryant Park, but with a collection that was still basically pleated.
The full-fledged collection she showed last month attracted many new buyers from specialty and department stores, including Dayton Hudson in this country, Brown's in London and Isetan in Malaysia and Singapore. 
Neiman Marcus has added her clothes to more of its branches, and Henri Bendel will sell the entire collection as her exclusive outlet in New York.
On May 24, Han Feng will be one of eight designers of Asian ancestry to be honored by the Asian American Federation of New York at a dinner dance at the United Nations. 
She'll be in good company. 
The other honorees include Anna Sui, Josie Natori, Yeohlee Teng and Vera Wang.
