
IT is at dawn that the murky waters of the Yangtze River are most mysterious. 
As little cargo boats emerge from the mist like apparitions, it seems entirely possible that the Three Gorges here in central China were formed not by geological forces but by the goddess Yao Ji and the 12 dragons.
The 12 dragons, as local folk can tell you, used to bully and oppress the peasants along the Yangtze. 
Then Yao Ji showed up on the top of a nearby cloud and pointed her finger at the dragons, killing them. 
Unfortunately, the goddess hadn't thought the problem through. 
The bodies of the dragons left 12 huge mountains that blocked the river and turned the region into a huge sea.
Then the goddess figured out a way to carve a channel through the dragon-mountains. 
That channel became the Yangtze River gorges, and the goddess stayed behind in the form of a rock pinnacle.
The Three Gorges, extending 120 miles in the midreaches of the Yangtze River, remain one of the most famous tourist sites in China. 
Thousands of foreigners and even more Chinese each year take a leisurely three- to five-day cruise up or down the river through the belly of China. 
Several dozen cruise boats, some with swimming pools, discos and karaoke bars, ply the Yangtze. 
Now the trips are particularly in demand because of fears that a huge dam just beginning construction will flood the entire area and destroy the scenery.
I traveled through the Three Gorges in late May on one of the best boats, the Yangtze Paradise. 
Some 285 feet long, the Paradise has 70 cabins, an observation deck, a couple of coffee shops, a souvenir shop, a bar and a tiny swimming pool that was empty during my voyage. 
Perhaps more important, it has clean sheets, decent food and better commitment to modern hygiene.
Like most travelers, I boarded the ship in Chongqing and traveled downriver. 
For those with time on their hands, however, the journey upriver is a good alternative, because the boats have fewer passengers and the pace is somewhat slower. 
The downriver journey takes three to four days, while it takes a day longer traveling against the current.
Chongqing, which used to be known as Chungking, is a crowded, polluted rabbit warren of a city in Sichuan Province, 900 miles southwest of Beijing. 
Yet the city, divided by two rivers and built against a hillside, offers a much more authentic glimpse of China than the cities tourists normally see, Beijing and Shanghai.
The sailing was set for 8 A.M., so by 7:30 I was at the dock, a frenzied herd of would-be porters surrounding my car and pressing against the windows. 
"If you get a porter to help you with your luggage, be sure to fix the amount before he touches your suitcase," the driver warned. 
"A while ago I took some Germans here, and the porters helped them to the boat. 
But the porters refused to give them back their luggage until they paid some outrageous amount. 
The Germans almost missed their boat."
With that warning, I decided to carry my own bags and slipped through the throngs of porters down a steep set of stairs to the water's edge and across a gangplank to the Yangtze Paradise.
"Hi, my name is Ben," said a tall Chinese man in his mid-20's, in fluent English. 
"I'm the cruise director."
After picking up my key, I inspected my cabin. 
It was scarcely bigger than a king-sized bed, but contained two single beds -- I was traveling with a Canadian journalist -- a night table, a desk, a stuffed chair and a small bathroom with a shower. 
A narrow door opened onto a balcony with just enough room for the two chairs provided, and over the next few days the balcony proved a wonderful escape from the cabin.
The cabin was clean and air-conditioned, perfectly comfortable but a bit worn and dowdy. 
Facilities in Communist countries often look old and faded within a week of opening, and so it was with the cabin. 
My wallpaper, for example, was stained to a degree that in other countries it would have been replaced; in China, the staff would have regarded it as perfectly silly to discard wallpaper just because of a few character-building stains.
The Yangtze Paradise was much the same. 
From a distance, it looked sleek and graceful, a swan compared to the rusty hulks carrying freight up and down the river. 
But up close, nothing ever worked quite as well as it was supposed to. 
The coffee shops were mostly unstaffed, so that it was a major triumph to get service. 
There was a nice fitness center, but the stationary bicycle and most of the other equipment was broken. 
And the rat . . . but wait, I'm getting ahead of my story.
The Yangtze Paradise, as Ben explained to all the passengers as we gathered in the lounge shortly after departure, was launched in 1991. 
It can accommodate 130 guests; only 91 were on board. 
This perplexed me, as when I made the booking -- three months earlier -- I was told that the Paradise was booked solid, and it was only after considerable time and effort that I was able to reserve a ticket. 
One couple at my table had paid a bribe to get tickets, for they were told that everything was sold out.
The cities along the Yangtze are known as the "furnaces" of China, because of their unrelenting summers, and so I had brought several pairs of shorts and short-sleeve shirts. 
I thought about that as I huddled in a windbreaker on deck, occasional raindrops plunking down on me, watching the landscape. 
From May through September, the temperature is normally very hot, often well above 90 degrees, but my trip was a reminder that the weather is unreliable. 
I wish I could say that I stared over the deck rail at the churning waters and the river bank, overwhelmed by the beauty and mysteries of China. 
Instead, I gazed at the filth and litter in the water, contemplating how polluted the Yangtze has become. 
Beyond the opaque brown river, the river banks were ugly and industrial, with one hulking factory next to another.
The Yangtze, of course, is one of the most important rivers in Asia. 
Some 35 percent of all Chinese, accounting for 8 percent of all humanity, live in the Yangtze basin. 
It is a crucial economic highway for the development of interior provinces.
But an important river is not necessarily a beautiful river, and I decided that at least the stretch below Chongqing is not very scenic. 
Perhaps the gorges themselves would be.
That evening the boat made the first of five stops, in the grimy Sichuanese county seat of Wanxian. 
The night market in the center of town -- a mile from the dock -- is a jumble of peddlers selling everything from live chickens to wicker chairs to racy magazines. 
It's worth a walk around, not because it's charming, but because it's bleak and ugly: Wanxian is fairly typical of the county towns all over China that foreign tourists do not normally visit.
The next morning, after a pleasant sleep in my cabin, we reached the first of the Three Gorges. 
The Yangtze Paradise has a spacious observation deck that offers a full view in every direction while guests sit in comfortable chairs and sip lukewarm tar -- well, the waitress said it was coffee.
As the boat entered the gorge, with high mountains rising on each side, I didn't hear many "oohs" or "aaahs" from the other travelers. 
Instead, there were plenty of appreciative "mmmmm's," and that was how I felt. 
With steep cliffs on either side of the narrow channel, it was certainly scenic, but not so spectacular that I would advise someone to travel halfway around the world to see it. 
.
The same was also true of the second gorge, which we saw that evening, and the third, which we passed through the next morning. 
In fact, those of us on the observation deck were getting impatient for the second gorge and finally asked a waitress when we would enter it. 
"Don't you know?" she said, shocked. 
"This is the second gorge. 
We've been in it for 20 minutes now."
Most of the other people with whom I talked on the boat had a similar reaction to the Three Gorges, but we were genuinely impressed by a side trip on the second day to the Lesser Three Gorges. 
These are on the Daning River, a tributary of the Yangtze, and nearly all cruise boats make the seven-hour side trip.
Because the Daning is narrow and shallow, we transferred to a group of motorboats that could each carry about 20 people. 
With the motorboat's awning pulled back and the spray of the rapids around us, the boat ride was much more engaging than the one on the Yangtze. 
The toilets on the small boat were so dirty that we all limited our intake of beverages.
The Daning is a pretty little river, a refreshing turquoise after the brown of the Yangtze, flanked alternately by steep cliffs and gentle tree-lined slopes. 
The boatmen point to odd-shaped formations that are thought, with some stretch of the imagination, to resemble pandas, Buddhas and goddesses.
Perhaps the most interesting stop was Zigui, a county seat where we docked for the second night of the cruise. 
A famous poet and statesman, Qu Yuan, committed suicide in about 288 B.C. by leaping into the river here. 
His suicide is commemmorated each spring with dragon boat races, held especially for tourists, who can participate, whenever a cruise boat pulls up. 
It's all rather hokey, but everybody seemed to have fun. 
We also explored Zigui and visited a temple honoring Qu Yuan.
Trips to the Three Gorges have been particularly popular in the last few years because of fears that the area will be inundated by the Three Gorges Dam, but "farewell tours" seem a bit premature. 
Opposition to the dam, which would be the world's largest hydro-electric project if it is completed when scheduled, about 17 years from now, remains considerable, and there is some prospect that the scheme will be quietly dropped after the death of China's 89-year-old senior leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Although the 607-foot-high dam would not destroy the landscape, it would change it radically, raising the level of the water and making the vistas less dramatic -- something that already happened with the construction of the Gezhouba Dam in the 1970's and 1980's. 
Accounts from several decades ago describe the Three Gorges as exciting rapids with boulders and whirlpools. 
Now the gorges are placid and much deeper than they used to be.
Some American friends who have taken Three Gorges cruises complain that the other passengers were mostly Taiwanese who could not speak English and with whom they had little in common.
BUT on the Yangtze Paradise, the passengers -- primarily Americans, with smaller numbers of Europeans, Japanese and Taiwanese -- were very companionable, and we enjoyed long and friendly meals with new friends. 
The meals were large and reasonably good, all served in a modern and spacious dining room with clean tablecloths. 
The food was all Chinese, except that Western breakfasts -- toast and eggs -- were also offered. 
A typical lunch or dinner included rice, a diced chicken dish, a stir-fried vegetable or two, spicy minced pork and a fish, with fruit for dessert.
Among those assigned to my table were two young Britons who turned out to be the Earl and Countess of Dalkeith. 
They were pleasant conversationalists who enjoyed the trip, at least until the final morning.
It was about 5 A.M., in their cabin, that the Earl suddenly was awakened by a pain in his finger. 
He looked down to see a rat (or perhaps just a mouse) nibbling his hand. 
It ran away, leaving only a bit of blood, considerable commotion, and anxiety about rabies and other diseases. 
The boat had a Chinese doctor on board, but she turned out to be an ophthalmologist who spoke no English and knew nothing about animal bites. 
Perhaps the most distressing aspect of the incident was that the boat staff did not seem particularly surprised. 
In fact, I discovered rat poison beneath my bed as well, and a crew member explained that, on the Yangtze, rats come with the river.
Now that I've ruined the sleep of any reader who takes a Yangtze cruise any time soon, I should add that I have never heard of any other foreigner's seeing a rat on board a foreign cruise boat on the Yangtze. 
Still, like many visitors, I found the Yangtze Gorges fell short of my expectations. 
There are plenty of sights in China that are far more captivating: the Forbidden City in Beijing, the terra cotta warriors of Xian, the Potala palace in Lhasa, Tibet, the huge carved Buddhas of Datong, the painted caves of Dunhuang, sacred Mount Tai in Shandong Province, even the day cruises along the Li River in Guilin.
Yet, for all that, floating down the Yangtze past the Three Gorges is a pleasant break, a respite from the trains and planes that normally whisk tourists around the country. 
But temper your expectations, because some of the praise for the gorges can be attributed to poetic license -- like these lines of Guo Moruo earlier in this century:
 
Cliffs rise like walls on both banks,
Guarding the river's zigzag course.
Rosy cloud brightens the army hats,
And the river roars in the mist.
 
 
 
A VISITOR'S GUIDE TO CRUISING IN CHINA
Getting There
The shortest Three Gorges cruise is just two-and-a-half days on the water from Chongqing to the rather dull city of Yichang. 
However, Yichang does not now have a functioning airport, and so disembarking passengers must take an overnight train -- quite comfortable -- to the major industrial city of Wuhan and fly from there. 
It is also possible to continue on the boat from Yichang to Wuhan, although this adds a day to the schedule.
Many cruise guides say that the Yangtze Paradise is the best boat on the river; other relatively good ones include the Bashan, the Yangzijiang, the Yangtze Pearl and the Yangtze Princess. 
Two new boats, China Glory and China Dream, are supposed to go into service next year. 
But all 20 of the boats for foreigners are reasonably clean and comfortable.
When side trips such as the Lesser Three Gorges visit are included, a four-day Chongqing-Wuhan cruise on the Paradise costs $690 a person sharing a standard double cabin. 
The price is about $510 in July and August, when the Three Gorges are extremely hot, or in the late fall or early spring, when the area can approach freezing. 
The longer upriver journey costs $620 in the peak season and $480 in the slack season. 
(Probably the best time to go is May to June and from late August to early October.) These figures include meals, but a cabin with a balcony -- much recommended -- is $50 more a person. 
Less luxurious boats than the Paradise are a bit cheaper.
Generally, single-occupancy cabins cost 75 percent more than the price of a bed in a double. 
There are also deluxe double cabins for as much as $1,200 a person.
Travel agents sometimes tack on their own profit margins, and so visitors frequently spend much more than the sums mentioned above. 
An American biochemist at my dining table paid $1,600 each for himself and his wife for the Three Gorges trip, including air fare from Hong Kong, two nights in a hotel in Chongqing and one night in Wuhan.
Even in Beijing, I found that prices varied by 50 percent or more for identical Three Gorges packages. 
Within China, the most reasonable and efficient travel agency that I could find for booking Three Gorges tours was the Hubei China International Travel Service, 48 Jianghan Yilu, Hankou, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430021, China; phone (86-27) 221-265, fax 211-891. 
The sales director is Wu Dandan. 
While it may be more convenient to book through an American travel agent, Ms. Wu can accept overseas orders.
The trip is not physically demanding, but at several of the ports of call there are gangplanks and dozens of steps. 
This might not be the best cruise for those who have difficulty getting about.
 
Where to Stay
The best place to stay in Chongqing is the Holiday Inn, 15 Nan Ping Bei Lu, Chongqing 630064; (86-811) 203-380, fax 200-884; $97.75 a night for a double room including tax.
In Wuhan, the best accommodations are at the Asia Hotel, 300 Jie Fang Da Dao, Hankou, Wuhan 430030; (86-27) 568-777, fax 559-372. 
Double rooms are $69 a night including tax. 
Both the Asia Hotel and the Chongqing Holiday Inn can pick up guests at the airport for an extra charge if arranged in advance.
It is safest to plan on having an extra day in Chongqing, for otherwise a delayed flight could cause you to miss your cruise.
If you are traveling to the dock yourself to board the boat, be sure to find out from your hotel the number of the dock assigned to your cruise boat. 
Otherwise, you may find yourself frantically searching for your boat at departure time.
 
What to Take
The cruises are very informal, as is China generally, so there is no need to take suits or fancy dresses. 
Shorts and T-shirts are very much accepted.
A useful picture book with text, "The Three Gorges on the Yangtze River," is available in Chongqing and on some of the boats. 
Also useful is "The Three Gorges of the Yangtze River, a Guide for Tourists," but this is rather more difficult to find.
English books and magazines are generally harder to find in China.
