
Just after dawn today, a senior staff member of an international women's forum assembling here left her hotel room for stroll around Huairou reservoir, where the mist-shrouded Fragrant Hills loomed to the west and the morning light caught delicate pagodas in silhouette.
A Chinese policeman stepped into her path and ordered her back to her room.
Later in the day, another senior official of the forum, a gathering parallel to the Fourth World Conference on Women, found men with walkie-talkies going through her belongings. 
When she challenged them, they said they were in her room to pick up the laundry.
In the final day of preparation for the opening of the forum of nongovernmental organizations, known as the N.G.O. forum, Beijing was awash in recriminations over China's management of this mammoth meeting.
"It has been a very long day," said Colleen McCabe, a spokeswoman for the forum, which has attracted nearly 30,000 women to this distant suburb of Beijing.
After a long struggle to get here, most of the women in the forum have hotel rooms, but many are running short of patience.
"A lot of people have been searched," Ms. McCabe said, "and I've had at least a thousand questions from journalists about when and where the demonstrations are going to begin," she said.
The reason for the questions is that many of the women arriving here are angry. 
The Chinese Government held up some visas; denied visas to hundreds, perhaps thousands, of others; separated the nongovernmental forum from the main United Nations conference, which is an hour away in Beijing, and generally treated this convocation of women's advocacy groups as a hostile force invading China.
Perhaps because of the mood, the Government tried to impose some last-minute limitations on public expression.
At a morning press conference, Tian Qiyu, China's Vice Minister for Public Security, acknowledged the longstanding agreement that women could demonstrate on the land that had been made available to the United Nations.
But, he added, referring to the forum site here: "Within the designated area, relevant organizations can have processions and demonstrations, but these activities should not infringe upon the sovereignty of the host country and should not attack or slander the state leaders of the host country, nor shall such activities be allowed in which violence is taking place against other persons."
Mr. Tian's statement, made in Beijing, reverberated through Huairou within hours, further agitating many of the women preparing their agenda for the United Nations conference, which runs from Sept. 
4 to 15 in Beijing.
After all, they say, China actively pursued the opportunity to play host to the conference to begin with.
But in recent months China has arrested dissidents, pushed migrant workers out of Beijing, rounded up prostitutes and the homeless and executed dozens of people around the country in what was described as a law and order crackdown. 
The action was an echo of the kind of rough justice that marked the period when the International Olympic Committee was considering Beijing as a site for the 2000 games.
Amnesty International, which was allowed into China for the first time in the history of the human rights group, denounced the campaign of arrests and repression that preceded the conference, including the execution of 16 people.
Pierre Sane, the secretary general of the organization, said, "We have heard virtually every excuse from Governments to justify human rights violations, but this is simply unbelievable: to welcome the world to Beijing, people must die?"
A Chinese Government spokesman, Chen Jian, retorted later, "Amnesty International is an organization that has always harbored deep prejudices against China, and its allegations are groundless."
"We didn't do those things they claimed," Mr, Chen said. 
The executions were reported earlier in a Beijing newspaper controlled by the Communist Party.
In the afternoon, Mr. Chen amended the statement of the Public Security official, saying, "These two conferences are U.N. conferences, and the place where these conferences are held are U.N.-designated premises."
But he added: "Any organization or individuals attending the World Conference on Women should not use it as an opportunity to interfere in China's internal affairs. 
All activities outside these areas must abide by Chinese laws and regulations."
      
