
The Prime Minister of China, Zhu Rongji, began his visit to the United States today, determined to defuse rising tensions between the two countries with a business-like agenda, trade concessions and an ample supply of good humor.
Mr. Zhu, who runs China's Government day-to-day but ranks third in the Communist Party hierarchy, is, at age 70, the sprightly star of his nation's taciturn leadership team. 
This trip promises to test his often-praised skill for communicating with the West. 
That is a skill in short supply these days as the goodwill in United States-China relations, which was affirmed with President Clinton's visit to China last year, has all but given way to restrained hostility.
Mr. Zhu wasted no time setting the tone. 
Moments after stepping off his plane, he jumped a security line to shake hands and exchange pleasantries with reporters. 
In the process he firmly pushed aside one of his guards, a possibly calculated gesture of defiance to the decorum Chinese leaders almost always observe during public ceremonies.
Mr. Zhu's nine-day, six-city tour is slightly longer than a state visit in 1997 by his boss, President Jiang Zemin, but far less ceremonial. 
His plans include attending to down-to-the-wire negotiations over the terms of China's entry into the World Trade Organization. 
He has also scheduled numerous meetings with business and banking leaders around the country and will seek to address nearly every hot-button issue in bilateral relations, including China's human-rights record, its environmental pollution, its huge trade surplus with the United States, and charges that its agents have pilfered American military secrets.
During a brief stop in Los Angeles before diving into the diplomatic deep end of his mission in Washington on Thursday, Mr. Zhu met with civic leaders and representatives of the local Chinese-American community, the largest in the country. 
He also had a private audience with Michael Eisner, chairman of Disney. 
Mr. Eisner recently presided over a high-profile bidding war between two Chinese cities, Hong Kong and Shanghai, to be the venue for the next Asian Disneyland.
Bone-chilling drizzle and scattered protests by people seeking independence for Tibet and Taiwan marred Mr. Zhu's arrival. 
So did his tardiness at a lunch at the Century Plaza Hotel, where civic and business leaders, from the former Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, to the fallen junk bond financier, Michael Milken, waited more than an hour past the appointed time for Mr. Zhu to take his place on the podium. 
But those setbacks did nothing to shake the Prime Minister's upbeat message. 
In fact, he used them as fodder for a stream of self-deprecating jokes that are his trademark.
"God does not welcome me that much because it's raining today and I know that it was very sunny here yesterday," he said, beginning his luncheon remarks. 
Speaking in Chinese entirely without notes and with scant trace of the boilerplate phrases about friendship and warm relations that usually dominate Chinese diplomatic statements, Mr. Zhu used much of his opening speech as an apology for arriving late to lunch.
He chided Mayor Richard J. Riordan of Los Angeles and Gov. Gray Davis of California, explaining that they must shoulder at least "half the blame" for his lack of punctuality. 
Both men had arranged telephone calls with Mr. Zhu, but used that time to raise weighty issues, he said. 
"They asked so many questions and I could not refuse to answer."
The mayor, he said, pressed him on China's gaping trade surplus with the United States. 
China exported $57 billion more than it imported from the United States last year, giving it the second-largest trade surplus with the United States after Japan. 
Mr. Zhu said he had originally prepared a speech on the issue for delivery next week at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass., but had no choice but to indulge Mr. Riordan's curiosity.
The Prime Minister then teased Mr. Davis for expanding the 10-minute call into a 30-minute debate on human rights.
"I explained that to do this properly we should start with Rousseau and the human rights declaration of the United States," Mr. Zhu said to laughter. 
"I spent a long time explaining my views. 
But whether or not he is satisfied, I don't know."
Referring to the continuing trade talks in Washington, Mr. Zhu sounded optimistic that the two sides were close to a breakthrough on China's application for entry into the World Trade Organization. 
He said he had received "good news" from his top negotiator, Long Yongtu, on progress on what he called the most important stumbling block in the talks over dismantling China's ban on importing wheat and citrus fruit from some parts of the United States.
Whether such banter will do much to soften the criticism of China's policies heard from many members of Congress, religious groups, labor unions and national security experts remains to be seen. 
But Mr. Zhu, despite deep bags under his eyes and a somber black suit, seemed primed to disarm hostile audiences.
Mr. Zhu said he approached the United States Ambassador to China, James Sasser, for advice on how to present himself during the trip. 
Mr. Sasser, a former Senator from Tennessee, told him to "always keep a smiling face," Mr. Zhu said in a spurt of fluent English.
Mr. Zhu said that smiling all the time "would be too difficult for me."
