
THERE is a story behind every restaurant. 
Even the tiniest takeout has a tale to tell. 
The modest Good Earth, which opened recently at 399 New York Avenue at Huntington Village (421-1414), is a case in point.
The combination of unlikely people, events and ideas that led to its establishment are straight out of an adventure story. 
They include a Mexican who was the executive chef of the Ritz Hotel in London, a kosher caterer in Hewlett, a trip to Shanghai, China, and an unusual, creative idea.
Faz Esmizadeh, the Mexican chef came to this country from London eight years ago and became the kitchen commander at Victor Mayer Kosher Catering in Hewlett, where he met Stanley Chi, a chef from Shanghai who was in charge of the caterer's Chinese station. 
Mr. Esmizadeh was impressed by the Asian chef's cooking, style and speed and learned from him.
Five years ago, Mr. Chi returned to China and although the two men stayed in contact, Mr. Esmizadeh put his catering job and new-found interest in Chinese food behind him and opened the Tortilla Grill, on Route 110 in Huntington Village. 
There he began cooking healthful Mexican food that emphasized fresh ingredients and eliminated preservatives, oils and frying.
As his nontraditional Mexican take out grew in popularity and became a modest restaurant as well, Mr. Esmizadeh once again turned his attention to Chinese cuisine. 
For two years he experimented at home, attempting to apply the same principles to Chinese cooking that he had to Mexican dishes. 
Eight months ago, he felt ready enough to visit China, seek out Mr. Chi and urge him to return to the United States and open the Good Earth.
When Mr. Esmizadeh told his friend of his plans for a different kind of Chinese takeout restaurant, one with no frozen ingredients, lard, microwave, artificial coloring or spices, monosodium glutamate or cornstarch, he was greeted with interest. 
But when he said the Good Earth would be "the only Chinese restaurant in the world without a deep fryer," Mr. Chi replied: "That's impossible. 
How are you going to make an egg roll?"
The answer was, "Bake it."
Mr. Esmizadeh perservered, peppering the Chinese chef with his ideas for fresh, light cooking. 
"With my ideas and your ability we can do this," he said. 
"We will cook sweet and sour chicken in a wok, not fried in oil. 
We will use only high quality olive oil and very little of it. 
No cornstarch, only potato starch, and let's forget that sticky white rice and use fluffy, tasty basmati instead. 
We can offer Chinese food that will not leave a knot in people's stomachs."
Mr. Chi liked what he heard and returned to Long Island, where he recruited two veteran chefs from Manhattan: Benny Wong of Hong Kong and Shao Shai of Shanghai. 
Last month the four chefs opened the bright, little Good Earth, "a Chinese spot like no other," said Mr. Esmizadeh.
 
Openings
Mirepoix, a 40-seat, contemporary American restaurant with a French name (mirepoix is a herb seasoned mixture of diced celery, carrot and onions sauteed in butter), opened six weeks ago at 70 Glen Head Road in Glen Head (671-2498), where the Station House Cafe had been.
Michael Maroni, who along with his wife, Maria, own Mirepoix, was the executive chef of the Ritz in Northport and catered meals for the Nassau Bar Association and a local yacht club.
Appetizers cost $7 and $8, soup $4, salads $4 and $6 and entrees are from $14 to $25.
Nearby, at 32 Railroad Avenue in Glen Head, Gisela's Cafe (656-0374), opened late last month where the Casa Nova Club was. 
The 55-seat spot features inexpensive Italian standards at very gentle prices.
Oscar Bonilla, Gisela's owner, saw previous service at Taverna in Roslyn and Cafe Rustica in Great Neck.
Turquoise, a 44-seat, seafood restaurant at 33 North Station Plaza in Great Neck (487-3737), where Cafe Primavera had been, has been open for about two months.
Fresh seafood, including filets of red snapper and flounder, red mullet and dorado or Israeli porgy are among the entrees, which range in price from $9.95 to $18.95.
What was Union Street, in New Hyde Park is now two restaurants with separate kitchens and identities. 
The 150-seat steakhouse at 265-11 Union Turnpike is now Nick and Maggie's (718-347-4846), a casual, value-oriented neighborhood spot, and La Cantina (718-831-1243), an inexpensive Mexican restaurant, is its neighbor. 
Both of the 80-seat eating places remain under the same owners who operate the five-year-old Luigi's Italian restaurant on the same block.
Nick and Maggie's, which opened last month, is a renovated, lower priced remake of Union Street with a redesigned menu (dinner entrees cost $9.95 to $21.95) that features aged Angus as well as prime beef.
La Cantina is in the $8.95 (for chicken or vegetable enchilladas) to $12.95 (sliced steak presidente or shrimp fajitas) category. 
John McElvoy who was at Luigi's and the North Street Grill, as well as Le Madri, in Manhattan, is the executive chef.
 
Wine Tastings
Paumanok Vineyards in Aquebogue (722-8800), is presenting its fifth annual Sunset at the Vineyard series. 
The concerts combine music, food and fine vintage wines. 
The first is this Saturday at 6:30 P.M. and is called "Life Is Just a Bowl of Cherries."
It remembers the great songs of the Depression era with culinary contributions by the Jamesport Country Kitchen. 
On Aug. 
6 at 6 P.M., brass ensemble classics ancient and modern will be featured along with dishes from Aldo's of Greenport. 
Tickets are $50 per event or $95 for both.
The James Beard Foundation (212-627-3308) and Champagne Taittinger has scheduled their annual celebration of Chefs and Champagne on Saturday from 5 to 8 P.M. in the Gardens of Kay and Jennifer LeRoy in East Hampton. 
Guy Reuge of the restaurant Mirabelle in St. James and Michael Castino of Pacific East in Amagansett will join 21 celebrity chefs from Manhattan, including Florian Bellanger and Eric Ripert of Le Bernadin; Erik Blauberg, '21' Club; Edward Brown, the Sea Grill; Anita Lo, Mirezi; Waldy Malouf, the Rainbow Room; Eberhard Muller, Lutece, and Marcu Samuelsson, Aquavit, to prepare the $150 ($100 for members) meal.
Five new restaurants, the Lobster Bar and Grill at Indian Cove, the Porterhouse in Southampton, the Bulls Head Bar & Grill in Bridgehampton, the Farmhouse Restaurant in Amagansett and the Inn at Great Neck will be among the 30 participating in this year's Gourmet's Taste of Summer '97 on Saturday at 8 P.M. in an airplane hanger at the East Hampton Airport. 
Proceeds from the ticket sales ($125 in advance, $150 at the door)will go to Guild Hall in East Hampton. 
More than 60 vineyards are also involved in the affair, which attracted 2,000 people last year. 
Other first line-Hamptons restaurants present will be Boom Bistro, Bridgehampton Cafe, Southampton Publick House and the Maidstone Arms (325-0806).
This Thursday at 7 P.M. the San Marco Ristorante at 658 Motor Parkway in Hauppague (800-510-0088) is presenting an evening of gourmet foods from California with a wine selection from the J. Fritz Winery in Sonoma and Durney Vineyard in Carmel.
One of the courses is fettuccine Bolognese with a veal sausage and taleggio cheese, cooked in a crust, over a basil/tomato coulis paired with Durney Cabernet Sauvignon Cachagua 1993.
Palmer Vineyards in Aquebogue will turn into a French bistro next Sunday with a special daylong visit from Jean-Paul Picot, of La Bonne Soupe in Manhattan.
Mr. Picot, owner of the popular New York bistro featuring home-style French cooking, will demonstrate some of his classic techniques and sign copies of his bestselling cook book. 
Doris Tobias, the food and wine authority and Mr. Picot's co-author, will also be on hand to personalize copies and answer questions about food and matching it with Palmer's varietal wines.
La Coquille Restaurant in Manhasset is celebrating Bastille Week from now to July 20. 
It is offering a prix fix four-course Bastille dinner, including a guillotine au chocolat dessert for $35.
