
FALLING LEAVES
The True Story of an Unwanted
Chinese Daughter.
By Adeline Yen Mah.
Illustrated. 278 pp. 
New York:
John Wiley & Sons. 
$22.95.
ADELINE Yen Mah's "Falling Leaves: The True Story of an Unwanted Chinese Daughter" opens with the reading of the first page of her father's will in the opulent office of a Hong Kong attorney. 
Joseph Yen's entire estate is left to his second wife, Jeanne, who declares that since there is nothing left -- without explanation, her husband's two tons of gold bullion, stocks and shares, and worldwide real estate holdings have disappeared -- the rest of the will is meaningless. 
With that, the siblings are instructed to hand over their copies, which, because they have been bullied by this woman their entire lives long, they do.
Mah alludes to a traditional Chinese aphorism -- "falling leaves return to their roots" -- to describe her narrative journey back in time to the roots of her Shanghai family. 
Although the early stories are inspiring and even heartwarming -- Mah's great-aunt defies tradition by resolutely refusing to have her feet bound and founds the Shanghai Women's Bank; another aunt exudes unconditional love -- "Falling Leaves" is nothing if not a traditional memoir of a bad childhood.
These early memories are soon supplanted by a litany of abuses. 
The family irrationally blames Mah for the death of her mother, who died in childbirth. 
Her father, Joseph Yen, soon takes up with Jeanne Prosperi, the 17-year-old daughter of a French father and a Chinese mother. 
With her European ancestry, great beauty and convent education, she is seen as the ultimate trophy wife. 
By the age of 23, Jeanne has two children of her own in addition to her five stepchildren, whose Chinese names she immediately bans. 
Overnight they become Lydia, Gregory, Edgar, James and Adeline, and are subjected to verbal degradation. 
"I do think Adeline is getting uglier and uglier as she grows older and taller," Jeanne observes at one point. 
This Mommy Dearest beats her own baby daughter, and Adeline, a plucky first grader, is the only person to object. 
"I shall never forget or forgive your insolence," Jeanne announces. 
"Never!
Never!
Never!"
She keeps her word. 
Just as the Japanese invade, Adeline is sent away to boarding school, where she is abandoned for years. 
So beguiled is Joseph by his luscious and headstrong wife that he never intervenes on his children's behalf.
To be fair, this entire family seems almost psychotically cruel. 
Adeline's brothers urinate into her orange juice. 
When one of those brothers writes that he'd like to become a professional bridge player, his father sends a telegram: "Why don't you become a pimp instead?"
The elder Yens repeatedly pit one child against the other. 
Those who dare to protest are disowned and disinherited. 
Through it all, Adeline never stops longing for her family's love and acceptance. 
But with the exceptions of Adeline and her half sister Susan (herself married to a Hong Kong billionaire), these are people who plot and scheme to the very end for their father's long hidden and greatly depleted fortune of $30 million.
Mah's story is almost a casebook study of the effects of long-term abuse, but she doesn't seem to have the self-awareness to place it in this context. 
So when her first love affair is with someone emotionally abusive, or her first husband is a batterer, she sees these interludes, which so clearly follow the pattern of victimization, as just two more bad things that happen to her. 
Only rarely does she offer a glimpse into her sex's historical plight, even though abortion, infanticide and abandonment of female children occur routinely in Chinese culture even now. 
Still, in many ways the turbulence of Mah's family life mirrors the great conflicts of China during the last century. 
"Bear many sons. 
Sublimate your own desires. 
Become the willing . . . spittoon of the Yens and we will be proud of you," Mah's grandmother was told on the eve of her wedding. 
Even her radically independent aunts are eventually stripped of power and position, condemned and persecuted. 
Humbled, they eke out their last days without protest.
Like so many memoirists, Mah finally triumphs over adversity. 
While never winning the Yens' love, she becomes a respected physician, marries a fine man and starts her own family. 
It's hard not to admire her persistence and perseverance, or to think of those siblings scattered around the world, spending their inheritances and maybe taking a peek at their sister's scorching and vivid account.
