
Not long ago, Tsingtao Brewery looked unbeatable.
With a high quality product, a well established name, a booming beer market and ambitious plans to quadruple production in five years, Tsingtao seemed perfectly positioned to ride China's locomotive-like economic growth. 
In 1993, when the Government allowed China's top companies to list shares on Hong Kong's stock exchange, Tsingtao was chosen to go first, and its stock was one of the hottest issues of the year.
Yet Tsingtao (pronounced ching-dow) is going nowhere. 
Its profits are sagging, its stock is near an all-time low, and its expansion plans have stalled. 
Tsingtao managers have been reluctant to explain why the $190 million they raised in 1993 has not been invested in expansion.
Tsingtao's story straddles a central paradox in China today. 
In this nation's wrenching shift from a planned to a market economy, explosive growth has been accompanied by bumbling financial operations mired in a hopelessly inefficient system run by the Communist Party. 
The heralded entry of Chinese stocks into securities markets in Hong Kong and Shanghai has been a dud.
"Even by the year 2000 China could become an economic giant but remain a financial pygmy," Timothy Beardson, chairman of Crosby Securities in Hong Kong, said at a recent conference in Beijing.
The contradiction is striking: China has emerged as a magnet for international investment, as manufacturers like Motorola, Coca-Cola and General Motors pour in. 
Economic growth has averaged a sparkling 12 percent annually for four years, and an awakening demand for consumer goods and services is likely to continue for decades.
Yet the financial system envisioned by China's leaders is stuck in its infancy. 
China's stock markets remain tiny and lackluster: in the past six months, as the Dow Jones industrial average kept racking up new highs, Chinese shares on the Hong Kong and Shanghai markets have drifted lower and lower.
Unforeseen difficulties are inevitable, of course, when capital markets are being built from scratch. 
In China, though, such problems are compounded by a situation that most Western investors have a hard time fathoming: companies that say they want to make money are still run by Communist Party bureaucrats who care more about meetings and Government policy than revenues or profit margins.
Many businesses survive on Government subsidies and loans that banks are ordered to give them, and those selected to issue shares are picked as much for political reasons as for financial ones.
Tsingtao's difficulties are especially striking because the opportunity is so great. 
China's beer market is now about 118 million barrels annually, roughly 15 times as big as it was in 1980 and growing so fast it has overtaken Germany to become the world's second largest, after the United States.
But Tsingtao, unused to entertaining questions from anyone but Government officials, is almost completely indifferent to investors and analysts, offering them little information.
Of the 17 China-based companies now listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, only one, Shanghai Petrochemical, trades at more than its original listing price. 
And Brilliance China Automotive Holdings, a Bermuda-registered company that promoted itself as China's first listing on the New York Stock Exchange, shot up to $30 shortly after its debut in 1992, but now trades at around $4.
American investment banks like Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Smith Barney, after big expansions into China in 1993, now have little business here.
Any analyst can list a number of reasons Chinese stocks are down this year: Many have suffered from Beijing's tight-credit policy, others were hit by unexpected tax increases, still others were simply priced badly. 
But the main problem is that it has gradually dawned on investors that they understand little about how Chinese companies are run. 
When they do get a peek inside, they don't like what they see.
Tsingtao is a prime example. 
It has been making beer here since the Germans opened the brewery in 1903, when they colonized a section of the Shandong peninsula in northeast China. 
As it earned a reputation for making the best beer in China, Tsingtao gained a robust 70 percent of China's beer exports.
When they announced plans to list shares as the first of many "red chip," or mainland Chinese, stocks in Hong Kong, Tsingtao executives boldly proclaimed plans to dominate China's fragmented beer market, in which more than 800 breweries compete.
Response was overwhelming, and the initial offering was so oversubscribed -- more than 100 times -- that few investors could get in.
After Tsingtao was listed at 36 cents a share, it climbed to $1.40, a towering 98 times earnings, in 1994. 
The Anheuser-Busch Companies, the American beer giant, bought a 5 percent stake.
But bad news began emerging about Tsingtao in the middle of this year.
Profit in the first half fell 49 percent, as prices of raw materials rose sharply but competition prevented Tsingtao from charging more for its beer. 
More troubling, analysts looking over the company's puzzlingly vague annual report discovered that Tsingtao's managers had taken nearly half of the $190 million from their share issue and, rather than investing it in plant expansion -- as had been promised in a prospectus -- lent it to other Chinese companies that Tsingtao will not identify.
With its new capital thus mysteriously tied up, Tsingtao had to scale back expansion plans and cut projected growth in beer production, which is now at about three million barrels a year, by half. 
Worse, it remains unclear how much of Tsingtao's loans will be repaid: China's state-owned enterprises are famous for losing money and remaining immune to demands for repayment.
"When we called with questions, they wouldn't come to the phone," said Lim Cheang Yee, an analyst for H. G. Asia in Hong Kong. 
"They screwed around with minority shareholders' money, but wouldn't explain anything."
Ms. Lim said that Tsingtao had apparently recovered much of its loan money in recent months, and had even become more responsive to questions. 
But she said that it would still take a long time to repair the damage done to its credibility.
Talks between Anheuser-Busch and Tsingtao about expanding the American company's stake to 15 percent or more went sour. 
Anheuser-Busch executives have told colleagues at other beer companies that the deeper they looked into Tsingtao, the more pessimistic they became about the company's ability to expand its share of this fragmented market.
While Tsingtao is one of China's largest breweries and clearly its best known, it has just 2.2 percent of the market. 
And though its 70 percent share of China's beer exports sounds good, that accounts for just 10 percent of Tsingtao's sales over all. 
Moreover, those sales are blurred by the complex set of distribution rights, which vary from market to market, that the company agreed to when first entering international markets several years ago.
"They're amazingly arrogant," said a distributor who works with Tsingtao managers. 
"They say, 'We're Tsingtao, we don't need to advertise.'
It's so ridiculous. 
Even Coca-Cola has to advertise."
The markets have judged Tsingtao harshly as well, with the stock now trading at less than $2 and its American depository receipts selling for pennies. 
[On Tuesday, the company's shares closed at 1.82 Hong Kong dollars, and its A.D.R.'s closed at 23 cents.]
Tsingtao executives brush away questions about their unorthodox lending.
"I don't see what the fuss is about," said Qiao Qijian, a senior executive at Tsingtao, in an interview at company headquarters here during which he downed three glasses of Tsingtao draft. 
"Many investors from Hong Kong are concerned. 
But when they come to visit, they can see that everything is going fine."
Mr. Qiao said Tsingtao had been unable to invest its newly raised capital immediately because of shifting policy in Beijing, and had to delay its planning throughout 1994 until a meeting was held in February 1995. 
At that time, Beijing officials informed company executives about the need to shift China's alcoholic consumption away from the traditional favorite, grain alcohol, because of a growing shortage of grain.
That means beer and wine production is to be encouraged, which sounds good for Tsingtao. 
Yet the fact that a leading beer company's expansion was dictated by a Government meeting, itself most concerned with the politics of grain production, was an indication of how the emphasis remains on Government planning rather than on market demand.
Moreover, Mr. Qiao conceded that the financing of increased beer production was not even discussed at the meeting.
That seems short-sighted. 
China's beer market is entering an intensely competitive stage, with foreign breweries marching into China every day. 
Asahi and Kirin of Japan and Foster's of Australia recently announced plans to expand, and Beck's of Germany and Pabst of Milwaukee are already making beer in China.
With prospects for Tsingtao bleak, Anheuser-Busch went ahead with a joint venture to produce Budweiser with a different brewery in the central Chinese city of Wuhan.
"Our greatest concern with the company has always been that competition will force Tsingtao to cap price growth," Ms. Lim of H. G. Asia wrote in an analysis of the brewery, recommending that shareholders sell. 
"Profit growth will therefore have to depend on volume growth."
On paper, Tsingtao's expansion plans call for a fourfold production increase by the year 2000, which would come to 10 percent of today's domestic market. 
But Mr. Qiao, the Tsingtao executive, conceded that with all the delays it has encountered, the company would be pleased to achieve half as much.
Even with scaled-back plans, it is unclear where additional financing will come from, since China is in the midst of a tight credit policy that shows no signs of easing.
Mr. Qiao leaned back in a puffy chair and took a deep breath when asked about this.
"We have three options: bank loans, Government subsidies or another share issue," he said.
Unfortunately, he added, none of those look feasible anytime soon.
