
Asia's largest investment bank outside Japan, Peregrine Investments Holdings, was forced to shut down today, the first major casualty of the economic and currency crisis that has swept through the region since summer.
Moreover, Peregrine's collapse is the first major bankruptcy in Hong Kong since the territory reverted to Chinese rule last July.
News of Peregrine's failure shook Hong Kong's stock market, which was already rattled by the growing financial difficulties in Indonesia. 
Stock prices plunged today, with the Hang Seng market index falling985.51 points, or 11.1 percent, to 7,909.13, by the midday trading break.
The shutdown of Peregrine came after a weekend of frenzied negotiations with potential rescuers.
"It looks like liquidation this afternoon," said Tom Grimmer, a Peregrine spokesman. 
"Bankers didn't go for any sort of rescue operation last night. 
There are no alternatives left."
Founded a decade ago by a former British race car driver and a local investment banker with support from an array of Hong Kong's leading tycoons, Peregrine quickly emerged as the principal underwriter for Chinese companies listing in Hong Kong and the largest brokerage firm here.
Peregrine earned a reputation for daring and rapid decision-making, and for a formidable network of connections with Hong Kong and China's most powerful financial figures.
But as rapidly as the bank soared, it was pulled down as quickly by mounting economic turmoil in Asia, especially in Indonesia, where Peregrine had committed one-third of its capital as a loan to a Jakarta taxi and bus company.
Last summer, Peregrine decided to back Jopie Widjaya, the owner of Steady Safe, a taxi company listed on the Jakarta stock exchange. 
Mr. Widjaya sought financing to expand into ferries and toll roads, plans apparently supported by the daughter of President Suharto. 
Like many of Peregrine's deals, Mr. Widjaya's connections seem to have played a key role in the decision to loan Steady Safe $270 million.
Since the loan, however, the Indonesian rupiah began a swift decline from 2,400 rupiah to the dollar to nearly 10,000 rupiah to the dollar last week. 
Steady Safe found itself unable to meet its obligations and over the weekend its doors in Jakarta were shuttered and locked. 
Peregrine was left with a gaping hole in its balance sheet.
In November, Peregrine announced that it had reached a deal with the Zurich Group of Switzerland to take a 24.1 percent stake in the bank, in what would have amounted to a bailout. 
That deal fell apart as the rupiah continued its slide and the depths of Peregrine's problems became apparent.
As a last-ditch effort, Peregrine approached the Bank of China, but according to a Bank of China executive, senior officials in Beijing ruled out the possibility of taking a stake in the troubled bank.
Over the weekend, Hong Kong's senior civil servants sought to calm the waters as anxieties over the economy mounted, but Donald Tsang, Hong Kong's financial secretary, said the Government would not intervene to save Peregrine.
Zurich Group's withdrawal sent Peregrine's co-founders, Philip Tose and Francis P. T. Leung, into a frenetic search for a savior for their bank. 
Apart from the Bank of China, Deutsche Bank A.G. glanced briefly at Peregrine before shying away.
In Beijing, there was some consternation that Peregrine had even dared to approach the Bank of China, a move that some Chinese bankers saw as running counter to the deliberate policy of insuring Hong Kong's virtual autonomy from Beijing.
And none of Peregrine's original backers, some of the most high-profile tycoons in Hong Kong, appeared willing to come to the rescue of the bank.
As one banker put it this morning: "No one really knows what Peregrine's liabilities are or what it's exposure to Southeast Asia is. 
How could you step in at the last minute?"
About 700 Peregrine employees are expected to be laid off in Hong Kong, with another 1,000 losing their jobs elsewhere in Asia.
      
