
Stepping through grass, mud and clods of dirt, Ding Shilong ran his hands across a new wire fence and beamed at the thought of what a mini-Hong Kong might look like on this huge chunk of barren land.
After nearly five years of internal wrangling, the central Government has finally allowed foreign developers to begin construction of an 11.6-square-mile port and manufacturing center here, in the southern island province of Hainan. 
The project, which is expected to cost $1.3 billion for the initial stages, is one of the boldest economic experiments the Chinese authorities have begun.
For the first time, a foreign consortium is being allowed to transform an empty patch of dirt into a small planned city. 
If all goes well, the giant town will have a mixture of shops, offices, factories, warehouses, gardens and apartments for 250,000 residents, all separated by a fence from the rest of the island and the rest of China.
The interest in the project from Chinese officials and company executives is enormous, with high-ranking Government employees frequently coming down to assess the prospects in Yangpu. 
In Chinese, officials formally refer to Yangpu as a development zone, but in a sign of how they really view Yangpu, they often switch to English in the middle of their Chinese conversations and call it the "free port" project.
Yangpu has not yet been given permission to be a free port like Hong Kong, where almost all goods imported would be available duty-free to the population. 
But it has received a wide variety of privileges, including one of the country's most relaxed policies toward duties on industrial and consumer goods. 
And Hainan officials say that if Yangpu is successful they hope its privileges may be extended to the entire island.
"This is an experiment," said Fan Yueqin, a senior manager at the Pearl River Enterprise Company, a real estate company in the island's provincial capital of Haikou. 
"If Yangpu is successful, Hainan can use Yangpu as a model. 
If we want to become a Hong Kong, then Yangpu is a trial."
But for now, all this is still on paper.
"My biggest worry now is that there's no special development zone yet -- it's just a piece of bare land," said Mr. Ding, a Chinese official who has spent the last three years on the project, as he rode in a car down the narrow two-lane road from the provincial capital to Yangpu. 
The scenery was of hills, eucalyptus trees and peasants with pointed straw hats -- a great contrast from his dream city.
The project at Yangpu (YAHNG-poo) is a victory for Kumagai Gumi (H.K.) Ltd., which is partly owned by the Japanese construction company. 
Kumagai Gumi will have land-use rights on the property for 70 years and will then sell those rights to other companies that want to build factories or offices.
In the three months since Kumagai began selling plots from its Hong Kong office, the company says it has sold about 8 percent of the zone's space. 
In a sign of the economic frenzy that pervades the nation, mainland Chinese companies have been the quickest to sign up, some apparently buying land simply in the hope of reselling at a profit.
 
Holding Down Speculation
"There's bound to be speculation in any project like this," said Frederick S. Ma, executive director at Kumagai Gumi (H.K.) Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
"The key is that we don't have so much speculation that the place becomes a ghost town."
China began experimenting more than a decade ago with special economic zones, inspired by the booming achievements of similar endeavors in Taiwan and Hong Kong, and to some extent in Malaysia and Singapore. 
These days, the greatest influence on Yangpu comes from Shenzhen, once a patch of countryside on the border with Hong Kong, which was allowed certain economic freedoms by the central Government.
Today, it is the most successful of China's experiments.
Yangpu expects to have a freer hand in foreign currency transactions than the rest of China, with its banks possibly able to change the local currency, or renminbi, into foreign currencies at their counters. 
Currently, the renminbi can be traded only into United States dollars or Hong Kong dollars at special foreign currency swap centers.
Kumagai, which has a 30 percent stake in the project, has been organizing the consortium and negotiating the terms, which included the purchase of the 70-year land-use rights at $350 an acre. 
It also had to pay to relocate a small population of peasants.
 
Power, Roads and Water
It recently began construction on a $200 million power station and is laying the groundwork for $1.1 billion more in roads, water supplies and residential areas that will be ready in one year for certain parts of the zone.
The Yangpu project emerged in 1988, when it was a favorite plan of the Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. 
He envisioned it as a free port and the centerpiece of the national development strategy.
Mr. Zhao was never able to get approval for the project, however, in part because it reminded hard-liners of the foreign enclaves that existed in China in the first half of this century. 
The Communists have always denounced those foreign concessions, which were most famous in Shanghai, and so the idea that foreigners would have a major role in developing enclaves struck some nationalists as a threat to sovereignty.
Then Mr. Zhao was purged in 1989, after the Tiananmen democracy movement, and for several years the proposal was put on hold. 
It was finally approved by the State Council, China's cabinet, in the fall, but it gets little attention in the Chinese press and the leadership seems uncertain about whether it should be proud of what it has done -- or embarrassed.
For now, Mr. Ding is elated at the construction of the wire fence, which will stretch 5.4 miles and separate the industrial zone from the rest of the island.
 
'A Big Political Risk'
"China is taking a big political risk in Yangpu," Mr. Ding said, glancing around at the expanse of land. 
"Some officials are saying that with Yangpu, we are betraying the country. 
In 10 years, we should be like a small Hong Kong, and if we aren't at least better than Shenzhen is now, then we won't be completely successful."
Shenzhen is a special economic zone on the Chinese side of the border near Hong Kong. 
In the last 12 years it has been transformed from a region of rice paddies to an urban center with plush hotels, a huge manufacturing base and a stock exchange.
Kumagai says that it is not sure how much it will ultimately invest in the project. 
But so far, it has been able to keep the actual amount of its investment relatively low by financing the construction with bank loans -- three of the seven partners in the consortium are local Chinese banks. 
Cash is also coming in from land sales.
"The major advantage is that foreign investors only need to deal with Kumagai and the consortium, and not with Chinese officials," said Carl K. B. Wong, a senior analyst at Wardley James Capel (Far East) Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
"But this advantage may no longer be solely available at Yangpu in the future. 
Other parts of China may get increasingly decentralized so they can provide lenient terms to foreign investors."
Kumagai is trying to attract investors from Taiwan and Southeast Asia, but China's coastal areas are all competing for foreign investment, and the central Government itself has invested a great deal of capital in a virtually barren region of Shanghai called Pudong.
Pudong has been given numerous special privileges, but the difference is that Pudong is run by the Chinese, whereas Yangpu will be run by a foreign developer.
 
'It's Like Hong Kong'
"There will be periods when the whole thing slows down a lot, and then they'll be periods when it picks up," said Mr. Ma of Kumagai. 
"How do you define when the project is finished?
It's like Hong Kong. 
It's like a city. 
It may take seven years to sell all the land. 
But maybe we don't want to sell it all."
The advantage of Yangpu is that it is in a relatively undeveloped part of China, so land and labor are fairly cheap. 
It is also close enough to Hong Kong that shipping and air routes could eventually become convenient.
For now, many foreign investors are cautious, noting that the work force is essentially unskilled, that many local factories are losing money and that transportation links are backward.
Compared with Guangdong Province, which is linked by land to Hong Kong, Yangpu is far away and less convenient for Hong Kong and Taiwan business executives. 
There is no airport yet at Yangpu, and no decision has been made about whether to build one, so for now business executives must take the two-and-a-half-hour car ride from the small airport at the provincial capital of Haikou.
"You need to get a pioneer to go and build a factory out there in Yangpu,"
said Gillian Y. S. Kong, a real estate analyst at Sun Hung Kai Securities Ltd. in Hong Kong.
