
The architecture of Dan Hinkley's garden on the Kitsap Peninsula in Washington State is native, shaped by old Douglas firs and a seeping bog. 
But in the cultivated understory, he has convened plants from all around the globe, reuniting the tribes of the botanical diaspora. 
More than 50 kinds of arisaemas -- called jack-in-the-pulpit in North America -- rocket from the soil, and one, Arisaema nepenthoides, stands fully erect, a single cobralike spathe beside a rotting stump crowned with ferns. 
Thirty-five varieties of Solomon's seals, or polygonatums, from China, Japan, Taiwan, Nepal and Sikkim unspiral from their early growth, and dozens of types of hellebore have just passed their prime. 
Throughout the garden, hydrangeas and viburnums are beginning to dispense their leaves; Stachyurus and Edgeworthia, winter-flowering shrubs from Asia, are leafing out. 
On some loops of the garden trail, where a Cardiocrinum giganteum thrusts its antediluvian seedpod six feet into the air, you almost expect to see a dinosaur wander past. 
Bud-break has stirred among an orderly chaos of growth-forms.
The man behind this collection of plants is Daniel Hinkley, a 45-year-old native of northern Michigan who has come to be regarded as one of the pre-eminent plant explorers in the world. 
Hinkley is the co-owner and chief plantsman of Heronswood Nursery, started in 1987, which lies within the visual domain of the Olympic Mountains across Puget Sound from Seattle. 
Heronswood is Hinkley's personal garden, his trial garden and a two-and-a-half-acre commercial nursery rolled in one. 
It's also Hinkley's home, which he shares with his partner, Robert Jones, an architect who is to the mailing list, the account books and the commercial operations at Heronswood what Hinkley is to the plants.
Here are more than 9,500 plants sprung from seed gathered all over the world. 
Most are numbered and listed in a loose-leaf binder that Hinkley calls the Big Bang, a compilation of plants already for sale and those that someday will be. 
The binder listing current inventory is called the Grand Mal. 
To most gardeners, the plants on these lists would be unfamiliar. 
Instead of the classic Hosta "Frances Williams," for instance, there is Hosta kiyosumiensis, which Hinkley collected from Mount Kiyosume in Japan's Chiba Prefecture in 1995. 
Instead of hybridized Asiatic and Oriental lilies, there is Lilium nanum, collected by Hinkley during a joint expedition to the Himalayas in 1995. 
Instead of a Norway maple or a David Austin rose, there is Acer rufinerve, a striped-bark maple he gathered in central Japan in 1997, and a rose of as yet undetermined species collected from an altitude of 10,800 feet in China's Yunnan province in 1996.
From this garden each year also comes the Heronswood catalogue, a major literary artifact in the world of gardening ephemera. 
Printed solidly in small type, it begins with Hinkley's wry musings on the imperfect art of running a mail-order nursery and ends 300 pages and some 2,500 plants later. 
The catalogue is a saga of botanical excitement and a chronicle of adjectival fatigue, the fate of a man driven to travel the world searching for remarkable plants and then doomed to write a terse, descriptive paragraph about one $6 or $8 clone after another, beginning with Abies balsamea "Nana" in the "Conifers" section and ending with the New Zealand sedge Uncinia unciniata, the final plant in the section on grasses.
Though it advertises nowhere and admits visitors only by appointment, Heronswood Nursery mailed 35,000 copies of the 1999 catalogue, and subscription requests are currently arriving at the rate of 100 a week. 
At $8 for a two-year subscription, the catalogue just pays for itself, unless you count the cost of Hinkley's writing time, in which case it is grossly underpriced. 
Subscribers pleasantly lost among Hinkley's paragraphs can be forgiven for wondering whether the nursery exists to justify the catalogue, or vice versa. 
Still, appealing to a newly adventurous generation of gardeners, Heronswood was an almost instant success. 
In 1993, the year after it incorporated, it had a gross income of $220,000. 
In 1998, it was five times larger, $1,100,000. 
These days, as Robert Jones says, he and Hinkley are trying to choose their limits, trying to let Hinkley's interests, rather than mere economic growth, continue to shape their offerings.
Plant introduction has traditionally been one of the reasons public agencies, public gardens and university arboretums -- like the United States Department of Agriculture, the New York Botanical Garden and the Arnold Arboretum at Harvard University -- have mounted collecting expeditions. 
But such institutions, as even they sometimes admit, usually do a far better job of collecting and studying plants than they do releasing them to the public. 
There is a historic rivalry between the public gardens and commercial nurseries like Heronswood, which dates to well before the days when the legendary plant hunter Ernest Henry Wilson combed turn-of-the-century China first for Veitch's nursery and then for the Arnold Arboretum. 
It's a rivalry, as the academics would put it, between science and mere trade or, as the tradesmen might put it, between exclusivity and openness. 
But these days, in fact, many public gardens and arboretums buy directly from Hinkley, sometimes taking a share in his plant-collecting expeditions, which entitles them to a portion of the seeds Hinkley gathers. 
"They're some of my best customers," he says.
Mid-April is the peak of the spring plant-shipping season at Heronswood, where overworked staff members try to meet the florid expectations of gardeners by selling them plants that are not only garden-worthy but that also carry, for many customers, an echo of the exotic places where Hinkley has collected -- Nepal, Sikkim, China, Japan, Korea, Tasmania, Mexico and Chile. 
The nursery office, an attractive prairie farmhouse of sorts, is surrounded by open shade-canopies sheltering tables crowded with flats, each marked with a customer's name and shipping date.
Hinkley's Michigan drawl crackles over a walkie-talkie clipped to a plant-packer's belt. 
Concealed somewhere in the woodland garden, he is the ghost in this botanic machine, enjoying a 10-day respite from a busy spring speaking schedule and preparing for a collecting trip to Japan. 
A path leads into the benign enveloping shade characteristic of the Northwest woods. 
The light falling on the mounded garden beds seems detached from its source, and what it illuminates has a freshness that is an attribute of the early season and of the vegetation itself. 
A hundred yards down the path, Hinkley works in mottled shade helping a new crew member shovel steer manure from a garden cart onto a planting site. 
No matter how exotic his expeditions may be, this is the end point of every collecting trip -- making a hole in the ground, sprinkling a little 20-20-20 fertilizer in it and grubbing the earth back into place by hand around the stem of a newly propagated plant.
Hinkley speaks quietly, slowly, but there is a sense of haste about him, the result of living in what he calls "a perfect madness of plants," a garden that needs to be brought into peak condition within the next few weeks. 
"At this point it feels like it's moving day," he says. 
"But as long as I keep bringing new plants into trial, it's always going to be like this. 
I get tired of one plant, or it's just not doing for me, so I get rid of it and start over again. 
But every time you do that you want to rejuvenate the soil, and to do that you've got to move another plant."
Hinkley kneels on the ground, chopping at the soil with a border spade and looking up from time to time as he talks. 
He is direct and delicate at the same time, handling plants with none of the hesitation of the amateur gardener. 
He overflows with affection for the garden he has made, and yet his criticism of each individual plant-form -- a kind of veiled self-criticism in fact -- is unsparing.
Hinkley is bearded and balding, and he wears wide suspenders over a T-shirt from the J.C. 
Raulston Arboretum at North Carolina State University. 
Raulston, who died at 56 in a car accident three years ago, was one of Hinkley's mentors and a widely respected emblem of intellectual and horticultural generosity. 
Hinkley has dedicated his next book, "The Explorer's Garden," which Timber Press will publish in the fall, to Raulston and to Gerald Straley of the University of British Columbia, another gardening mentor who died in his 50's. 
"J.C.'s everywhere in this garden," Hinkley said. 
"Every day, I could take out a plant that he gave me, and I would never run out of plants. 
He knew, he sensed what a good plant was."
To sense what a good plant is -- to recognize it in the wild and then confirm it in his own garden -- is the essence of Hinkley's work. 
At Heronswood, there are really three different kinds of garden and, hence, of garden-worthiness. 
Among the greenhouses, for instance, there is the denatured, rationalized garden, which consists of plants grouped by size and species -- garden-worthy, in Hinkley's judgment, but also able to withstand shipping. 
In the woodland garden, tested and marketed varieties of plants compete with untested kin. 
The search here is for better form, greater hardiness, a distinctive virtue -- variegation or a more upright or prostrate habit -- or simply for the illumination, vital to Hinkley's task, that comes from growing many related species in proximity to each other. 
"For me," Hinkley says, "it makes a more complete, more understandable portrait of plants if I get the opportunity to grow many different relatives together."
And then there is the private garden surrounding the house, which is set at the back of the property. 
This is a place where Hinkley has tried to set aside at least some of the cultural limitations that frame our sense of what makes a garden. 
It is a subject he understands very well. 
"We have all this Lutheran guilt," he says. 
"We all moved west from the Midwest where we couldn't have winter gardens, and so our gardens in Seattle and Portland and Vancouver are amazingly timid as far as what our climate can actually do."
But there is no timidity in this garden. 
What takes it beyond timidity isn't massed plantings or vibrant color or expansive scale or even mere exoticism. 
It is Hinkley's subtle reliance on the globally diverse forms of individual plants. 
Each plant, grown well, reveals itself and reveals something, too, about its neighbor. 
What creeps grows next to what climbs. 
The fastigiate and the pendulous conspire. 
Bark peels, thorns protrude, vines finger their way across an arbor, and what unites it all, what makes these plants garden-worthy, is the interest they bestow upon each other.
There are few explicit canons for deciding what makes a plant garden-worthy, but one of them -- a base line below the realm of the esthetic -- is lack of ecological invasiveness. 
Most gardeners are familiar with species that tend to be invasive in the garden, like Ajuga reptans, sometimes called carpet bugle. 
But what haunts Hinkley is the thought of plants that can break loose from cultivation and run rampant across the landscape -- purple loosestrife, kudzu, tamarisk, honeysuckle. 
"My greatest concern," he says, "is the introduction of a bad plant."
To help prevent that, Hinkley has hired Sarah Reichard as a consultant. 
Reichard, an ecologist at the University of Washington's Center for Urban Horticulture and a founder of Washington's Native Plant Society, began to wonder while collecting seed in South America as a graduate student whether any of those plants would prove invasive in the Pacific Northwest. 
She has constructed a model -- a decision tree, based on a plant's observed characteristics, which asks questions about how quickly the species reproduces and whether it belongs to a family or genus already strongly invasive in North America -- that indicates whether a plant is likely to become invasive.
On the burn pile at Heronswood lay one of the results of Reichard's work. 
There, atop other horticultural debris, was Ligustrum delavayanum, a species of privet named after the French priest and botanist Jean Marie Delavay, who collected plants in China in the late 19th century. 
This ligustrum bore fruit in Hinkley's garden for the first time in October, and it caught the attention of Roy Lancaster, the English dean of plant explorers, who was visiting Heronswood at the time. 
"He said he'd never seen a more beautiful form of it," Hinkley told me. 
"But it's a broad-leafed evergreen, and those do really well in the Northwest. 
I looked at it all winter long and battled with it in my conscience. 
You've probably seen what Ligustrum sinense has done in the Southeast. 
It's everywhere. 
Finally we had Sarah run it through her model, and she said, Reject."
Invasiveness is a hot issue, and it inspires a botanical xenophobia, a fear that just because a plant is exotic -- i.e., non-native -- it's inevitably invasive or otherwise harmful to the suite of native plants, changing the balance of nitrogen in the soil, for instance, or causing the water table to dip below the roots of native plants. 
But in horticulture, as in agriculture, the distinction between exotic and native has been blurred by the ancient, extensive exchange of plants for their economic or ornamental value. 
Because plant material -- seeds, cuttings, fruits -- moves as readily as humans do, human plant collecting, like the invention of agriculture, predates history itself. 
Gardening may be a way of enclosing a distinctive botanical world -- separating the cultivated from the uncultivated -- but few gardeners have ever restricted themselves to growing only native plants. 
The literature of gardening is underwritten by the literature of plant trafficking -- Robert Fortune, Joseph Hooker, Joseph Banks, Armand David, Ernest Henry Wilson and a host of predecessors traversed temperate Asia searching for plants of botanical and horticultural interest. 
Their motto, and Hinkley's as well, might be the words of William Bartram, who explored America in the late 18th century, when it was still the gardening world's China. 
"Let us advance to the spot in which nature has seated them," Bartram wrote of the plants he sought.
If there's an ecological argument to be made against plant collecting, there are many to be made for it. 
The term itself is a misnomer. 
Hinkley does not collect plants. 
As he notes in the Heronswood catalogue, "Our wild collections are primarily of seed, which we collect in a very conservative manner."
This means collecting only when there is abundant seed, adhering to the terms of local permits and customs and making sure the seed is carefully prepared to meet U.S.D.A. restrictions (free of any potentially contaminating soil, insects and so on). 
The image of ship decks full of Wardian cases -- the enclosed, portable greenhouses that made the 19th-century boom in plant hunting possible -- has been replaced by the image of tired botanists cleaning seeds for U.S.D.A. inspection under less-than-ideal conditions. 
"It isn't necessarily a fun thing to do," Hinkley says, remembering a trip to Nepal, "especially when you're doing it in a tent at night and it's raining cats and dogs outside and the only light is a headlamp."
Gathering seed from wild plant populations is also a means of preserving genetic diversity in the face of widespread environmental degradation. 
In Nepal, for instance, a grazing yak-cow hybrid, the dzo, has had a grave impact on alpine plant communities. 
In China, deforestation is proceeding at a rate that far outstrips the ability of Chinese and foreign botanists to inventory and collect seeds from endangered plants. 
Even in a gardening culture as traditional as Japan's, there's a tendency to overlook native species in favor of the exotic -- which in the case of Japan means American species. 
After searching Shikoku Island in 1997 for a wild Japanese hydrangea called Hydrangea sikokiana, Hinkley began scouting Japanese nurseries, hoping to find the plant in cultivation. 
"We thought we'd see it from a distance in every single nursery, and we'd go up to it and it was our native Hydrangea quercifolia. 
No one we talked to had even heard of sikokiana. 
They had no interest in growing it because they had this very exotic, much, much more exciting hydrangea from America."
The exotic sikokiana is now growing at Heronswood, not far up the woodland path from the native quercifolia.
But the ultimate rationale for Hinkley's work is the garden itself. 
He shapes his expeditions by looking for climates similar to that of the Pacific Northwest, traveling to places where plants show similar hardiness because of elevation or latitude, and are accustomed to similar rainfall patterns. 
Sometimes a collecting trip broadens the gene pool for a plant that has already been collected, like Paris polyphylla, a Nepalese trillium relative Hinkley had grown at Heronswood for a decade but was the only clone in North America. 
Often a trip leads to a new understanding of how, as Hinkley puts it, a plant "wants" to grow. 
It can also be a means of expanding the idea of the garden philosophically and esthetically by allowing Hinkley to see cultivated species and their wild near kin in their native habitat. 
Perhaps, Hinkley says, re-collecting seed "will bring additional hardiness or additional insect or disease resistance, so I never pass up a plant if it's in seed, if indeed I think it's a plant that deserves to be in cultivation."
Hinkley's garden feels like a glimpse of another creation, a place where the monoculture of the mind is disturbed by a willingness to push beyond the familiar botanical forms into a realm of pleasing visual discomfort. 
Walking along the woodland trails at Heronswood, Hinkley points out some of the plants he admires -- like Podophyllum delavayi, a May apple from Sichuan, which, he says, "deserves to be worshiped" -- and some of the plants he thinks will become important to American gardeners in the years ahead, not only among "plant nerds," as he puts it, but also among gardeners generally. 
He points out a group called the woodland lilies -- Smilacinas, Polygonatums, Uvularias, Disporums and Disporopsis.
But above all he points out Hepatica -- Hepatica acutiloba, an American native and Hepatica maxima, which grows only on one island in the Japan Sea, Hepatica in a single clone, in many clones, in enough clones one day to sell. 
To a casual visitor, these are perplexing plants, modest, growing in low mounds with rather formal, old-fashioned leaves and small flowers, not half as striking as the arisaemas and trilliums that are rioting in the woodland. 
But besides being a "simply good" plant, Hepatica maxima, for one, is also very rare in cultivation, which makes its goodness no longer simple. 
It goes about its business in a quiet corner of the garden, reaffirming a strange premise of life itself, for being there at all is part of its beauty.
