
A THOUSAND years ago, in the villages of China at the beginning of the Sung dynasty, before there were restaurants, and before peasants had ovens, food vendors roamed mud streets.
From morning to night, the vendors hawked fried puffy breads, sweet sticky rice and plump barbecued chickens. 
They brought the food from larger, nearby towns where the chickens were roasted in ovens, then tucked into tiered bamboo baskets that hung on poles slung across their shoulders. 
The food was humble, but tasty -- tasty enough that the tradition is alive today on the streets of Beijing, Hong Kong and Manhattan.
In Manhattan's Chinatown, there are six or seven vendors along the south side of Canal Street, starting at Centre Street and heading east five short blocks to the Bowery, and several more vendors are located on the Bowery, south one block to Bayard Street.
To operate legally, each vendor must pass an inspection to receive a license and permit from New York City's Department of Health. 
As proof, the vendor numbers are prominently displayed on the front of each cart. 
The vendors offer the foods of 1,000 years ago, and people queue up to buy fried scallion pancakes, braised honeycomb tripe, barbecued duck and the snacks of both northern and southern China.
Very little has changed.
Gone are the bamboo baskets, and in their place are stainless steel carts equipped with steam tables, griddles and plastic take-out containers. 
White plastic forks and spoons have replaced chopsticks.
An informal tasting of the foods offered by these street vendors was conducted in three visits in the last three weeks. 
The vendors stake their claim to particular spots on the sidewalk and work six days a week, usually from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. Kee Lim, a vendor who sets up in front of 226 Canal Street, was a street vendor in Hong Kong for six years before moving to New York.
Some vendors, like Mr. Lim, were chatty in Cantonese. 
A few spoke minimal English, enough to understand that a customer wanted one pancake, or four dumplings. 
The provenance of the food was a mystery. 
A few, like Mr. Lim, bought from restaurants, but they wouldn't say which ones. 
Still others said nothing. 
They cooked, they sold, but they did not reveal sources.
To find the best food, go where the crowds are, and assume that in dishes like dumplings or braised meats, there will be a bit of monosodium glutamate.
People clustered and gawked at the Hong Kee Food Corporation's street stall -- an extension of the take-out food store -- that sells traditional Chinese snacks at 234 Canal Street (Centre Street). 
Working on a griddle, Shirley Kong took a roll of silky white rice noodle and wrapped it around crisp-on-the-outside, chewy-on-the-inside fried dough, a breakfast food that was both soothing and was filling ($1). 
To warm the roll up, she lightly sauteed it on the griddle, and to offset its bland flavor, she drizzled it with thinned-out soy sauce that had been simmered with sugar, scallions, ginger, garlic and broth.
On the other side of the griddle, rectangles of turnip pudding were sizzling. 
Made of grated white Chinese turnips seasoned with ginger and garlic, the pudding was steamed, sliced and pan-fried until crisp and golden on both sides (three slices for $1). 
It slithered down the throat, slippery and savory. 
It is best eaten with a sprinkle of oyster sauce. 
If the cook doesn't offer the oyster sauce, ask for it. 
Hong Kee's vendor number is 19863.
Where street food stands apart from homemade or high-quality restaurant food is usually in the degree of refinement or luxuriousness of ingredients. 
At a good dim sum parlor, the turnip pudding is sometimes studded with bits of dried shrimp and Chinese sausage. 
At Hong Kee, the turnip pudding lacked the shrimp and sausage. 
But who complained?
Judging from the crowds, the answer was no one.
About three steps to the east of Hong Kee, Shu Chen, No. 16592, was one of two vendors on Canal Street selling deep-fried scallion pancakes, a Shanghai specialty. 
Filled with freshly chopped scallions, the perfect pancake is crisp on the outside, greaseless, slightly salty, with the scallions adding a sweet flavor. 
Here, the pancake (50 cents) was imperfect -- somewhat tough, and scanty on the scallions. 
But the fried chicken wings, which tasted like they were marinated briefly in soy sauce and a splash of wine, were warm, crisp and greaseless (two for 50 cents).
The other purveyor of scallion pancakes was Sung M. Wong, No. 19890, who operated in front of 228 Canal Street. 
His pancakes looked like the others, were priced the same (50 cents each), but were much closer to the ideal of crisp outside and tender within.
He also sold one of the most ancient of Chinese snacks, the dumpling or jiao tze, a pleated pouch traditionally filled with minced cabbage and pork, and seasoned with ginger, soy sauce and sesame oil. 
The historical importance of the dumpling was discovered in the 1960's when the Chinese unearthed a pair of preserved dumplings that dated from the eighth or ninth century, the time of the Tang dynasty, which lasted from 618 to 907 A.D. More than 1,000 years later, the crescent shape of the jiao tze, and the number of pleats, is unchanged.
Here, the dough was thick, somewhat crude and chewy, but the filling of minced Chinese chives and pork, along with the highly familiar dash of MSG, was both pungent and tasty (four for $1).
Farther east down Canal Street is Mr. Lim, one of the friendlier vendors. 
He hovered over a stainless steel cart that is divided into compartments, each holding a different hot dish, none of which he had cooked. 
Instead, like the food vendors of the Sung dynasty, he bought the food from different restaurants or suppliers.
He offered rice gruel, also called jook; slippery rolled sheets of rice noodle; curried squid, and braised beef tripe cooked with turnip. 
The tripe, made into a honeycomb with chunks of white turnip, was cooked in a rich, aromatic broth of soy sauce, rice wine, garlic, ginger, soy sauce, water, sugar, salt and star anise. 
The tripe was tender, the turnip soft ($1.25 for a container). 
The food "is Hong Kong style," Mr. Lim said. 
To spot him, look for No. 16872.
Culinary treasures like roast ducks, soy sauce chickens, roast pork and braised barbecued pork are sold at bargain prices by Ying Chun Hui, whose cart, No. 16982, is usually in front of 208 Canal Street. 
But, surrounded by crowds, it's not hard to find.
One recent weekend, a woman waited in line to buy a duck to be presented as an offering at a temple. 
Another woman was struck by the prices, and said, "The duck is cheaper than Ollie's!"
She was referring to the popular chain of restaurants with three locations on the west side of Manhattan, where a whole roast duck sells for $17.50. 
At Kam Man, a Chinese grocery store at 200 Canal Street, the roast duck was $13. 
Mr. Hui sold ducks for $10 apiece -- and they were flawless. 
Each day, he said, he sells at least 20 ducks.
The skin was burnished and crisp, the tender meat subtly flavored by the marinade of scallions, garlic, bean sauce, soy sauce, chicken stock and sugar that filled the cavity of the duck as it roasted. 
(The same sauce is traditionally retained to be poured over the duck at serving time.)
The roast pork (not to be confused with the red-tinged strips of barbecued pork) had crisp, golden blistered skin -- like cracklings. 
When served, the pork is considered perfectly cooked when there are three distinct layers: the thick crunchy skin, a slender layer of sweet fat, and a thicker layer of lean yet moist meat ($5 a pound.) Mr. Hui's pork was perfect.
Who cooked these meats?
And where?
Mr. Hui would say only that the cook was a professional who moved from Hong Kong to New York and once worked in a local restaurant.
Scattered along Canal and the Bowery are vendors who sell egg-shaped cookies made from a batter of egg, flour, sugar and milk. 
They pour the batter into an iron griddle that has egg-shaped indentations and resembles a waffle iron. 
The cookies tasted like warm sponge cakes. 
Whenever an adult stood in line to buy the cookies (20 for $1), there was often a child hovering nearby, seeming to salivate.
At the corner of the Bowery and Bayard Street, in front of the National Westminster Bank, a husband and wife sold their specialty -- tripe and turnips -- which drew a steady line of customers, often six deep. 
The man, Chuck Au, said, "This is the best tripe."
Mr. Au was not a braggart; he spoke a humble gastronomic truth. 
The tripe almost melted in the mouth but still had a little crunch. 
The turnips were tender. 
But it was the flavor -- the classic combination of soy sauce, star anise and sugar -- that ran deep.
One customer bought four containers of tripe at $1.25 each. 
Others bought the rice gruel, which was subtly flavored with dried fish and blanched peanuts ($1). 
The cart is No. 16816.
When asked how their popular tripe was prepared, Mrs. Au, who did not want to give her first name, said, "Buy it, boil it and let it dry before you season it."
She paused, poured some water into the steam table, and said, "It's hard work."
But the results are delicious.
