
His films are notable for cascading glass, falling bodies and enough bullets to touch off a war. 
But John Woo, Hong Kong's most celebrated filmmaker, whose movies are almost operatic in their excess, insisted that the flamboyant violence stamping his work resembles a ballet, almost ethereal, even otherworldly.
"It's like dancing," the 51-year-old director remarked the other day as he nervously awaited the opening of "Face/Off," his most ambitious American film, starring John Travolta and Nicolas Cage, which opened No. 1 at the box office this weekend. 
"My actors are amusing and exciting. 
I grew up on films like 'Singin' in the Rain' and 'Seven Brides for Seven Brothers.'
That's what I want!
It's like a cartoon."
And the anarchic violence in his films?
The BBC once called Mr. Woo "the Mozart of mayhem."
"Violence in real life is horrid, frightening," Mr. Woo said. 
"The news on television is scary, not movies. 
Movies are fake, not real. 
People know the movies are not real."
Mr. Woo, who moved to Los Angeles five years ago to flee what he termed the creative constraints of Hong Kong, is now poised to become an American success story after a 1993 misstep with "Hard Target," starring Jean-Claude Van Damme, and the far more successful 1996 movie "Broken Arrow," with Mr. Travolta and Christian Slater.
Thus far, however, Mr. Woo's fame rests on Hong Kong movies that have been lauded by directors like Martin Scorsese and Quentin Tarantino. 
Films like "A Better Tomorrow" (1986), "The Killer" (1988) and "Hard Boiled" (1992) transformed the traditionally low-budget king-fu action genre into bizarrely over-the-top fantasies inevitably involving two men inextricably linked and hurtling toward a fatal collision.
"Face/Off," a film released by Paramount, which received the best reviews of Mr. Woo's career, is a weird saga involving a law enforcement officer, played by Mr. Travolta, who undergoes radical surgery to "borrow" the face of Mr. Cage, a psychopath bent on destroying Los Angeles. 
Mr. Travolta wants to find the site of a poison gas bomb. 
Of course, things go awry. 
Mr. Cage awakens from a coma with the face of Mr. Travolta. The film has Mr. Woo's trademarks: a dizzy plot, hypercharged editing, blunt religious symbolism, offbeat humor and unimaginably creepy villains. 
Subtlety is not Mr. Woo's strong point.
In its opening as No. 1 this weekend, the film grossed $22.7 million, said the Exhibitor Relations Company, which tracks ticket sales. 
It outflanked Disney's "Hercules" as well as "Batman and Robin," which was No. 3 at the box office and dropped off so sharply in its second week that it looms as a major disappointment.
Referring to the movie, Mr. Woo said the duality of good and evil is central to the film and to his work. 
"It's my usual theme, always good and evil mirroring each other," he said, in an office near the 20th Century Fox studios in West Los Angeles, where he is starting work on a new film. 
"I like imperfect characters. 
Perfect heroes bore me."
Mr. Woo's films, with their choreographed and often slow-motion violence, seem surprisingly funny and bloodless, as if all that killing were not horrific. 
His sources, he said, are rooted in films by directors of the 1950's and 60's: Sam Peckinpah, Stanley Kubrick, Akira Kurosawa, Alfred Hitchcock and Arthur Penn.
As Peter Rainer, chairman of the National Board of Film Critics, wrote last week in the newspaper New Times: "Woo openly courts -- and satisfies -- our primal desire to see people pulverized. 
Even five years ago his brand of mayhem might have seemed too way out for American audiences, but because of the increasingly heightened violence in our movies -- and especially because of the Hong Kong movie influence in the films of Quentin Tarantino -- Woo may soon be anointed as Hollywood's new crown prince of estheticized gore."
Mr. Woo said he moved to Los Angeles in 1992 partly because he felt stymied in Hong Kong -- "The Government in Hong Kong, the police, treat filmmakers like beggars" -- and partly to spend more time with his family. 
"I worked seven days a week in Hong Kong. 
My children hardly saw my face, they never really had a father and there were misunderstandings, difficulties," said Mr. Woo, a compact man with a wide smile and an open, engaging manner. 
"I was guilty, very guilty."
"Now I stay home after work," said Mr. Woo, who lives with his wife, 15-year-old son and two daughters, 17 and 20. 
"I try to be a good father. 
I cook for them."
Mr. Woo himself is part of a vanguard of Hong Kong filmmakers working increasingly in Los Angeles and clearly a bit uneasy about the end of colonial rule after 156 years when Britain hands the colony back to China on Tuesday. 
.
"Some people say it will be tough on the film business at first," he said. 
"There will be censorship, but perhaps this will be temporary. 
I don't see many problems."
Mike Simpson, senior vice president of the William Morris agency, which represents many of Hong Kong's top filmmakers, agreed that there was some nervousness within the movie business there -- as well as anticipation.
Among the filmmakers the agency represents are Mr. Woo; Jackie Chan, the action star of "Rumble in the Bronx" and "Supercop"; Chow Yun-Fat, a frequent star of Mr. Woo's films who is making his Hollywood debut early next year opposite Mira Sorvino in "The Replacement Killers"; Stanley Tong, director of "Rumble in the Bronx," who is now making "Mr. 
Magoo" for Disney, and Michelle Yeoh, one of Hong Kong's top female movie stars, who appears in the new James Bond film, "Tomorrow Never Dies."
"There is some feeling of apprehension or wariness, of uncertainty," Mr. Simpson said. 
"There's also a sense of excitement."
Mr. Simpson said the migration of Chinese talent to Los Angeles had little to do with the handover. 
"The level and quality of films made there just began to go down and down," he said. 
"They were remaking bad versions of good films they made earlier."
He also noted that American action films had simply usurped many Chinese-language films in the Asian marketplace in recent years, leading to a deteriorating financial base for Hong Kong films and a decline in quality.
As for Mr. Woo, he said his next movie, called "King's Ransom," which is set to start filming later in the year, is a comedy.
A John Woo comedy?
Mr. Woo smiled. 
"It's like the 1960's heist movies, like 'To Catch a Thief' or 'The Thomas Crown Affair,' " he said. 
"It will, I hope, be funny and charming and elegant. 
Only a little bit of shooting."
