
A dissident who ranked third on the Chinese Government's list of "most wanted" student protesters after the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations has been admitted to the United States after fleeing China, the White House confirmed today.
The dissident, Liu Gang, 35, was arrested in June 1989 and sentenced to six years in prison and two years' deprivation of political rights. 
From remote Lingyuan Labor-Reform Camp in Liaoning Province, he smuggled out a letter accusing the authorities of torturing him, and he staged several hunger strikes.
After his release in June 1995, he was kept in isolation in his remote hometown of Liaoyan, with his phone cut off. 
He said he was unable to find a job or to live with his family. 
He violated his parole last month to go to Beijing, and from there he was smuggled to the United States.
In a telephone interview from Cambridge, Mass., where he is staying, Mr. Liu said he arrived in Boston on Thursday. 
But he refused to describe his route, saying he does not want to jeopardize the safety of his relatives in China and Hong Kong.
He said he expected to stay in the United States and attend school.
"I've just applied to go to school now, to some universities in Boston and other places," said Mr. Liu, who has a master's degree in physics.
He has not applied for political asylum, officials said. 
He was allowed into the United States under a provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act allowing entry "temporarily for immediate emergency reasons or the public interest."
The United States and China are sparring over the spread of nuclear weapons, intellectual piracy, Taiwan and human rights, with the expectation that Washington will soon impose billions of dollars in sanctions on the weapons and piracy issues.
The White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said the Liu case should not further damage relations with China. 
"We are confident we can maintain the broad constructive engagement with China which reflects the status of our current bilateral relations," he said.
Regarding Taiwan, the State Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, confirmed a report in The Washington Post that senior American officials met with Taiwan's national security adviser, Ting Mou-Shih, on March 11 in New York, to urge Taiwan to avoid provocative actions during China's military exercises at that time.
The American officials were Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff and Samuel R. Berger, deputy national security adviser. 
The meeting was one of the highest-level contacts since 1979, when Washington broke off diplomatic relations with Taipei.
Mr. Burns said he was unaware of any formal Chinese expression of unhappiness about the meeting. 
"In light of the tensions in the Taiwan Strait," he said, "the U.S. 
Government believed it was important to communicate directly and at a high level with both the People's Republic of China and with Taiwan."
