
INTERESTED in a trip around the world that will cost almost nothing?
You can visit this country without ever leaving Long Island.
Italy and China have always been easy destinations for hungry, value-conscious diners. 
Spain, Japan, Germany, Mexico, Greece, France, Ireland, India and Portugal have also become popular ports of call. 
But not until recently did Vietnam, Russia, Poland, Persia, El Salvador, the Dominican Republic, Turkey, Thailand and Afghanistan, among others, become accessible in terms of cuisine. 
Add some of the penny-wise, new American regional restaurants popping up locally and you have a diverse culinary chain on Long Island that circles the globe. 
The opportunity to eat your way around the world, without eating at all deeply into the family budget, is now a reality.
Most of the multi-national cuisine being served in Nassau and Suffolk originates in humble hang-outs brimming with authentic atmosphere that reflect each country's culture and spirit. 
In fact these ethnic spots, many of which are listed below, represent Long Island's best restaurant values.
 
AFGHANI
Kabul, at 1153 East Jericho Turnpike, in Huntington (549-5506), is one of the Island's most foreign restaurants, with its dissonant Middle-Eastern music, hanging leather and macrame lamps, hand-made rugs and filigreed curtains of hanging gourds. 
The most expensive entree, two lamb chops on a skewer, is also the best. 
But be sure to sample all the inexpensive appetizers, the aush soup, shish leek (a lamb and vegetable saute), sauteed pumpkin and all desserts.
 
CHINESE
There is no chow mein, chop suey, egg roll or egg foo young at the exceptional Fortune Wheel Seafood Restaurant in Levittown.
Asian and Western purists consider such menu mainstays gimmicky. 
Chinese food aficionados flock to the Fortune Wheel in the Nassau Mall at 3601 Hempstead Turnpike (579-4700), between Pathmark and Rickels. 
It is one of the Island's best choices for diners serious about Chinese meals. 
Although food of this sort is available in some Chinatown restaurants in Manhattan and Flushing, and many Hong Kong eating places, it is rarely found on the Island.
 
GERMAN
Koenig's, at 85 Tyson Avenue (354-2300), in Floral Park, has been serving mammoth portions of hefty, hearty, German food at modest prices for over a half century. 
It is especially well known for dishes like rouladen (rolled beef with onions, bacon, mustard and pickle), kassler rippchen, (smoked pork chops), a wurst platter of knackwurst, bauernwurst and bratwurst, tender beef goulash and pan-fried steak topped with crisp onions.
 
GREEK
The Mediterranean Snack Bar, a long-time local institution with the spirit of a neighborhood taverna, at 360 New York Avenue in Huntington (423-8982), gets my vote for the best bargain Greek restaurant on Long Island. 
This well- run, clean cafe, with its quick service, moderate prices and earthy authentic Greek dishes has, from its beginning, nearly a quarter of a century ago, had lines of diners waiting for tables. 
That is still the case, despite an expansion that doubled its capacity.
Although few of the expected Greek classics, like gyros, falafel, spanekopeta and moussaka are missing from the menu here, the Mediterranean Snack Bar excels with seafood.
The owner is a knowledgeable fisherman with a feel for the preparation of fish. 
In fact, he catches many of the blue fish, striped bass and other local varieties served at this store-front spot.
 
INDIAN
Soothing sitar music fills the air, tuxedoed waiters glide by, diners savor an array of dishes in an atmosphere of elegant serenity, amidst ornate Indian antiques, temple carvings and art. 
Bombay?
Calcutta?
Manhattan?
No, Jericho Turnpike in Syosset at mid-day, where an elaborate Indian buffet is served seven days a week at the Jewel of India, 347 Jericho Turnpike (677-9898).
This dinner-sized lunch costs $8.95 weekdays and $9.95 on weekends when it is even more bountiful. 
It is one of the Island's most outstanding luxury-value combinations. 
The Syosset restaurant is the Island branch of the well-regarded Jewel of India, which has been serving classic Indian cuisine in Manhattan for more than six years (a similar lunch costs $13.95 there).
The buffet, with soup, eight hot dishes, salad bar and condiments aplenty, provides an opportunity to sample from dishes that are familiar and foreign, spicy hot and mild and assertive and subtle. 
That is an especially welcome prospect for those who want to try Indian cuisine but are not secure enough to order any single dish.
 
IRISH
Dublin Delights Cafe, 244 Lake Avenue, St. James (862-6900), is a tiny sparkling shamrock of a place. 
Behind its multi-paned cottage windows are just six tables and a small bar. 
Inside the bright, cheery, clean cafe, diners in sweaters, plaid shirts and jeans eat Irish and English style pub food considerably superior to that usually found in Dublin or London. 
The wee Irish gem, hidden away in a shopping center, serves authentic dishes like bubble and squeak, shepherd's pie, Lancashire pot pie, Scotch eggs and, of course, corned beef and cabbage.
 
JAPANESE
Japanese food lovers and haters will find Restaurant Yamaguchi at 63 Main Street (883-3500) in Port Washington to their liking. 
Many familiar Japanese standbys are available as entrees or in smaller portions as appetizers. 
Tempuras, shrimp and vegetable, are lacy, crisp and delectable. 
Negima-yaki, tender beef rolled around scallions, broiled and served with teriyaki, is also done well at Yamaguchi as is sushi and sashimi. 
Conservative diners will find happiness with the tenderloin steak spiked by a tasty mustard sauce.
Restaurant Yamaguchi has wide appeal for its high quality food, inviting atmosphere, affordable prices and caring staff.
 
MEXICAN
Everything at Los Compadres, 243 Walt Whitman Road, Huntington Station (351-8384), is plastic, except the food. 
That means that the clean, modest Mexican luncheonette style restaurant is quite different from most of its suburban counterparts. 
The restaurant has a brisk takeout business at the same counter where sit-down diners place their orders. 
In fact, its slogan is "The Hottest Takeout in Town."
But whether eating in or taking out at this fast service spot with sombreros on the walls and a neon sign in the window, the prices are amazing, the greeting is friendly and the food says Mexico.
 
PORTUGUESE
The 100-seat Churrasquiera Bairrada, at 144 Jericho Turnpike in Mineola (739-3856), is a very different type Portuguese spot, with its wood-burning barbecue and herb-flavored authentic dishes like roast suckling pig and kid. 
Two people can split a whole barbecued chicken, accompanied by salad, rice, potatoes and vegetables for $14.95 or order rodizio, a dinner of unlimited quantities of five to seven meats served on skewers and presented tableside. 
It is accompanied by all the chopped cabbage or other green vegetable, black beans, rice and fried bananas anyone desires.
 
REGIONAL AMERICAN
The Cooke's In serves far more food than anyone has a right to expect for the prices it charges. 
Generosity, warmth and smiles are the keynotes at this modest storefront at 210 Depot Road in Huntington Station (424-2181). 
The restaurant specializes in hearty down-home Southern and American heartland dishes. 
Diners receive a complimentary fruit starter, bottomless glasses of iced tea and cups of coffee, both sweet and white potatoes, an entree, warm crusty bread, a family style bowl of salad, two vegetables and whatever else Juanita Cooke, the chef and owner, happens to have on hand.
Two entrees -- Southern fried chicken, four sizable pieces, and fried catfish with a zippy barbecue-like dipping sauce (both $8.95) -- boast light herb-infused crisp coatings that encase moist meat running with juices.
 
RUSSIAN
Russian restaurants have always been rare on Long Island. 
But the sparkling 40-seat storefront Cafe Samovar, opened by a warm, hospitable Russian family, at 2245 Long Beach Road in Oceanside (764-7676), has the potential to be around for quite a while.
Its hearty specialties consistently provide the earthy flavor bang of peasant food from Russia's heartland. 
Especially impressive are the pirogis ($5.25), varenikis ($4.95) and pelminis ($4.95), dumplings of various sizes and shapes.
 
SALVADORAN
Rincon Guanaco, a gleaming luncheonette-style storefront in Copaigue at 492 Oak Street (264-0324) is the largest and most accessible of a growing number of Central and South American restaurants to open on the Island.
Although this restaurant Salvadoreno, like the others, appeals mainly to Hispanic people who have settled in the region in recent years, an increasing number of adventurous longtime residents are visiting it as well. 
They are attracted by its tasty food, rock-bottom prices and warm atmosphere.
This bilingual restaurant knows what it is about, and that is reproducing the dishes of El Salvador. 
Included among them is the country's national dish, pupusas. 
A pupusa is made up of two corn or masa tortillas that form a pita-like pocket stuffed with the Central American version of chicharron -- pork, tomatoes and spices that are virtually cooked into a spread -- and warmed on a comal, or Mayan pottery griddle.
 
THAI
Siam Lotus again proves that good things come in small packages. 
The tiny Bay Shore restaurant at 1664 Union Boulevard (968-8196), jump starts bored palates with some of the best Thai food on the Island. 
The winning formula is familiar. 
The owners are ever-present. 
The husband is in the front and the wife in the kitchen. 
He is a gracious host and waiter and she is a talented chef.
Portions here are smaller than those at Chinese restaurants, but prices are rock bottom, enabling patrons to sample many dishes.
 
TURKISH
Although most Middle Eastern restaurants are modest storefront spots, the new Medeast Chalet at 5 Railroad Avenue in Roslyn (621-7975), has retained the enchanting Early American charm of the previous occupant, The Chalet. 
Despite its rugged stone taproom, appealing fireplaces and tree-covered deck, the prices here are modest (most entrees cost between $12 and $16) and much of the food delivers a flavor rush from the first bite. 
This is an Eastern Mediterranean restaurant specializing in tasty Turkish dishes, especially those that feature eggplant.
 
VIETNAMESE
Although a number of hole-in-the-wall Vietnamese spots have failed on the Island, Maxia, in Bethpage might well have staying power.
This modestly priced Southeast Asian outpost at 560 Stewart Avenue (942-0776) is an authentic place to sample Vietnamese cooking, which has its own distinctive character. 
It is a lighter, more subtle Chinese spinoff with Indonesian, French and Thai overtones that stress ingredients like fish sauce, coconuts and coconut milk, white rice, lemongrass, cilantro, cinnamon and plum sauce.
Although many of the dishes look and sound like familiar Chinese favorites, they rarely taste the same. 
The greaseless chicken spring roll ($3.95) starter, for example, a mix of mushrooms, chicken and shrimp cooked with oyster sauce, rock sugar, sesame oil and white pepper, among other ingredients, is quite different from its Chinese counterpart. 
Even fried won tons ($2.45), a Chinese standard-bearer, contain an intricate blend of honey, cilantro, dried bean curd and the ever-present fish sauce at their meaty middles.
