
The Clinton Administration mounted the most detailed defense of its satellite export control policy today. 
Three top officials said that China's military had not benefited from transfers of sensitive American technology and that safeguards were in place to prevent any such leakage.
The spirited rebuttals by senior officials from the Departments of Commerce, State and Defense marked a counteroffensive against a growing Republican-led attack on the Administration's handling of satellite exports to China, a policy that Republicans have charged threatens American national security.
"We do not believe that the commercial space launch activities that have been authorized by licenses and monitored under these procedures have benefited China's missile or military satellite companies," John D. Holum, an acting undersecretary of state, told a House hearing today.
And Jan M. Lodal, the principal deputy undersecretary of defense for policy, said, "The current system protects national security."
The Administration officials said intelligence agencies have found no proof that any sensitive technology was transferred to the Chinese military through normal licensing channels. 
They asserted that adequate safeguards were in place to protect against that. 
But they did not rule out that there might have been unauthorized transfers. 
That is a question the Justice Department is looking into in the case of two American satellite companies.
But critics say it is very hard to tell whether there was a transfer of technology because the Chinese missiles that launch American satellites are very similar to the Chinese missiles that carry nuclear warheads. 
Improving the reliability of the commercial missiles might help the Chinese military, even inadvertently, with its nuclear program.
Despite the united front at today's hearings, cracks of dissension within the Administration's ranks and among usually loyal Democrats broke through.
The Government's arms control agency warned last year that waiving a ban on satellite exports to China to entice Beijing to curb missile sales had accomplished "nothing."
The warning by the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, contained in a memorandum apparently sent to State Department officials, was made public at the House hearing. 
The memo undercut a fundamental reason for granting waivers to allow satellite exports to China despite a ban imposed after the 1989 massacre in Tiananmen Square.
"History has proven that the only time we have gotten movement from the Chinese on missile proliferation has been in the face of a penalty being imposed," the memo said. 
"Carrots have gotten us nothing."
But the agency's advisory was not included in the State Department's official recommendation to the White House earlier this year. 
President Clinton approved the waiver last February, despite objections from the Justice Department that it would undermine an ongoing criminal inquiry into whether two satellite makers divulged sensitive information to Chinese rocket scientists.
Mr. Holum, who also heads the arms control agency, told an unusual joint hearing of two House committees, National Security and International Relations, that the warning was not adopted because "it would have been very disruptive" to broader American commercial interests.
In an afternoon Senate hearing, Senator Max W. Cleland of Georgia became one of the first Democrats to openly criticize the White House's shift of licensing authority for all commercial satellites to the Commerce Department from the State Department in 1996. 
"I've got more and more concern about Commerce becoming the lead dog here," said Senator Cleland. 
"I'd rather hedge my bets and put national security first and commerce second."
The back-to-back hearings over seven hours featuring the Administration witnesses capped a frenzied day on Capitol Hill over the wide-ranging China accusations, and came just a week before Mr. Clinton visits China.
The Director of Central Intelligence, George J. Tenet, updated the House Intelligence Committee in a closed, two-and-a-half hour briefing on a series of conflicting Government assessments. 
They involve whether two satellite makers who are the focus of the Justice inquiry -- Loral Space & Communications and Hughes Electronics -- jeopardized national security by discussing results of their independent review of a failed launch of a satellite on a Chinese Long March missile in February 1996.
With little dissension, the House approved a resolution, 409 to 10, to create a special select committee to lead its inquiry on the China accusations. 
The 10 who voted against the resolution were Democrats.
Despite bipartisan backing for the resolution, Democrats criticized Republicans during the debate for spending too much money on duplicate investigations of President Clinton and Democratic fund-raising practices. 
And they expressed concern that the work of the select committee would fall captive to what they labeled a Republican witchhunt to tarnish Mr. Clinton and curry favor with conservative voters.
At the House and Senate hearings, Administration officials said allowing American satellites to be launched on Chinese rockets was a "wise" policy inititally set by Republican Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush to help make up for a shortage of American launching services.
And by transferring commercial satellite licensing authority to the Commerce Department, the Clinton aides said, the Administration was completing a shift that President Bush started in 1992. 
In a nutshell, the State Department considers national security implications for sensitive exports, while the Commerce Department also weighs American commercial interests.
Or, as William A. Reinsch, undersecretary of commerce for export administration, told Senators: "Commerce is an open, transparent, time-sensitive approach. 
State's is not. 
We've developed a 'process-friendly' " approach.
The General Accounting Office said the shift in licensing authority had loosened controls of satellite exports. 
But Mr. Reinsch disagreed, saying the Administration had added safeguards, including a broader role for the Pentagon and intelligence agencies to review export applications. 
Critics say those protections still fall far short of the State Department's regime.
"The existing Commerce licensing system fully protects our national security and foreign policy concerns," Mr. Reinsch said.
      
