
Only weeks after signing a global covenant calling for freedom of speech and assembly, China has taken new steps to suppress political organizations and debate.
On Monday, Government agents closed a recently formed independent think tank in Beijing that sponsored research and open seminars on democracy and current affairs.
Government censors have also barred the further distribution of a path-breaking book of essays on political change, people with ties to the book said today. 
And, during the last three days, the police have questioned or detained more than 20 democracy advocates who had planned a show of support for a colleague who is being evicted from his home and whose wife was forced out of her teaching job after he applied to register a new political party.
The measures seem part of a pattern in recent months. 
Over all, the climate for open discussion is somewhat looser than it was during the previous nine years, since the violent crackdown on demonstrators in 1989. 
But security agents have not hesitated to harass or detain people who try to form independent organizations or who publicly question the primacy of the Communist Party.
The think tank closed on Monday, the China Development Union, was started this year by a 42 year-old former official and businessman, Peng Ming. 
It has sponsored research and frequent public seminars, attended by a few dozen people, on topics ranging from democratic theory to environmental policy.
Recently, Mr. Peng started enlisting new members. 
He has said he hopes to sign up millions in a movement to push for new policies.
Mr. Peng's ideas are somewhat eclectic and he has had few associations with the better known, and often more radical, dissidents here. 
But he has walked a risky legal line. 
In order to bypass the rule that all groups have Government sponsors, he had registered the China Development Union in Hong Kong.
But on Monday, agents who said they were from the Beijing Bureau of Civil Affairs entered the union offices, held Mr. Peng and eight others for three hours of questioning, said the group was operating illegally and took away the office computer and other documents. 
According to Mr. Peng, they also searched the home of an American citizen and businesswoman who is a union board member, Qiao Zhihui, known as Wisdom Qiao, and took away her computer and other documents.
In an interview today, Mr. Peng said that while he believed the closure was illegal, he would comply with the orders to cease the union. 
But he vowed to continue the activities of a separate affiliated entity, the China Development New Strategy Research Institute, including its research and public forums. 
"They didn't say that was illegal," Mr. Peng said.
Whether the tactic will work is unclear since on Oct. 
13 the institute's sponsoring Government agency severed its ties. 
The institute also remains registered in Hong Kong.
In another crackdown, during the last three days the police temporarily detained several democracy advocates who planned to travel to Shandong Province, on the east coast, in support of a destitute colleague. 
Many more were questioned.
The dissidents had announced plans to travel to Dongping city in Shandong where Xie Wanjun has been punished for trying to register a new opposition party, which has been declared illegal. 
Mr. Xie faces eviction from his home on Sunday and his wife has lost her teaching job, dissidents said.
Among those detained was one of the best-known dissidents still in China, Xu Wenli, a veteran of the Democracy Wall movement of the 1970's who has been repeatedly detained for short periods during the last six months. 
He was held yesterday for 10 hours.
"We have repeatedly made it clear to Chinese authorities that the recent detention of political activists is a step in the wrong direction," the State Department said today in Washington.
Last week, China held its own international conference on human rights, where officials boasted that the Chinese view of human rights as a relative concept, adapted to national traditions and needs, was gaining international acceptance.
Early this month China signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
But, like any country, it has the right, whenever it eventually ratifies the treaty, to override any clauses it deems to contradict Chinese law.
The book Government censors have suppressed is "Political China: Facing the Era of Choosing a New Structure."
Published in August by China Today Publishing House, it brought together 39 recently published essays on political change and democratic thought by 32 scholars, journalists and former Government officials.
While it is hardly radical -- the book avoids any discussion of multi-party politics or calls for electing senior officials -- it reflects the impatient ferment among liberal intellectuals who are questioning the ossified, corruption-riddled system of Communist rule. 
It was edited by two journalists with official newspapers, Dong Yuyu of The Guangming Daily and Shi Binghai of The China Economic Times.
Mr. Shi was arrested on Sept. 
5 and is still in detention. 
Associates said they did not believe his involvement with the book was the reason, but rather some other activity -- possibly contacts with the former Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang, who has been under house arrest in Beijing since he was ousted in 1989 for being too soft on the student demonstrators.
The first edition of "Political China" ran to 30,000 copies, most of which have already been sold. 
With more orders pouring in from bookstores around the country, the publisher printed an additional 30,000 copies. 
But early this month it was ordered not to distribute them by the Administration of Press and Publications, according to people with ties to the book.
      
