
Each year, nearly every second-grader in China goes through a solemn rite of initiation.
Lined up before an audience of classmates, teachers and perhaps some beaming parents, the school band playing at the side, they stand at attention as sixth-graders march up and place red kerchiefs around their necks. 
An older student leads them in the pledge:
"I am a Young Pioneer. 
I pledge under the Young Pioneer flag that I am determined to follow the guidance of the Chinese Communist Party, to study hard, work hard and be ready to devote all my strength to the Communist cause."
From that day on, through the sixth grade, the students wear their kerchiefs to school every day -- except in hot weather, when they wear a red pin instead.
As Young Pioneers, along with their normal studies they learn about the Communist Party's glorious creation of a strong China, the importance of respecting authority and the merits of doing good deeds.
Supervised by a schoolwide Young Pioneer instructor, students organize themselves into teams, elect their most upright classmates as leaders, raise the national flag and inspect each others' dress and discipline. 
They read about model Pioneers who gave their lives while saving sheep from the cold or foiling robbers. 
They participate in after-school activities like music, dancing or chess.
Combining elements of the Scouts, the Safety Patrol and the Hall Monitor, larded with thick, simple doses of patriotism and Communism, the Young Pioneers remains a shared experience of China's children.
For a beleaguered Communist Party preparing to celebrate, and whitewash, 50 years of rule on Oct. 
1, this school-house club is about the only place any more where Communism can be offered and received as a pure, idealistic force for good.
"Every child is a blank paper," said Wang Chunxin, the 22-year-old Young Pioneer organizer at the Yonganli Primary School in Beijing.
"We have to teach them that China is a socialist country and the Communist Party is our leader," she said on the school grounds the other day, with evident sincerity. 
"We help children grow up better."
"When students first put on the red scarf they feel very proud," said Ms. Wang. "Because in this society, everyone should be in some kind of organization and the Young Pioneers is the best one for young people."
In today's buoyant, fast-developing China, the Communist Party's reach into daily life has drastically shrunk. 
For children, though, grade school and the party's Young Pioneer club are practically indivisible. 
Asked where one begins and the other leaves off, Ms. Wang and the school principal both had trouble comprehending the question. 
Since all the students become Young Pioneers, they said, how can you make a distinction?
After grade school, the next step up the Communist ladder is the Communist Youth League, which a majority of students join by the end of high school for social if not political reasons. 
Then in college or workplaces, a select minority -- including active leaders from the Youth League -- are accepted as members of the party, which now has 61 million members, or 1 in 20 Chinese.
Most Chinese today are cynical about Communist ideology and many younger people are simply indifferent, suggesting that the fervent message propounded by the Young Pioneers does not entirely stick. 
But in more subtle ways, many Chinese say, those years of hearing about the party's all-embracing and benign role may have lasting effects.
"Little kids don't really understand the talk about 'loving the party,' and later you may think some of the Young Pioneer stuff was funny," said a professional woman in her 30's. 
"But that kind of talk gets into your blood."
The woman said the patriotic and nationalistic elements of that constant childhood message had the deepest impact -- so that nearly everyone, for example, gets emotional about China's claim of sovereignty over Taiwan or Tibet.
In this respect, the role of the Young Pioneers may resemble that of schools, youth groups and founding myths in any country, all working to imbue youngsters with patriotism.
But there is a difference: in the Young Pioneers, patriotism is equated with devotion to the party and the nation. 
And this message, delivered to generations of youngsters in the same cheerful spirit as how to add and subtract, may help make it seem natural to many Chinese that a single organization should maintain such unrivaled power.
"Chairman Mao founded China, Deng Xiaoping made us rich and now Jiang Zemin is leading us into the future," was the capsule view of the last half-century given by 12-year-old Li Jia. 
Ms. Li, an earnest sixth-grader, is 1 of 15 top Young Pioneer leaders among more than 700 students at the Yonganli school. 
She was selected by authorities to meet a visiting journalist.
Ms. Li was not prepared to discuss the ins and outs of Deng Xiaoping Theory, but she easily rattled off the weekly schedule of Young Pioneer activities, from ceremonies to raise the flag, salute young martyrs and inspect students' kerchiefs to more relaxed after-school hobbies.
"As a leader, I have to be a good student, get good grades and be willing to serve the other students," she said. 
"I feel that we are the future masters of our country, so we have to study hard to build our country stronger."
"I've learned that before the founding of the People's Republic, China was a very poor country," Ms. Li said when asked what the anniversary meant to her. 
If nothing else, it was clear she was a good student of the party's take on history.
"Since Liberation, under the leadership of the Communist Party and with the efforts of our people, China's economy and defense and people's lives have greatly improved," she continued. 
"Now China is a strong country."
