
An envoy from Taiwan today concluded five days of talks with mainland China officials, clearing the way for a historic meeting between senior representatives of each side to try to turn four decades of enmity into a cooperative future.
The meeting will mark the first time since 1949 -- when the Communists defeated the Nationalist Government and forced it to flee to Taiwan -- that top representatives of the two rival Governments get together to discuss their differences. 
Officials from both sides said they expected the meeting to be held in Singapore, and China said it would take place on April 27 and 28.
 
Opening a Dialogue
The meeting is not expected to deal with the weightiest questions between Taiwan and mainland China, like possible reunification. 
But it is intended to result in cooperation between the rival Governments to fight crime and smuggling and to protect the investments on the mainland by Taiwanian businesses.
Perhaps most important, the talks will begin a high-level dialogue between rivals who regularly shelled each other throughout the 1950's, 60's and 70's. 
Both sides officially regard Taiwan as part of China, and each claims to be the legitimate government of all China. 
Even now, tensions remain high, and the mainland openly reserves the right to attack Taiwan.
There has been occasional talk of possible secret meetings between the sides in the 1980's but there is no evidence that they ever took place.
Chinese television news showed a beaming Wang Daohan, who will lead the Chinese delegation to the Singapore talks, pumping the hand of Cheyne J. Y. Chiu, a former Taiwan presidential aide. 
Mr. Chiu returned tonight to Taipei to brief Taiwanian leaders including C. F. Koo, a member of the governing Nationalist Party's highest echelon, who will lead the Taiwanian delegation to the talks in Singapore.
Mr. Wang is a former Mayor of Shanghai who heads the Chinese organization that deals with practical problems relating to Taiwan, like repatriating criminals, smuggling across the Taiwan Strait and inheritance of property. 
Mr. Koo, a close associate of President Lee Teng-hui, is in charge of a similar organization in Taiwan.
President Lee has cautioned that the talks in Singapore are mainly intended to build mutual trust.
"We must be very patient in forging rapprochement with the mainland," Mr. Lee said recently. 
"Exchanges across the Taiwan Strait remain at non-official levels and the Koo-Wang meeting aims to resolve administrative and technical problems arising from such exchanges."
The meeting will come at a time when Taiwan's relationship with the mainland seems to be at a crossroads, perhaps a dangerous crossroads.
On the one hand, economic and cultural contacts across the 100-mile Taiwan Strait are growing rapidly. 
A Chinese Peking Opera troupe just left to perform in Taipei, and bilateral trade last year -- almost all via third places like Hong Kong -- rose nearly 28 percent to a record $7.4 billion.
On the other hand, many people on Taiwan say they do not want the mainland back even if it is offered to them. 
The first direct presidential election on Taiwan is to be held in 1996, and it is possible -- though unlikely -- that an opposition candidate will win and call for Taiwan to declare itself an independent nation, separate from the Chinese mainland.
China has repeatedly said that in such circumstances it will use military force to prevent Taiwan from becoming independent. 
A Hong Kong magazine, The Mirror, which has good ties to Beijing, recently published what it said was a confidential speech by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, underscoring the threat of military intervention.
"The two sides must be unified," the magazine quoted Mr. Deng as saying.
"If Taiwan engages in 'one China, one Taiwan' or in Taiwan independence, if it colludes with foreign forces to interfere in China's internal affairs, we'll have no choice," Mr. Deng reportedly added. 
"We'll have to use force to solve the Taiwan question."
 
Trading and Visiting
Mr. Deng acknowledged that such intervention would force China to pay an enormous price, but he added, "We must pay, and we can afford the cost."
Taiwan and mainland China have no formal relations and no direct flights or other transportation links. 
But Taiwan seems to be moving toward permitting some direct links, perhaps within the next year, and there are growing calls for an informal mechanism for handling problems arising from the booming trade and tourism across the Taiwan Strait.
According to accounts in the official Chinese press of the meetings in the last few days, both sides agreed to establish "a systematic channel for exchanges."
This is likely to include an informal Taiwan office in Beijing, with Taiwan representatives.
During the discussions in Beijing, leaders of each side initialed agreements that will speed registered mail between Taiwan and China and that will make it easier for a notarized document from one place to be recognized in the other.
The opposition party in Taiwan, the Democratic Progressive Party, has warned that Taiwan Nationalists and the Chinese Communists may reach a secret agreement for eventual reunification. 
Its requests to sit in on the talks in Singapore have been rejected by both sides.
