
More than a year after the tramp steamer Golden Venture went aground off Queens with a cargo of 300 illegal Chinese immigrants, a Government crackdown on the ship-borne smuggling of Chinese to this country has apparently led smugglers to open a new route through the Caribbean.
So far this year, only two large ships, together carrying just over 300 Chinese immigrants, have been intercepted on the high seas, a sign of the waning success of ship-borne smuggling. 
More than a dozen ships were intercepted in the year before, yielding 2,533 arrests.
But while the Government's blockade has choked off one avenue of entry, officials say smugglers have adopted a new route in which small groups of Chinese are taken to Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands, where they can board domestic flights to the mainland, avoiding the tighter inspection of international travelers.
"The smugglers have had to alter their modus operandi, and this is the new avenue that has come to the forefront," said John Wright, director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's criminal section.
While the number of smuggled Chinese is minuscule compared with the millions of Mexicans and Central Americans who try to cross into this country each year, the continuing smuggling underscores the difficulty in sealing the nation's borders and controlling the increasingly sophisticated gangs of international traffickers.
"It's like if you squeeze a balloon, it just pops out around your hand," said Comdr. Robert Morrison, chief of the Coast Guard's migrant-interdiction branch. 
"If we tighten up, they're going to look where there's a weak link."
The shift to the Caribbean route became apparent in spring of 1993, officials said. 
In the year before, the Border Patrol arrested just 10 Chinese in Puerto Rico. 
Last year, the number rose to 251 and has jumped to 453 so far this year.
Mr. Wright said many of the Chinese apprehended in Puerto Rico had begun their journeys in Fujian Province in China. 
Typically, the would-be immigrants would fly Latin America with an eventual destination of Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic.
Using small boats at night, the immigrants would cross the 100-mile Mona Passage that separates the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico.
Once in Puerto Rico, immigrants would try to board domestic flights to the mainland or continue northward by boat to Florida. 
Mr. Wright said virtually all of the Chinese apprehended over the last year said their final destination was New York City.
So far this year, the Coast Guard has intercepted only two boats carrying Chinese immigrants in the Caribbean. 
Other boats, carrying a mix of Dominican, Pakistani, Cuban and Chinese illegal immigrants, have been discovered by the Border Patrol, the immigration service says.
As arrests in Puerto Rico have mounted, the smugglers have once again begun to modify their routes. 
Just this month, a group of 27 Chinese who had departed from Antigua were picked up by the Coast Guard off Charlotte Amalie in the United States Virgin Islands.
"There is a major influx coming into this area," Mr. Wright said. 
"My sense is the operations are moving to South and Central America and the Caribbean."
The emergence of the Caribbean route is the latest twist in the long-range cat-and-mouse game that has evolved between the Government and Chinese smugglers.
While Chinese illegal immigration has gone on for decades, the rise of highly organized Far Eastern smuggling organizations is a modern phenomenon, with immigrants aboard the large freighters and fishing vessels favored by smugglers often paying$20,000 to $30,000 each for passage to the United States.
Experts say that the smuggling of Chinese immigrants by boat began about five years ago, although the first large-scale arrests of illegal immigrants were not made until the arrival of the I-Mao No. 306 off the coast of Southern California in 1991 with 118 Chinese aboard.
The number apprehended was relatively small, but the use of large vessels as smuggling ships marked a disturbing turn in which the coastline of the United States, like the southern border, became open territory for illegal immigration.
From 1981 through 1990, the Coast Guard had apprehended only 28 Chinese trying to enter the country by sea. 
In 1991, the year the I-Mao No. 306 arrived, the number jumped to 146, to 791 in 1992 and to 2,533 in 1993.
What brought the issue to a boil was the arrival of the Golden Venture off Rockaway Beach, Queens, on June 6, 1993. 
Ten Chinese immigrants died as they tried to swim ashore through the frigid waters.
Shaken by the Golden Venture incident, the Government announced a sweeping plan devised by the National Security Council and several other Federal agencies to crack down on the multimillion-dollar business of Asian smuggling.
Commander Morrison of the Coast Guard said officials hoped to improve intelligence on smuggling ship departures, increase surveillance of the seas, improve coordination on illegal immigration enforcement with foreign governments and intercept smuggling ships as far from American waters as possible.
Some ships were intercepted as far out as 1,600 nautical miles from the United States. 
In several cases, illegal immigrants were taken to other countries, including Guatemala and the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and then flown back to China.
The strategy has sharply curtailed the arrival of ships to American waters. 
So far this year, the only ships intercepted by the Coast Guard have been the Jin Yinn No. 1, stopped in April with 113 Chinese immigrants about 980 nautical miles southwest of San Diego and the Captain Denny, which was it was spotted from the air in June about 350 nautical miles east of Norfolk, Va.
Commander Morrison said interviews with Chinese immigrants arrested by the immigration service in the United States had indicated that two other ships might have escaped detection.
From last year's high point, the number of Chinese apprehended at sea by the Coast Guard has dropped to 340 so far this year.
"As far as the large mother ship operations are concerned, the numbers have dropped off significantly," he said. 
"We've basically been having a full-court press and we're optimistic."
But Commander Morrison added that while the time of the big ships appeared to be waning, it was still uncertain whether the overall flow of illegal Chinese immigrants by sea had begun to slow or had simply shifted to other routes that are more difficult to detect.
"It's the million-dollar question," Commander Morrison said. 
"If you look at the numbers, you can see that things have changed. 
We are encouraged that we are getting less of the big vessels, but the fact is criminal organizations don't tell us what they're doing. 
It's really hard to say what is happening now."
