
The Commerce Department has scheduled an interagency meeting for Tuesday in a final effort to approve the sale of crop-duster aircraft to Iran and jet engines and satellite gear to China before President Bush leaves office, Administration officials said today.
The sales are strongly opposed by the Defense Department, which is worried about increasing the military power of the two countries, and about the precedent the sale could set for the export of even more advanced commercial equipment with potential military applications.
The Administration is also considering whether to allow the sale of a petrochemical factory to Iran but will not decide this issue on Tuesday. 
The factory would produce as a byproduct large quantities of hydrogen cyanide, a primitive chemical-warfare gas that, unlike a related chemical, potassium cyanide, is not considered militarily useful, an Administration official said this afternoon.
 
First Sale of Planes in Decade
If approved, the delivery of 10 single-seat crop-dusters to Iran would be the first sale of American aircraft to Teheran since the bombing of the United States Marine barracks in Lebanon in October 1983, when 241 Americans were killed. 
Iran was suspected of involvement in the bombing.
The jet engines are intended for use in Chinese military training aircraft, but a Defense Department analysis found that their components could also be used to build cruise missiles that could fly farther and carry a heavier payload than anything now in the Chinese arsenal.
The satellite gear consists of a cesium-beam laser component that would be used as a clock to coordinate other satellite systems.
 
Commerce vs. Defense
Federal law requires Government approval for the transfer of technology with potential military applications to nations that have Communist governments or have been labeled by the State Department as supporters of terrorism, as Iran has.
The approval process has deeply divided the Administration, three officials said.
The Commerce Department has advocated the sales as necessary to insure that United States businesses do not lose foreign markets.
State Department officials have been busy with the arms control agreement with Russia signed on Sunday and have not taken an active role in the dispute, said all three officials, who insisted on anonymity.
 
Some Find Consensus Unlikely
The Policy Coordinating Committee on technology transfers, which has representatives from the State, Defense and Commerce Departments, will meet Tuesday at the request of the Commerce Department to try to form a consensus on the sales. 
One official predicted that the committee would be unable to reach a consensus because of the Defense Department's concerns, and would forward the issue to a top interagency committee, which is unlikely to meet before Mr. Bush leaves office on Jan. 
20.
But another official said many in the Administration felt that because the sales deals had been struck during Mr. Bush's tenure, there was an obligation to resolve them rather than leave them to President-elect Bill Clinton.
The crop-dusters represent the most difficult issue because many people associated them with gas warfare.
 
Use in Gas Warfare Disputed
Iraq has long been rumored to have used crop-dusters to dump lethal chemical gases on Kurdish civilians, but no evidence has ever been found to prove that crop-dusters were used, said Anthony H. Cordesman, an adjunct professor of national security studies at Georgetown University. 
A recent study by the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence Agency found that crop-dusters would be very difficult to use for chemical warfare because the pilots would be likely to be killed by the gas.
The United States has already allowed the sale of several European jetliners with American parts to Iran, but has barred any sale of completely American-made planes. 
The Boeing Company tentatively agreed last year to sell nearly $1 billion worth of jetliners to Iran Air if American policy were to change and allow such sales.
If the United States does not sell the crop-dusters, other countries will do so, said Fred P. Ayres, the chairman and owner of the Ayres Corporation. 
The company, based in Albany, Ga., is seeking permission to export 10 of its Ayres Turbo Thrush crop-dusters to Iran. 
Poland and Russia are already leasing 100 crop-dusters to Iran, he said.
