
The World Bank said today that the AIDS epidemic is about to explode in China, India and eastern Europe and threw its political and financial weight behind needle exchange, condom distribution and other prevention programs.
In its first extensive report on AIDS, the bank said it was prepared to spend hundreds of millions of dollars in countries that will carry out sound programs to help control the world epidemic that has infected 23 million people and killed 6 million.
The AIDS epidemic is increasing poverty and decreasing educational opportunities in the developing world, and without condom distribution, needle exchange and other prevention programs, the epidemic cannot be stopped, said Martha Ainsworth, a senior economist at the bank.
"Failure to act now will cost millions of lives," Ms. Ainsworth, an author of the report, said at a news conference at the bank's headquarters here.
The bank has spent $800 million on programs to control H.I.V., the AIDS virus, in developing countries since 1986 and will respond to demand from its member countries, said Richard G. A. Feachem, who oversees the bank's AIDS work. 
He said "we would certainly double" such funding but said no upper limit has been set for the amount of additional funds for such programs.
Governments have a fundamental responsibility to prevent H.I.V. infection among people who have multiple sex partners, inject drugs and share unsterile needles because prevention measures aimed at those groups "will prevent the largest number of infections among all people -- even among people who do not take risks," the report said.
"Political leaders and government officials must take the necessary steps to confront the epidemic, even when these are politically controversial," said Joseph E. Stiglitz, the bank's chief economist.
In developing countries, nearly half of the cases are among women, and AIDS is reversing decades of progress in improving the quality of life. 
In Africa, for example, AIDS has shortened life expectancy by 22 years in Zimbabwe and by 11 years in the Ivory Coast and Burkina Fasso, the bank said.
The 353-page report identifies priorities for developing countries so governments can allocate scarce resources and find fair and cost-effective measures to deal with AIDS and their many other pressing problems.
The report is intended to offer a framework for governments to decide on programs to control H.I.V. by "pointing out the minimum set of activities that all governments should engage in to improve the efficiency and equity of prevention programs."
Dr. Peter Piot, who heads the United Nations AIDS program in Geneva, said in an interview that the report would help him deal with heads of state about the disease because the World Bank "is politically very important" in third-world countries.
The bank said the AIDS situation is not hopeless. 
More than two billion people live in areas of the world where AIDS is still relatively scarce, even among people most likely to contract and spread AIDS, Mr. Stiglitz said.
However, China and India "are set to have very large epidemics, and very strenuous action taken now can attenuate the magnitude of those epidemics but cannot prevent them completely," Dr. Feacham said.
Governments can change people's behavior with education and condoms, the bank said.
Ms. Ainsworth cited a program in Nairobi, Kenya, involving 500 sex workers. 
They were treated for sexually transmitted diseases, and with education their condom use was raised to 80 percent. 
The measures prevented 10,000 H.I.V. infections per year among the clients of the prostitutes, the clients' spouses and other partners of the sex workers.
If 500 men chosen randomly from the community had achieved the same level of condom use, about 80 H.I.V. infections would have been prevented each year.
Similar benefits would be expected among those who have many sex partners, such as truck drivers, bar workers, military personnel and migrant workers, Ms. Ainsworth said.
Illustrating how rapidly H.I.V. can spread when no sterile equipment is used, Ms. Ainsworth cited experience in the Ukraine where the infection level among injecting drug users was less than 2 percent in January 1995 but had soared to 57 percent 11 months later.
Bank officials said there was strong evidence that well-designed and well-executed needle-exchange programs limit H.I.V. spread among people who inject drugs.
In drawing on lessons learned about AIDS prevention throughout the world, bank officials cited Australia and Thailand for having good AIDS programs in a developed and developing country respectively.
   
