
The task for the student air traffic controller was routine: tell the pilot to maintain level flight and pass over a specific point before proceeding to a landing at Orlando International Airport.
But in this drill, the controller was Chinese, as was the man in the role of the pilot. 
They were among 15 controllers who spent the last eight weeks here learning to speak and understand an unfamiliar language in which the fate of hundreds of lives can turn on a single phrase.
"TWA 754, Orlando approach," said the controller, Shu Xiaobin, identifying himself to the plane as he had been drilled. 
"Maintain 6,000 feet."
He continued, "Proceed direct to ----," then paused and said something the pilot did not understand, possibly because it sounded nothing like the destinations Mr. Shu announces in Jiangxi Province or the ones heard around Beijing by the man playing pilot, Li Jianming. 
"What?"
Mr. Li said over his headset. 
"Proceed direct to what?"
This was just an exercise, at an air traffic control laboratory at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University here. 
But starting in just over a year, Chinese controllers are to begin talking in English to all pilots, both Chinese and foreign, in all parts of China with international traffic.
Including the 15 Chinese controllers, Embry-Riddle has trained 75 such students from China in a rare international program that teaches veteran controllers to work in another language at a time when English-speaking air traffic is rapidly growing in their country. 
Officials at the school say the controllers arrive here with varying levels of training in English and leave here with skills that are better, but still uneven.
Proficiency in English among air traffic controllers and pilots is a problem around the world, and has been blamed for several recent crashes. 
Some airlines put an interpreter in the cockpit, and at critical moments, some pilots whose English is not adequate have been known to obtain language help from flight attendants whose English is better.
But with airplanes moving at hundreds of miles an hour in often crowded airspace, American safety experts worry about such practices. 
They say that nothing can substitute for the language abilities of the pilots and controllers themselves. 
After an American Airlines jet crashed in Colombia a year ago, the National Transportation Safety Board recommended that the Federal Aviation Administration do more to help improve the language proficiency of foreign controllers worldwide.
"It's certainly an issue that needs vigilance," said Barry M. Sweedler, the director of the office of safety recommendations at the board.
As the world grows smaller, Mr. Sweedler and others say they think that the language gap may grow larger because, he said, "air traffic will be expanding to nations that haven't had as great a need to have controllers proficient in English."
That description fits China. 
In early 1995, Delta Air Lines asked the Chinese authorities for permission to fly a new route into Beijing. 
Because the route would take the planes over Heilongjian, Jilin and Liaoning, three northeastern provinces where few controllers spoke English, the Civil Aviation Authority of China set a price: Delta would have to arrange to train controllers in English.
Delta sent them to Embry-Riddle, a 70-year-old institution that is the world's largest and oldest institution of higher learning dedicated to aviation. 
United Air Lines and Federal Express, which also want to expand their routes in China, have also sponsored such courses. 
Financing for Mr. Shu's group was provided by Federal Express. 
The airlines pay about $100,000 for each group of 15 students.
China will need hundreds more because the central Government has set Jan. 
1, 1998, as the date when controllers and pilots are to speak English to one another in all sectors with international traffic. 
This is a safety measure used all over the world, so that all pilots in a sector can listen in on all conversations and know the locations of all other planes.
Some of those listening are native speakers of English, but others are not. 
In the case of China, there are pilots of planes from Germany, Italy and other countries who are expecting the conversations to be intelligible in English.
Chen Yawen, the deputy director of the air traffic control department in the Chinese Civil Aviation Authority, who arrived here today for the graduation ceremonies, said in an interview that the change would have to be phased in gradually. 
Mr. Chen did not offer a timetable and said some controllers would learn English in China.
The program at Embry-Riddle is the largest language-training effort for foreign controllers in the United States. 
The Federal Aviation Administration enrolls some students, primarily from the Middle East and parts of Asia outside China, at the agency's academy in Oklahoma City, but it teaches them air traffic control, not English.
The Center for Aerospace Science, at the University of North Dakota, trained 120 Russian controllers in English in the early 1990's, and conducted one class of 21 Chinese in 1993, but such instruction has not been continued there. 
The students appear to prefer Florida to North Dakota.
Students from China face special problems, because their language has no common roots with English. 
But to be understood over radio links to pilots, they must master all its sounds. 
The teachers here simulated operations at Vero Beach, Fla., but the V and R sounds are both very difficult for Chinese speakers, and they tend to drop the last syllable. 
As a result, at first most of the students from China could not pronounce the name of the airport, said Graham R. Elliott, the director of language training at Embry-Riddle.
But working in "simulated airspace" designed by Embry-Riddle -- the Orlando area, with some distant airports squeezed in closer and a few mountains thrown in, to make the traffic patterns more challenging -- the students mastered the basics, including checking that they had been understood.
For example, Wang Qiang practiced directing the crew of an Air China flight to take off from a small airport near Orlando (an unlikely event but a part of the training exercise). 
Mr. Wang told the Air China flight to climb to 6,000 feet, proceed to a radio beacon some miles distant and make contact with another controller on a different frequency. 
Mr. Wang had trouble getting through to the crew in his airspace but, as trained, he used the officially approved phraseology to address the situation.
"American Flight 254, state your intentions," he said in a command that roughly translates as "Hey, captain, wake up!"
If the controllers' communication was not often grammatical, its meaning was clear. 
One could be heard telling a flight crew over his headset, "Speak louderly."
An outsider would have found the conversations difficult to follow, but that was a matter of content as well as accent. 
When spoken by an American controller, standard air traffic phraseology "sounds like a foreign language to English speakers," said Paul E. McDuffee, a university vice president who helped set up the program with the Civil Aviation Authority of China.
The training laboratory here reverberates with phrases like "Climb and maintain 5,000 feet proceed direct webs" or "Descend and maintain 2000 report airport in sight," all in heavy Chinese accents.
Air traffic control language is highly structured and clipped, a corpus of about 500 words and phrases meant to convey precise meanings covering everything that can happen in a routine flight, for rapid communication over busy radio frequencies. 
But communicating precisely is a big task even if the pilot or controller's first language is English and sometimes plain English words are needed. 
At Embry-Riddle, which primarily teaches aviation, not English, instructors tell horror stories about misunderstandings.
Mr. Elliott said in one training flight, a controller told a foreign pilot to cross the river and turn right, and then he would see the airport. 
The pilot asked what "cross the river" meant.
A foreign student pilot recently put his training plane in danger by following the instructor's orders too literally, Mr. Elliott said. 
He said the instructor knew that the pilot was flying too slowly as his plane approached the runway for landing, and told the student to "put the power back in."
The pilot pulled back on the throttle, slowing the engine, and then pushed it in, speeding it up. 
The instructor has sworn off that phrase, Mr. Elliott said, and will say "increase power" or "decrease power."
To improve the students' general knowledge of English, the teachers have been immersing them in the language by taking them to such places as a nearby shopping mall. 
On Thursday, in a late stop in preparation for their departure today, Li Jianming showed that his general command of English was up to the challenge of shaking off a saleswoman at the cosmetics counter.
The saleswoman was pushing a $17.95 vanilla musk cologne set, with talcum powder and body lotion. 
In response, Mr. Li said, "But my suitcase hasn't any empty area."
Yet for the 15 Chinese air controllers, their command of English was not sufficient to understand American movies. 
Along with the 4,500 regular students here, the Chinese were offered a movie every Thursday night. 
They liked "Independence Day," "Courage Under Fire" and "Phenomenon," but said the dialogue was too much and too fast. 
"The Rock" was easier, some said.
