
With surprising and decisive ease, the Senate cleared the last major hurdle today to passing a trade bill with China and handing President Clinton one of his top remaining foreign policy goals.
Senators rejected a contentious amendment to impose sanctions on Chinese companies that export sophisticated weapons to hostile nations, setting the stage to vote in a few days on legislation to give China permanent normal trading privileges.
The amendment was defeated on a bipartisan vote, 65 to 32, after a furious last-minute lobbying campaign this week by pro-trade business leaders and several of Mr. Clinton's cabinet officers, who argued that the measure was redundant and could scuttle the bill.
The vote virtually assures that the Senate will join the House in ending the annual Congressional review of China's trade status, a ritual for 20 years that Beijing considers humiliating but that opponents argue is a lever for improving human rights. 
More than 70 senators are generally expected to vote for the overall bill.
"This is the big enchilada," said Senator Max Baucus of Montana, a pro-trade Democrat who led the fight against the amendment. 
"We've got it now."
Unlike the situation in the House, where the trade bill survived intense opposition from a coalition of labor and religious groups, final passage in the Senate was never been in doubt, only the course to get there.
Supporters of the legislation have pressed for a bill free of amendments because they say there is not enough time before Election Day to reconcile an amended Senate bill with the version that the House passed in May.
One after another, amendments to improve human rights, religious freedom and labor standards in China have fallen by lopsided votes this week, not because senators opposed them on merit but because of their potential harm to the underlying bill.
But the amendment sponsored by Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, and Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, to penalize Chinese companies that traffic in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as long-range missiles, struck a strong chord with lawmakers who are increasingly alarmed by intelligence reports of Chinese arms exports.
Under the amendment, the president would have been required to conduct an annual review of China's proliferation activities. 
If Chinese companies trafficked in the prohibited weapons, Mr. Clinton could have cut off sensitive technology exports and United States government loans or credits. 
The president could have waived the sanctions if it was in the national security interest of the United States.
"Senator Thompson is asking us to put national security ahead of greed," said Senator Robert C. Byrd, a West Virginia Democrat who supported the amendment. 
"What's wrong with that?"
Senator Mike DeWine, Republican of Ohio, added: "This amendment is not just about holding other nations accountable as proliferators. 
It is also about holding our President accountable as the world's principle proliferation enforcer."
But other senators, including Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, voiced support for the overall bill and its trade benefits and objected to any amendments that could imperil them.
Mr. Thompson mocked Mr. Gramm for naively believing that trade could help reverse Beijing's penchant for selling missiles and missile technology to countries like North Korea and Pakistan.
"His response is trade with them, and one day we will magically wake up and they will be dismantling their armaments," said Mr. Thompson, who has clashed with Mr. Gramm in recent months over a bill to govern export controls. 
"When that happens, I will present the tooth fairy on the floor of this body."
Even after Mr. Thompson had watered down his amendment to address administration complaints that it focused too narrowly on China and that its sanctions would hurt American farmers, the Clinton administration strongly objected.
This week, several cabinet members, including Defense Secretary William S. Cohen and the national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, telephoned senators who were wavering on the amendment, warning that it overlapped existing law and hindered the president's ability to compel China to curb proliferation.
In the end, 35 Democrats and 30 Republicans voted against Mr. Thompson's measure, while 23 Republicans and 9 Democrats voted for it. 
Several Republicans, who favored the amendment as a separate bill, including Thad Cochran of Mississippi, Connie Mack of Florida and Don Nickles of Oklahoma, voted against it as an amendment.
"This is it, it's settled, it's all over but for the shouting," said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a New York Democrat who has championed the trade bill.
After the vote, Mr. Thompson's aides said he had not ruled out bringing up the measure again before the Senate adjourns.
The United States and China reached agreement last fall on a deal to help pave China's eventual entry into the World Trade Organization, the 135-member trade group that sets the rules for global commerce. 
China will enter the W.T.O. no matter how the Senate votes. 
But without Congress's blessing, Beijing could withhold some of the trade benefits, including lower tariffs, from the American farmers and companies that it will extend to other members of the trade group.
Business leaders hailed the surprisingly wide margin of the vote and predicted speedy passage of the overall bill, perhaps as early as Thursday.
      
