
The United States falls behind almost every country in Europe as well as Canada, Australia and Israel in what the World Health Organization calls "healthy life expectancy," according to a report released today.
With the report, the organization joins a trend toward measuring life expectancy in a new way, for the first time factoring in the diseases and disabilities that are likely to rob people of a lifetime of good health.
By this adjusted measure, Japan leads the world in healthy life expectancy, according to W.H.O., which is part of the United Nations system. 
A Japanese citizen can expect to lead a life of 74.5 healthy years, it said. 
At the very bottom of the scale is battered Sierra Leone, where a child born in 1999 can expect to live a healthy life of fewer than 26 years.
Almost every country with a healthy life expectancy below 40 is in Africa, where AIDS and warfare are lowering life spans significantly. 
The group estimates that H.I.V.-AIDS has cut 15 to 20 years off life expectancy in southern Africa, and 5 to 10 years in other parts of the continent.
As in other measures of well-being, the study found, the United States loses ground against other industrial nations because it has its own "third worlds" within its population. 
Not surprisingly, the health agency says, years lost to disease, injury and other disabilities are substantially higher in poorer countries, and poorer communities in richer nations.
The new study lists poor health among American minorities, the effects of AIDS, tobacco-related cancers, heart disease and violence as factors in reducing a healthy life expectancy in the United States.
At the Population Reference Bureau, a private demographic research organization in Washington, Carl Haub, who compiles annual statistics on world population, said the American ranking is not particularly surprising.
"We have a 25 percent minority population that has lower life expectancies," he said, adding that even by traditional measures of mortality, the United States does not rank among the nations with the highest levels of longevity. 
"If you look at the U.S. by ethnic group, you see a somewhat different result. 
African-Americans in the U.S. have a much lower life expectancy, particularly males."
Using traditional methods, the United States had a life expectancy of 76.7 years in 1998, Mr. Haub said, with men at 73.9 years and women at 79.4.
The World Health Organization table of healthy life expectancy lowers the level to 70 years for Americans overall, with 67.5 years for men and 72.6 years for women.
Nicholas Eberstadt, who follows demographic surveys at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, said there has been a trend, beginning in Europe, to add new dimensions to the study of longevity. 
"There has been an enormous amount of work done on healthy life expectancy," he said. 
"Some of these efforts have been inventive, but none have been particularly compelling."
Mr. Eberstadt said that a number of surveys have factored in perceptions about health and well-being among populations, which can vary dramatically from one country or region to another despite the statistical similarities.
The World Health Organization survey does not deal with perceptions, but does include projections based on what is known about major health factors like heart disease or lung cancer related to smoking. 
In Japan, for example, the new survey says that lung cancer rates for men "are expected to jump in coming years as the long-term effects of the post-World War II smoking popularity begin to hit."
China, the world's most populous nation, with one-fifth of the world's people, was found to have a healthy life expectancy of 62.3, well ahead of the second-largest country, India, at 53.2. 
The Chinese figure is considered particularly impressive, given the country's income level, W.H.O. says. 
China outranks not only India in a healthier life but also Russia and many nations in Central Asia, the Middle East and North Africa.      
