
"I lied to them," said the human rights campaigner Harry Wu, leaning forward in his study today as he recounted his two months of imprisonment in China, "and so what?"
"I said that if they released me I would stay away from politics and have a good life with my wife," he said in an interview just hours after his expulsion from China and return to his home here, 30 miles south of San Francisco.
Mr. Wu, whose arrest had become an irritant in United States-Chinese relations, declined to say whether he would continue his secret forays into China investigating forced labor camps. 
But he said would continue his human rights work.
"Why should I be honest with them?" he said. 
"I deal with men as men deal with me, and they lied to me from the very beginning."
And then he turned to politics, and the decision by Hillary Rodham Clinton to attend a women's conference in Beijing next month.
"She had to judge by herself to go or not to go," he said. 
"But if my release is part of a deal, if this is a condition for Mrs. Clinton to go to China, I will be angry about it."
He added: "The release of Harry Wu does not mean the Chinese human rights record has improved. 
The police told me, 'You are lucky you are an American citizen.'
This made me very sad."
In a detailed account of his ordeal, Mr. Wu said he was keenly aware of the special treatment he received as an American. 
He was kept in an air-conditioned room in a medical building, was fed the same food as his guards and was told to shave before the monthly visits of an American consular official.
Mr. Wu, 58, who spent 19 years in Chinese camps as a young man before coming to the United States in 1985 and becoming a citizen, has made a career of publicizing abuses in the labor camp system, returning in secret to China four times to compile his reports.
It was during his most recent visit, on June 19, that he was seized at the border. 
This week he was convicted of spying and stealing state secrets and sentenced to 15 years of imprisonment and expulsion. 
Immediately after his sentence was read, he said, the judge smiled, patted him on the arm, and told him he could go home.
Today was Mr. Wu's chance to tell the story of his most recent stint in a Chinese prison, in the first person, and his words began flowing before he had even taken his seat -- about the cell he was forced to share with three guards, the duel he played with his interrogators, and the secret diary he kept, in tiny Chinese characters, in the inner margins of a fat Chinese-English dictionary.
An expert on the tricks prisoners play, Mr. Wu made a thin glue from rice and water and sealed the inner edges of the pages together to hide his journal entries. 
As he gingerly pulled them apart today, his hidden chronicle of pressures and interrogation sprang to light.
The page numbers denoted the month and day of the entry. 
On page 704, July 4, two weeks after his arrest, the entry reads: "Got fresh air for the first time."
Page 710, July 10, reads: "They take away my ring and my watch. 
I request medicine. 
I protest that I wrote a letter to my wife and they did not send it."
July 11: "Talked to them about my back pain."
July 18: "Two doctors from the medical university examined me. 
Talked about my counter-revolutionary crimes from 10 to 12 o'clock. 
Afternoon interrogation about my activities in China in 1994."
Mr. Wu said he broke his back in a coal mine accident while serving in a labor camp 20 years ago. 
As a result, he said, without medication his left leg was in constant pain.
At the start of his two months of interrogations, Mr. Wu said, "I played it tough because I didn't know what they wanted. 
They said, 'Do you know what is your problem?
You have caused us big trouble. 
We have wanted you for a long time.'
"I said, 'Here I am, like meat on the chopping block for you. 
Whatever you want, you can chop."'
Later, he said, he asked his interrogators, "Why are you doing this?
You are making me a hero. 
Are you crazy?
Maybe my books will sell well again."
The interrogations focused on television documentaries he had made about conditions in Chinese labor camps, Mr. Wu said, and he won some points and lost some points.
"I admitted violating the law," he said. 
"It is true. 
If America has a speed limit of 55 and China has a speed limit of 40 and you go 55 in China, then you break the law. 
If a watchtower is a secret and you film the watchtower, what can I say?"
Last night, with the time change and the exhilaration of his release, Mr. Wu said, he could hardly sleep. 
Only hours before, he had expected to spend the next 15 years in prison.
"But something funny happened," Mr. Wu said today. 
"After the sentence was read, they did not put handcuffs on me. 
The police very kindly said, 'Now we can go.'
"
Within two days, Mr. Wu said, he was put on a Chinese commercial flight from Shanghai to San Francisco.
"As soon as I boarded, the door closed, and an hour later the American consul was informed of my departure," Mr. Wu said. 
"Everything was prearranged. 
A pretty good show."
