
After six months of tough negotiations with a group of Taiwanese investors, Barry Lewen, a real-estate broker, thought he was just days from completing the $14 million sale of a building at 366 Madison Avenue when he was unexpectedly told there was one last detail.
The investors insisted that before anything more was done, a Chinese mystic had to be flown from Taiwan to determine if the building's qi, or life force, was acceptable. 
"I thought they were joking," said Mr. Lewen, an executive managing director of The Galbreath Company, a Manhattan real-estate company.
A few days later, however, he anxiously watched as a practitioner of the ancient Chinese craft of feng shui paced the site for 30 minutes before giving his approval.
"I wasn't sure if he was a witch doctor or what," Mr. Lewen said. 
"I can tell you there were a lot of sweaty palms."
Long a tradition in the Far East, the millennia-old craft of feng shui (pronounced fung shway) has begun to exert a subtle influence on the hard-edged world of real estate in America. 
Feng shui, which means "wind" and "water" in Chinese, is a blend of astrology, design and Eastern philosophy aimed at harmonizing the placement of man-made structures in nature.
Driven by the influx of investors from Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and China, the use of feng shui has surfaced in the design and marketing of projects from mini-malls in Los Angeles to skyscrapers in Manhattan.
Its influence is more apparent in West Coast cities with large Chinese populations, like Los Angeles and San Francisco. 
Its impact on New York City's skyline is still barely perceptible: a rounded corner on a building, mirrors in hallways, oddly placed offices and blocked-off doorways -- measures taken to manipulate the flow of qi (pronounced chee).
But as more Chinese investors have come to the New York area, feng shui has become an increasingly familiar term to developers and designers. 
The former Gulf and Western Building on Columbus Circle, 40 Wall Street and the China Trust Bank in Flushing, Queens, are among projects in which developers called in feng shui experts to review the sites.
In West Orange, N.J., the developers of the Eagle Ridge residential development touted their project with full-page advertisements in Chinese newspapers featuring a Chinatown feng shui master, Tin Sun, who declared: "Its feng shui is unassailable!"
Even the $2.5 billion Riverside South project on the Upper West Side could include some elements of feng shui because of the entry of a group of Hong Kong investors as Donald J. Trump's new partners in developing the site. 
"It's just another element in which you can have the advantage over your competitors," Mr. Trump said. 
"Asians are becoming a big part of our market and this is something we can't ignore."
The theory behind feng shui is that a life force flows through all things -- buildings, hills, rivers, power lines, people -- and the manipulation of the force through the proper orientation of physical structures can enhance a person's luck, wealth and good health.
In the Far East, buildings with good feng shui can draw mobs of buyers eager to enhance their fortunes. 
Bad feng shui, in the opinion of a practitioner, can break a deal in a moment.
Although the craft, known as geomancy in English, originated at a time of rural villages and crude structures, feng shui masters say that analyzing the effect of modern phenomena, like elevator shafts, car traffic and air-conditioning ducts, follows the same principles.
In the basement of the Wing Fat Mansion in Chinatown is the office of Master Tin Sun and his daughter Master Pun Yin, a Hunter College graduate in film production who has worked with her father since she was a teen-ager.
They both practice a traditional form of feng shui that relies on analysis of the physical attributes of a site using the luopan, or feng shui compass, and the astrology of the client to determine the most auspicious arrangement.
Master Tin Sun said that feng shui had nothing to do with superstition, but rather drew on common-sense rules of design that enhance sunlight and air flow through a building. 
But he added there was also a mystical component of sensing the flow that required a trained practitioner.
"It is metaphysics," said the master, who has his own weekly radio show on feng shui on a Cantonese-language station. 
"The rules are only the mechanics. 
The rest you must feel through meditation."
Each master has a different way of looking at a structure's feng shui. 
Lin Yun, a well-known West Coast practitioner who has lectured at the Library of Congress and Harvard University, said he had no use for the luopan and relied instead on his intuition to determine the flow of qi. 
Some use mirrors and crystals to alter the flow of qi; others reject the method as a silly gimmick.
For believers, feng shui can influence every aspects of their lives, from the selection of a grave to the orientation of their desk and bed.
But even nonbelievers say that using feng shui has become a business necessity in some cases because the practice is so important to some Chinese.
Edmund Yu, president of Kinson Properties, which is renovating the 1.1-million-square-foot office building at 40 Wall Street, said that even though he was an avowed nonbeliever, he still commissioned the construction of a $300,000 pool in the building's lobby on the advice of a feng shui master.
"It's like killing two birds with one stone," he said. 
"Other people will just see it as an attractive addition. 
But for the Chinese, when they see it, they will know."
Before embarking on a $230 million renovation of the Trump International Tower and Hotel, formerly the Gulf and Western Building, on Columbus Circle, Scott Coopchik, an executive managing director of the Galbreath Company, decided to call in Master Tin Sun for advice after hearing that many potential tenants could come from the Far East.
Whether architects will heed the master's advice to move the main entrance to the north and sheath the building in an earth-toned glass is still under discussion, but Mr. Coopchik added that developers may take advantage of the master's feeling that the northwest corner of the buildings had the best feng shui, opening the possibility of marketing the normally less popular spaces at premium prices.
"If the marketing people are correct that 20 to 30 percent of our buyers will come from the Pacific Rim, we might as well respect their customs," Mr. Coopchik said.
Joseph S. Tarella, an architect with Greenfield, Sawiki, Tarella, was two months into the design of the $15 million China Trust Bank in Flushing when he was told that a feng shui master had advised moving the elevator shafts to a different side of the building and installing a two-foot-high water fountain in the cash-machine vestibule.
"We've never installed a fountain in an A.T.M. vestibule before," Mr. Tarella said. 
"But you have to be flexible if you want to work. 
Besides, I like it."
While many non-Chinese developers see feng shui only as a business necessity, its focus on harmonizing man-made structures with nature has attracted a growing number of architects and interior designers intrigued with its Eastern philosophy.
"It's one of those hot, buzzword fads right now," said Joseph Pryweller, senior editor of the American Society of Interior Designers Report. 
"Everyone wants to know at least how to pronounce it correctly."
Sarah Rossbach, who has written three books on feng shui, likes to describe the craft as "environmental psychology."
She has dropped the more superstitious aspects of feng shui, and instead focuses on the spiritual approach to design.
"It's really a manipulation of your environment to manipulate your life," said Ms. Rossbach, who learned the craft from Mr. Lin.
The increasing interest in feng shui has even prompted one designer, Ronald D. Chin, a third-generation Chinese-American architect, to open a company that specifically markets itself as using feng shui.
"Americans are really acknowledging there are other ways of looking at a space," he said. 
"I think they realize there should be a greater recognition of that intangible part of a space that deal with feelings and emotions."
But as feng shui becomes more popular, it also raises the possibility of creating new problems.
In Hong Kong, the Bank of China's 70-story tower has caused unease among the colony's feng shui believers, who say the building's sharp angles have caused bad feng shui for the area. 
Some residents have placed mirrors in their windows to deflect the evil energy supposedly coming from the building.
In some parts of Hong Kong, feng shui duels have emerged, with residents aiming mirrors at each other to reflect evil influences from buildings -- a decidedly unharmonious development.
"You can be driving down a street and you see your headlights reflected all over the place," Ms. Rossbach said. 
"It can get very dangerous."
The ancient Chinese craft of feng shui (pronounced fung shway) is the practice of arranging surroundings to promote prosperity and harmony. 
Here are basic guidelines from Tin Sun, a feng shui master, for assessing the feng shui of an urban apartment.
 
EXTERIOR
 
A building should not have its front door facing oncoming traffic. 
Cars and lights create negative forces that disturb the peace.
 
There should not be any sharp objects or corners facing a doorwya of a building or apartment. 
The corners are like arrowheads, shooting negative e4nergy toward the building and its tenants.
 
One should avoid facing glass buildings. 
The buildings would absorb the negative energies of their surroundings and reflect them back.
 
If a building is on a hill, the back of the building should not be on the lower part of the slope. 
It would be like a chair without back support - the energy would roll down the hill.
 
It is not advisable to have bridges in close proximity. 
They create tension and negative forces.
 
INTERIOR
 
An apartment should not be next to or facing an elevator, especially if one hears the mechanics of it. 
The humming of the elevator machinery disrupts the flow of qi, or life force.
 
When one enters an apartment, the stove should not be visible. 
It can turn happiness into sorrow because of its concentration of fire, which disturbs the peace of the space. 
This is a common cause of family problems.
 
An apartment should not be next to or facing a garbage disposal chute, which draws away energy from the apartment. 
Heavy traffic around the chute also disrupts peace.
 
(pg. B4)
