
Only days after deciding to move up a Presidential trip to Beijing, the Administration has given China another important boost by dropping American sponsorship of an annual United Nations resolution condemning China's record on human rights.
The move, which effectively kills a resolution before the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, was described by senior officials today as a response to Beijing's recent efforts to improve its rights record, including its decision this week to sign an important international human rights treaty.
"China still has an enormous way to go, and we intend to press them at every opportunity," a senior Administration official said. 
"But in light of these steps, we have decided not to sponsor the resolution. 
It's certainly not a reward. 
It is being done as a calculation. 
It is being done because we believe it is the way to make progress in the future."
The official, speaking on condition of anonymity, hinted strongly that China had agreed to release a number of prominent political prisoners if the United States dropped its sponsorship of the resolution. 
"I believe there will be further releases," he said, declining further comment. 
"Lives are at stake."
The Administration's decision was denounced by human rights groups, which said the Administration was abandoning one of its best tools to press Beijing to end what the Administration agrees are widespread human rights violations.
The annual resolution, first introduced at the commission in 1990 after the massacre of unarmed civilians at Tiananmen Square the year before, has infuriated China, even though it has never been adopted by the 53-member commission. 
The commission is to open its annual meeting in Geneva next week.
"If the President visits China without clear human rights preconditions and also drops any resolution at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, what leverage will the United States use to press for concrete progress?" asked Mike Jendrzejczyk, Washington director of Human Rights Watch Asia. 
"They've caved."
The White House announced this week that Mr. Clinton, who would be the first President to visit China since the 1989 crackdown on the democracy advocates, had moved up his trip to June from November in order to build on progress made during the visit by President Jiang Zemin of China to the United States last fall.
Chinese officials leapt at the proposal for an earlier meeting.
The Administration's steps to improve relations with China came as President Clinton sought to play down the importance of new evidence that China had tried to sell nuclear technology and equipment to Iran.
The President told reporters at the White House that the sale, first disclosed by the State Department in testimony before Congress on Thursday, was halted in response to an American protest last month.
"The Chinese followed through on it and kept their agreement to the letter," the President said. 
"I am well pleased, actually, with the way that issue came out."
Administration officials said that soon after President Jiang agreed during last year's summit talks to halt nuclear cooperation with Iran, the United States learned about negotiations concerning the sale to Iran of tons of chemicals that could enrich uranium for nuclear weapons.
Far from seeing the incident as a violation of the American-Chinese pact, Administration officials said today that only low-level Chinese officials had negotiated with the Iranians and that senior Chinese Government leaders had blocked the sale as soon as it was brought to their attention by the United States.
"Chinese authorities investigated the matter and promptly informed us that a transaction like that had not been agreed to and that China had no intention of making such a transaction," said James P. Rubin, the State Department spokesman. 
"This is a case that demonstrates how nonproliferation works."
The Administration's critics on Capitol Hill, however, viewed the incident as fresh evidence that China's commitment to its nuclear agreement with the United States was still in question.
Senator John Ashcroft, a Missouri Republican who is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, described the potential deal as troubling and said President Clinton had a "policy of blind engagement" toward Beijing.
The committee chairman, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, said through a spokesman, "We now have the spectacle of the Clinton Administration questioning China on whether it is continuing to provide nuclear weapons assistance to various countries even while, at the same time, a Presidential certification to the contrary is pending before the Senate."
Administration officials said -- and human rights groups agreed -- that the decision to drop sponsorship of the human rights resolution probably meant that no resolution against China would be offered this year.
Last year the resolution, sponsored by the United States and Denmark, was defeated, 27 to 17, after a vigorous lobbying campaign by the Chinese Government, which labeled the resolution "an outrageous distortion of China's reality."
A senior Administration official said Washington decided not to seek a new resolution because of recent actions taken by China at the request of the United States and other nations. 
These included the release of several prominent political prisoners and this week's announcement by China that it would sign the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The covenant, a United Nations treaty, is intended to provide guarantees of freedom of expression, religion, assembly and movement, and equality before the law. 
By signing the treaty, China would be required to file periodic reports on its human rights record that would be subject to review by international human rights experts.
"This is an important step that we have been seeking for several years," an Administration official said, describing the covenant as a "far better mechanism" to force changes in China than the sight of another United Nations resolution going down to defeat in Geneva.
