
According to the Chinese zodiac, this is not the Year of the Horse. 
But it should be. 
Ancient Chinese horse sculptures are showing up all over.
There are four life-size terra-cotta chariot horses from the Qin dynasty (221-207 B.C.) in "The Golden Age of Chinese Archeology," a show at the National Gallery of Art in Washington that opened on Sept. 
19 and runs through Jan. 
2. These horses, with ears forward and nostrils dilated, are part of a group of 500 horses and soldiers excavated from tombs in Shaanxi province in 1976.
Ten horses from the Tang dynasty (618-906 A.D.) are among the works in "Abstraction and Reality: Chinese Art From the Warring States to the Liao," which opened two days ago at the Chinese Porcelain Company, a gallery at Park Avenue and 58th Street. 
Some of the horses are glazed, in glorious blue, green, amber and cream, with tasseled bridles and elaborate saddle blankets. 
Others are unglazed, which makes them look modern to Western sensibilities.
One unglazed pale taupe horse has its head raised, neighing. 
Another twists its neck to catch a fly. 
Still another has its muzzle to the ground. 
They are subtly modeled to catch the light and create shadows.
"These are very rare models," said Jim Lally, who runs J. J. Lally, at 41 East 57th Street, and specializes in ancient Chinese art. 
"The Tang was a moment in Chinese art when there was a strong move toward realism and a strong decorative impulse. 
Horses imported from the Near East were precious. 
In Tang China, the horse was the emblem of wealth and power. 
They are meant to embody rank and speed."
Mr. Lally, who sells Tang horse sculptures, currently has a classic example in pale green glaze with an amber saddle cloth, for $100,000.
In addition, there is a herd of nine Tang horses for sale at E. & J. Frankel Oriental Art, 1040 Madison Avenue, at 79th Street, and there are a few more at the Alvin Lo Gallery, 5 East 57th Street.
China's love affair with the horse probably began in the Shang dynasty (circa 1600 to 1100 B.C.), when real horses and human charioteers were interred with Shang emperors. 
Initially, the Chinese had only small, sturdy horses they used as draft animals. 
After the Chinese were attacked by enemies riding larger, stronger horses, they began importing horses from the Middle East, breeding them and training them for warfare and sport.
This all came together in the Tang dynasty. 
Mario Prodan wrote in "The Art of the Tang Potter" (Viking, 1961), "This is China's moment of greatness, artistic, political, military and cultural."
He continued, "Whenever the Chinese dream of imitating nature, of achieving the unbroken line, may have begun, it is certain that it is at last fulfilled in the art of the Tang potter."
The horse was a favorite subject of these artists, but the horse has always been a source of inspiration in China. 
Chinese composers and poets wrote songs and poems about horses, and artists painted them, carved their portraits in stone and created pottery sculptures.
Today, Tang pottery pieces are the most valued of Chinese horse sculptures. 
They range in price from a few thousand dollars to millions. 
Unlike jade, a Tang horse offers a buyer a certain comfort level because thermoluminescence tests can prove its age and fakes can be detected.
The popularity of these works was proved again in Christie's New York sale of Chinese sculpture on Sept. 
16. One horse, which was estimated to sell for $60,000 to $80,000, went for $266,500.
Unglazed, it had its head lowered toward its left foreleg, which was slightly raised. 
There was a grooved channel running the length of the arched neck, where a real horsehair mane would have been inserted, and there was a hole for a horsehair tail.
An amber glazed horse with a textured fur saddle blanket glazed green went for $310,000. 
It was not unlike one that Sotheby's London sold in 1989 for the British Rail Pension Fund for $6.1 million, the world record for a Chinese work of art.
"Tang horses are the most widely popular image of Chinese art," Mr. Lally said, "because they are immediately accessible to everyone. 
You don't have to read a book on Chinese art to love a Tang horse."
Among the horses in the Chinese Porcelain Company show is a cream-colored, glazed one decorated with splashes of cobalt blue. 
Khalil Rizk, co-owner of the gallery, said: "Only 5 percent of Tang horses have blue glaze. 
Cobalt was put on during the last firing. 
Cobalt was a treasured commodity imported from the Middle East; it was more valuable than gold. 
Its use means the horse was for someone of the highest rank."
This horse is 15 inches tall and turns its head to the left. 
It has an ornamental harness and bridle. 
Originally, Mr. Rizk said, it would have had bronze decorations as well.
"Generally speaking, glazed horses used to be more sought after, especially in Japan," Mr. Rizk said. 
"But some horses were so well sculpted they may have been deliberately left unglazed."
One unglazed horse at the show has bent its head back toward its left shoulder in a natural pose. 
It would be considered a fine work of art in any culture.
The show continues through Oct. 
28. Prices for the horses are $35,000 to $2 million.
 
Chairs With Curves
American antique chairs can have more curves than Marilyn Monroe.
As the American furniture sale at Christie's New York, set for Thursday, approaches, Christie's experts are touting the virtues of a high-style, finely carved Philadelphia mahogany side chair commissioned by Gen. John Cadwalader about 1769. 
It is magnificent, but the star of the sale may be Lot 185, a Queen Anne carved walnut armchair that has been on display in the Diplomatic Reception Rooms of the State Department for the last 20 years.
The chair, circa 1740-1760, belongs to George G. Meade Easby, a descendant of its original owner, Robert Waln, a Quaker merchant in Philadelphia. 
And it is a study in well-executed, bold S-curves.
The arms have knuckle grips that look like fiddlehead ferns. 
The cabriole legs have shells carved on the knees. 
The crest has double scrolls, and the elbow rests are rounded and concave. 
The estimate is $600,000 to $900,000.
The chair is marked No. 1, and thought to be part of a set that is already represented in the Chipstone Foundation and the Kaufman collection, two important American furniture repositories.
The Queen Anne chair could be paired with a handsome Queen Anne carved walnut games table, circa 1740, in Sotheby's sale of American furniture next Friday. 
The table has rounded "turret" corners, carved shells on its knees, and claw and ball feet. 
The estimate is $30,000 to $50,000. 
This pair could really make a statement in the right environment.
