
It was hardly Paris, but Shanghai played a part in the brief, intense courtship between America Online and Time Warner.
America Online's chairman, Stephen M. Case, attended a Fortune magazine conference there in October, during which he mingled with Time Warner's top executives, including Gerald M. Levin and Ted Turner. 
Later, the executives traveled to Beijing for the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. 
A Time Warner executive who was there recalls a teasing exchange between Mr. Case and Mr. Turner, when the two found themselves stranded in the rain outside the Great Hall of the People.
"Ted, your big, merged company isn't getting you off the steps," Mr. Case shouted to Mr. Turner.
"Steve," he replied, "your billions ain't getting you anywhere either."
It is not clear, even after America Online's extraordinary bid for Time Warner, that this huge merged company will be able to get off the steps in China -- or elsewhere in Asia. 
In contrast to Europe, where America Online has built a valuable regional franchise through its partnership with Bertelsmann A.G., the Internet in Asia remains a fractured business with few large competitors and virtually none that cross national boundaries.
"AOL and Time Warner have tremendous critical mass in the United States and, through AOL and Compuserve, in Europe as well," said Michael J. Wolf, the partner in charge of the media practice at Booz, Allen & Hamilton, the New York-based consultancy. 
"But to a large extent, Asia is up for grabs."
America Online operates an on-line service in Japan, and recently started one in Hong Kong. 
But it has yet to enter the Chinese mainland, where Yahoo, the Internet portal service, is one of the few major American Internet companies to have established a foothold. 
Time Warner distributes movies and music in China -- as well as CNN and Time magazine, when they are not being banned by the Chinese government. 
But like most other American media companies, Time Warner has not been able to make deep inroads in the country because of hazards ranging from piracy to onerous regulations and political pressure. 
The proposed merger will not eliminate those.
Some analysts said that America Online would benefit more from a deal than Time Warner because its credibility will be burnished in the eyes of the Chinese government. 
Although Beijing, after months of equivocation, recently indicated that it would allow foreign companies to invest in the Internet, officials seem likely to pick and choose among potential entrants. 
Analysts said America Online's odds of receiving favorable treatment would be higher if it tied up with a media giant like Time Warner.
"CNN and Ted Turner will open doors for this company politically, allowing it to do things that other companies may not be able to," Mr. Wolf of Booz, Allen & Hamilton said.
Brian C. Lippey, chief executive of Tokai Asia, a hedge fund based in Hong Kong, added: "The merger gives AOL international credibility. 
Time Warner is a good old-fashioned multinational."
And although a combined company's prospects in Asia are uncertain, news of the huge deal reverberated through the region, prompting talk of more mergers and strategic alliances involving Asian companies. 
Shares of local media companies and Internet access providers soared on Tuesday, though most fell back as the initial giddiness over the announcement subsided.
This may reflect some basic truths about Asia. 
Lehman Brothers noted in a report that the ownership of many Asian media companies is concentrated in the hands of one or two big investors. 
That would make huge, widely held combinations like AOL-Time Warner unlikely, at least in the short term.
Cultural, linguistic and regulatory differences among Asian countries also militate against the creation of pan-Asian companies. 
Two decades after CNN was founded in the United States, Star TV, a satellite television unit of the News Corporation, remains the only genuinely regional media service based in Asia.
"If you look at Japan, there are some wonderful media companies, but very little of their material sees the light of day outside Japan," said Alexander A. Arena, the group managing director of Pacific Century Cyberworks, a Hong Kong company that is designing a satellite-delivered Internet service.
Still, analysts and stock pickers were quick to draw up lists of Asian companies they contended would benefit from the changes suggested by a merger of America Online and Time Warner. 
Leading the list are obvious candidates like Sony, the Japanese electronics giant, and less obvious ones like TVB, a Hong Kong television broadcaster that owns the world's largest library of Chinese-language programming.
Analysts said that Pacific Century Cyberworks and other companies that aspire to deliver information and entertainment to subscribers over high-capacity wires would also benefit. 
Hong Kong's dominant local phone company, Cable and Wireless HKT, may also come into favor because of its recent alliance with Star TV, in which the two plan to offer television programming to the phone company's customers.
For all the excitement, Asian reactions to the AOL-Time Warner deal have had an unfocused quality. 
Experts said that reflects the Internet's relative lack of development here, which makes picking winners and predicting the future even chancier than in the United States.
"It's a simple question of supply and demand," Mr. Lippey said. 
"There aren't that many quality Internet companies in Asia."
      
