
THERE are three ways of entering Tibet legally, and on each of three trips I have made there as a budget traveler, I have used a different route.
In 1992, on my first trip, I entered from Nepal, joining a tour because of Chinese regulations. 
I chose the Arniko Travel Agency in Katmandu and acquired a week's visa extension in Tibet beyond the departure of the tour. 
We traveled by hired bus from Katmandu to the unpaved climb to Zhangmu across the border in China. 
The next day we ascended the perilous gorge filled with trees, ferns and tumbling water. 
We stopped at mud slides to help local people heave rocks into the road so we could continue on our way. 
Cresting the pass, we left the green, water-drenched gorge and entered the Himalayan rain shadow of brown, beige and taupe.
On this route, which took 10 days from Katmandu to Lhasa, the traveler can visit Sakya Monastery and the former monastery city of Tashilhunpo outside Shigatse, once a pretty Tibetan town but now just another Chinese shambles of stained concrete and cracked blue glass. 
Gyangtse, my favorite Tibetan town, half a day's journey farther southeast on this route, has not yet met that fate. 
A stroll down the main street between Tibetan houses topped by rippling prayer flags takes one to the monastery and the Kumbum, a white wedding-cake structure honeycombed with chapels whose walls are bright with 15th-century murals. 
It is the Ste.-Chapelle of Asia.
I lost count of the passes we crossed bumping along over the potholes, but all were spectacular. 
We also drove along the shores of Lake Yamdrok, 40 miles southeast of Lhasa, a flawless turquoise set among jagged white mountains.
When my tour left Tibet, I moved from the Holiday Inn in Lhasa to the Yak Hotel, one of a handful of hotels run by Tibetans that cater to budget travelers. 
I spent the week learning the ropes -- where to eat (at Tashi's), where to shop (the Barkhor), where else to stay (the Banok Shul, the Snowlands or the Kirey). 
On the flight back to Katmandu on Southwest China Air, I was served a meal consisting of a bag of cashews, digestive biscuits, a boiled duck egg, an apple and cough drops. 
Because there was no regulation of carry-on luggage, baggage obstructed the aisle. 
The Lhasa airport was filthy, crowded and inefficient, but the views of the Himalayas during the flight were superb.
 
Chengdu
In 1995, on my second journey to Tibet, I flew from Hong Kong to Chengdu, capital of Sichuan Province, in the northeastern corner of China, where, as part of the needlessly expensive package I bought in Hong Kong, I was picked up by a guide with driver and car.
Chengdu, a heavily polluted town, has a number of interesting, rundown Chinese monasteries, such as the Wenshu and the Quingyang, where people worship by lighting joss sticks and prostrating themselves. 
There is also the "cottage" of the famous eighth-century poet Du Fu, where you can rent a fishing pole and fish in the stocked pond that smells of drains.
I waited four days for the Tibetan permit I'd arranged for in Hong Kong. 
At the end of my two-day package at the $100-a-night Chengdu Hotel, where electric wires snake in and out of holes in the walls and a dingy, feltlike carpeting covered the floors, I transferred to the Traffic Hotel by the bus station, a Spartan, clean place where I shared a triple with two other women for $5.45. 
I shared the bathroom, which was down the hall and also clean, with innumerable people.
Finally my visa and ticket arrived, and at 5:30 A.M. I was picked up at the Traffic by my guide, who funneled me efficiently through all the formalities onto Southwest China Air. 
Food and restrictions concerning carry-on luggage had improved 100 percent since my last flight. 
The new airport outside Lhasa was also an improvement.
I was very careful when I picked up my backpack because I could feel an altitude headache lurking. 
I knew from previous trips that bending over would make the top of my head explode. 
By flying in, I had come up too fast to an altitude of 12,000 feet.
On this trip I had organized, with two other Americans I met in Lhasa, an exhausting, adventurous and fascinating month's journey to Mount Kailas -- the holy mountain, considered the navel of the world by Hindus, Jains and Buddhists -- Lake Manasarowar and the Guge Kingdom. 
We traveled in the back of a baby-blue Chinese truck with a motley group of nine Europeans and Americans. 
Flying in meant that I had time to arrange the Mount Kailas trip before my three-month visa expired. 
Again, I flew out to Katmandu, to see Mount Everest up close.
 
Lhasa
In October 1996 I made my third trip, coming in overland from China, starting again in Chengdu. 
One cannot yet go by bus from Chengdu to Lhasa, which would be scenically thrilling, if difficult. 
The roads are bad and the Chinese worry about losing foreigners to accidents. 
One can, however, travel from Chengdu to Lhasa in hops, using different forms of transportation. 
Again I started in Hong Kong, this time booking through Time Travel Agency, which got me a flight and a two-month visa in a record eight hours. 
I would at some point have to get a Tibetan permit as well. 
After my previous experience, I knew that in Chengdu, at the Traffic Hotel's agency, I could get a flight to Xining (pronounced syee-neeng), the capital of Qinghai province, the next stop on the way to Lhasa. 
I spent two days in Chengdu arranging ticket, flight and permit.
During the short flight to Xining on Southwest China air, I munched a spicy potato-chip-like snack while looking down on mountains at first partly forested, then drier mountains terraced top to bottom like layers of phyllo dough.
I shared a taxi into town with Cendi and Hay, a Dutch couple I'd met at the Traffic Hotel. 
Xining has a mixed population of Muslims, Chinese and Tibetans. 
The Muslim men wear white crocheted caps; the women cover their hair with flocked black scarves. 
We thought we'd sighted a mosque on the river but it was our hotel. 
The endless stairs passed a floor housing a roller skating rink. 
On the floor that housed the hotel, we were led to a room for three where orange imitation-taffeta curtains sagged askew on a broken rod but the sheets appeared to be clean. 
With no lock on the door, I didn't mind being three in a room. 
The view across the river was of bluffs striated in yellow and red reminiscent of the landscape of Utah.
CENDI, pronounced "Sandy," asked the reception clerk for the name of a good Muslim restaurant. 
We piled into a taxi and for $1.35 were taken to a largely empty restaurant, clean and swagged with red velvet hangings. 
With the help of my Chinese conversation book, we ordered "sheep meat," eggplant, mixed vegetables, steamed bread and rice. 
The "sheep meat," flakes of lamb on toothpicks, was superb.
The next morning Hay, pronounced "Hi," toted my backpack to the train station for me. 
For $22.50 I had a bottom bunk with two blankets in a hard sleeper, Chinese second class. 
Because it was a local, it was relatively empty. 
At first we passed villages of small, flat-roofed brick houses with carved wooden arches and protruding wooden rafters. 
There was piped-in music, nasal American rock and saccharine Chinese pop.
The land became parched, fields disappeared into sloping sand dunes as we passed Quinghai Lake (Koko Nor), the largest lake in China, which contains an island breeding ground for birds. 
Other passengers bought food at the stations through the windows or from a cart that came down the aisle selling snacks. 
Not trusting Chinese dining cars, I had gone to a supermarket in Hong Kong and bought Laughing Cow cheese, Danish camembert, canned tuna, tea bags and a tin of duck with orange rind.
After probably three hours, we entered an area of grasslands where yak grazed. 
Two men sat on the bunk opposite me playing a game akin to checkers, but they had really come to stare at the only Westerner on board. 
The dining car chef came by to have a phrase-book conversation with me. 
Everyone smoked. 
I forbade it in my area, how ever, by pointing at the appropriate phrase in my book. 
My companions were mildly surprised, but willing to go along for the pleasure of staring at me.
We arrived in Golmud, formerly Tibetan, now a Chinese town, a small oasis in a barren area, at about 7 A.M. The Golmud Hotel dorm ($5) housed only a young Japanese man who had worked as a cook's assistant in Milan. 
He was going home to Tokyo to open an Italian restaurant. 
I went over to the office of CITS, the Chinese equivalent of the old Russian Intourist, and booked the last leg of my trip, from Golmud to Lhasa by bus, for $160, including a three-day tour, a low-end hotel and the necessary Tibetan permit. 
One could not just buy a bus ticket. 
My total was an outrageous price, since locals pay $9.50 for the bus.
When I returned to the dormitory, my Japanese friend had been replaced by a young American, Brian, from Oakland on his first foreign trip. 
We went out to the market, where we inspected plastic pails and garish-colored yarns and had an excellent dinner of shredded pork, cloud ears and red tofu at a place around the corner from the hotel.
At 10:30 the next morning we took a van to the bus station, where we were issued bits of paper by female bureaucrats. 
Our fellow passengers were a mixed lot -- four Japanese, Brian, myself, two Tibetan nomad men with long swords in silver scabbards and gold caps on their teeth, and a number of bearded Muslims wearing straw hats over white caps, which made them look Amish. 
One Tibetan, unsheathing his sword, peeled an apple in one long corkscrew.
There were flimsy curtains on the windows and the seats were covered in electric-blue plush. 
The bus started out clean but accumulated cookie wrappers, orange and apple peels, cigarette butts and other garbage. 
Rest stops were rare, so it was advisable to get out for every one of them, and we did, with women going to one side and men to the other (there were no toilets). 
Everybody chain-smoked except the Muslims.
We drove through sand dunes and jagged rock for two hours. 
At 4 P.M. we came to a row of restaurants on one side of the road and a row of white-topped mountains on the other. 
Brian and I watched a man blast a heap of goats' heads with a blow torch, then smash them open for their brains. 
In one restaurant, where the owner's wife fed her baby spoonfuls of soup, we motioned to have our bowls of dried noodles, bought in the Golmud market, filled with boiling water. 
Brian opened the can of stewed duck with orange peel and we feasted.
After dinner, climbing through barren rock, we came round a bend almost hitting a herd of horses. 
By nightfall the road was unpaved and terrible. 
Chinese Army convoys streamed by all the way to Lhasa. 
I slept a little but the road was like corduroy. 
Awakened by a bump, I gazed into a snowstorm thickly covering road and countryside. 
I was cold despite long underwear, sweaters and a down jacket because I had to keep the window open to thin out the smoke.
In the morning it was snowing lightly. 
I took two of Brian's aspirins for my altitude headache, which I wouldn't have had if I'd drunk enough water, but I was worried by the infrequency of the rest stops.
We were surrounded by big hills of velvety green. 
Large black birds with rufous bibs on their chests roosted on electric poles beside the road. 
A herd of antelope burst from a hill, racing us. 
The antelope were replaced by sheep and goats with twisted horns, yaks with babies trotting beside them, and black-and-gray nomad tents.
PASSING a battalion of snowy mountains we saw men and women making prostrations along the road. 
It would be weeks before they prostrated themselves all the way to the Jokhang in Lhasa, whereas we arrived late that afternoon, 28 hours after starting from Golmud, coming in along the ugly new strip of Chinese office buildings. 
I spent a month trekking around Lhasa, visiting temples and monasteries there and in the Yarlung Valley, a day's trip southeast, before flying to Katmandu.
This last is the most rewarding route I've taken into Tibet, since I was able to see countryside while avoiding a tour. 
If it were possible to take a bus from Katmandu to Lhasa without being in a group, I might find that the best way. 
But the next time I go, I will go via Golmud.
 
Places to bunk down
The best time for a trip to Tibet is late August through November.
 
Where to Stay
CHENGDU, CHINA: The Traffic Hotel: an inexpensive travelers' hotel, charges about $4 for an immaculately clean bed in a triple with bath.
XINING: The Young Fu Hotel: $3.40 will get you a bed in a triple with bath and hot water.
GOLMUD: The Golmud Hotel: There are two hotels next to each other but under one name -- the only place you can stay in Golmud. 
One is cheap, about $2.75 for a bed in the dorm with slept-in sheets and a nasty bathroom down the hall. 
The other is about $8 with cleaner sheets and private bath.
LHASA, TIBET: The Chinese-owned Holiday Inn is about $100 a day. 
The Yak, the Kirey, the Banok Shul and the Snowlands are all around $4.75 for a dorm room. 
Private rooms, single or double with bath are about $22. 
These are Tibetan-run ventures.
 
Travel Agents
HONG KONG: Time Travel, 16th floor, Block A, Chungking Mansions, 40 Nathan Road, Kowloon; (852) 2723-9993. 
They can get you a flight to Chengdu within eight hours.
KATMANDU, NEPAL: Arniko Travel, Nag Pokhari, Naxal, Post Office Box 4695, Katmandu; (977-1) 414-594; fax (977-1) 411-878. 
A two-week tour, all inclusive, by bus to Lhasa is around $1,000.
