
Reflections Abroad
Anthony Giordano Gallery, Dowling College, Idle Hour Boulevard, Oakdale. 
Through Nov. 
24. 244-3016.
For 10 years, and more intensively after the Government crushed the pro-democracy movement in his native China, Zhang Hongtu has examined the image of Chairman Mao Zedong as a symbol of pervasive power. 
His current exhibition surveys the decade, during which he turned from introspection to an overt critique of the Chinese Communism.
The earliest works in this selection, like "Portrait -- The Back," are literally inward-looking, a kind of interior dialogue between the artist and his materials. 
In the late 1980's, however, Mr. Zhang began using cultural icons as motifs. 
Unlike Andy Warhol, for whom Mao was one celebrity among the many he portrayed, Mr. Zhang focused on the political, social and moral implications of Mao's pervasive presence in the China of his youth.
Among the earliest works in this series is "Chairmen Mao," a group of laser-print manipulations that deconstruct the leader's features. 
With a Dadaist sense of disrespectful satire, Mr. Zhang exercises a freedom of expression that would be denied to him at home, while at the same time suggesting that, despite distortion and caricature, Mao survives.
Even as a silhouette or cutout shape, the Chairman's presence is strongly felt. 
In the "Material Mao" series, his unseen image is surrounded by basic raw materials, including corn, rice, wood and iron, on which society depends. 
Metaphorically Mao is in the food, the buildings, even the Ping-Pong table memorializing the sport that paved the way for diplomacy with the West.
In the silhouette drawings, soy sauce is substituted for ink, while the paper is recycled pages of Mao's "Red Book."
By alluding to traditional Chinese art, and especially by rendering the image in a staple of the Chinese diet, Mr. Zhang comments on Mao's program to remake China in his own image and nourish its people with his omnipotence.
The exhibition culminates in a non-Mao piece, "Flying Blues," Mr. Zhang's homage to the spirit that survives in spite of repression. 
Emanating from a Daoist diagram, feathers suspended by strings over a cloud pattern in sand symbolize imagined freedom restrained by ties to the past. 
Paradoxically, the sky is below and the earth above, a comment on the fact that, for the artist, the ground on which we stand represents openness, while freedom in China is still a celestial ideal.
 
Archeologies
Omni Gallery, 333 Earl Ovington Boulevard, Uniondale. 
Through Nov. 
25. 794-7800.
The artist and the archeologist have much in common. 
Both engage in excavation, look for evidence and contribute to cultural understanding. 
But while the archeologist searches for past meanings, the artist invents new ones.
In this group show, three artists engage in personal excavations that reveal as much about themselves as about the objects or images they uncover. 
The evidence they collect is more a means to an end than an end in itself.
Mary Leto actually begins with artifacts scavenged from building ruins and natural sites. 
Many are incorporated into her wall reliefs, but the most massive elements, pieces of broken concrete, are cast in paper made of pulverized texts. 
Thus "Sow and Reap" is not only a demonstration of how civilization's structures collapse on themselves, crushing the works of man and nature, but also a comment on how words and ideas are integral to those structures.
In Gail Cohen Edelman's mixed-media works, burial sites of several cultures serve as generic sacred spaces. 
Her two "Chapel of Bones" pieces use abstracted skeletons to link areas, like trails taking us from one site to another and emphasizing the universality of ancestor worship.
"The Opening of the Ark" and "You Can't Predict" are more specific, alluding to concentration camps and mass burials -- grisly relics of contempt for the living and the dead.
Naomi Grossman digs into human relations, using the body as her field of exploration. 
In her sculptures of wire, wax and shredded paper, figures are torn by conflict and imperfectly mended, surviving more by inertia than by volition.
"Holding Herself Together" summarizes female resignation, while "Memories of Youth" blatantly parodies lost virility. 
Although women as the victims of men's domination are Ms. Grossman's main concern, male vulnerability is also acknowledged, even if only as a stereotype.
 
Shades of Blue
Alfred Van Loen Gallery, South Huntington Public Library, 2 Melville Road, Huntington Station. 
Through Nov. 
30. 549-4411.
Members of the TANA artists' group are again exhibiting works in which a color is the only common factor. 
Last time it was red, and now we have blue as the harmonizing influence.
Water and sky are obvious subjects for artists who favor blue, and several works allude to those elements. 
Julienne Saslaw captures the mystery of an overcast evening in "Nuit Bleu," with its swirling clouds enveloping a lambent moon. 
A more sinister atmosphere invades Lorraine Baron's "Cloud of Annihilation," a plastic painting that seems to melt before our eyes.
The clever use of collaged holograms enlivens "Halley's Comet," Celia Kushner's evocation of a celestial phenomenon notable for its transcience. 
The comet's icy heart is suggested by the crystalline hologram fragments, while the dark void through which it hurtles is nicely imagined.
Judy Golden's all-over abstraction is titled simply "Blue," yet the composition incorporates flakes of gold leaf that offer a visual pun on the artist's name. 
Gladys Goldberg's "Blues Are Running" is also a double entendre, featuring blue fish, or is it bluefish, accompanied by ghostly afterimages that might be blueprints.
"Pompeii," by Vi Koch, imitates the surface of an ancient wall, scoured by time and the ravages of nature. 
The subtle interplay between surface and ground allows us to imagine the piece as a remnant from ages past. 
"Blue Guardian," Gloria Frey Yudkin's monoprint, also has archaic overtones, with its sentinel figure doubling as a gateway that seems to have its own internal watchman.
