
JON THOMPSON, DIRECTOR OF cultural affairs for the city of Memphis, faced a challenge in Beijing a few years ago. 
He had to persuade the Chinese Government to allow more than 250 relics and fine-art objects out of the country for almost three years. 
Worse, he had to explain that its cherished national treasures were not going to some world-renowned museum.
Instead, they were to be the heart of a touring blockbuster exhibition series called "Wonders," which would open at a convention center in downtown Memphis just a few miles from Elvis Presley's Graceland. 
The show would then go on to Portland, Ore.; Provo, Utah, and Denver before ending up in Orlando, Fla., just a few miles from Disney World.
But Mr. Thompson, a genteel Southerner who also happens to be a veteran marketing man, had his sales pitch ready. 
Knowing China was eager to win American admirers, he began by describing a "cultural corridor," running from New York to Washington, through Chicago and on to Los Angeles, saying it was in these cities that most major arts events occur in the United States.
"So why don't we create our own countercultural corridor," he suggested, "going from Oregon to Florida diagonally across the U.S. in the opposite direction?"
The Chinese were sold.
As a result, "The Imperial Tombs of China" opened in Memphis in 1995. 
Last Thursday, the exhibition opened at the Orlando Museum of Art, the last leg of its planned five-city tour. 
More than 1.5 million people have seen the show so far.
Predictably, some members of America's museum establishment are not particularly receptive to Mr. Thompson's road show. 
In fact, the concept of the "Wonders" blockbuster runs so counter to their notions of high culture that they may never completely accept it.
"Wonders: The Memphis International Series," which Mr. Thompson heads, was started after the city sponsored an exhibition in 1987 called "Rameses the Great."
It drew 675,000 people and went on to be seen by almost eight million people on an eight-city North American tour. 
Then came "Wonders" exhibitions on Catherine the Great, the Ottomans, the Etruscans, Napoleon and China, all staged in the Memphis convention center. 
The city's seventh blockbuster, "Titanic: The Exhibition," opened last month in the basement of Memphis's largest indoor sports arena, where it will remain through September.
The "Wonders" shows have even inspired a few spinoffs. 
James E. Broughton, the organization's original director, left Memphis and set up a similar series of three shows on Egypt, Russia and Greece in St. Petersburg, Fla. 
In Jackson, Miss., another former "Wonders" staffer, Jack Kyle, staged "The Palaces of St. Petersburg" in cooperation with Russia's Hermitage Museum last summer. 
Attendance was more than 550,000, second last year only to the Cezanne exhibition in Philadelphia.
Unlike blockbusters that are composed strictly of fine-arts objects, "Wonders" shows combine fine art, natural history and Smithsonian-like cultural history. 
Every exhibition is designed to make a strong emotional impact through elaborate sets and a story line. 
A free audio guide is narrated by a celebrity: Leonard Nimoy for the Chinese exhibition, Lauren Bacall for Catherine the Great. 
Non-art objects are often a big draw, too: bricks from the Great Wall of China, Catherine the Great's coronation carriage and every item in the art-free Titanic show, from jewelry and money to a steward's jacket and a jar of green olives.
"There is a real hunger for this kind of thing in second- and third-tier cities that do not have a Metropolitan Museum on their doorstep," Mr. Thompson said.
MANY FROM THE MUSEUM world are reluctant to dismiss the "Wonders" concept totally, but they express concern that the shows may warp the public's perception of what museum professionals do.
" 'Wonders' is a great draw for the city," said Kate Gooch, president of the Memphis Arts Council. 
"It is kind of the Boston Pops of art. 
But it is not a substitute for a museum."
Edward H. Able, president of the American Association of Museums, an organization of 3,000 museums across the country, also has reservations about the "Wonders" concept. 
"These are one-time events that come and go," he said. 
"They seem to be mostly entrepreneurial activities to make money, unlike museums, which are committed to continuing programs, education, scholarship and a broader and more complex mission."
Some museum officials are also troubled by the fact that "Wonders" is an arm of local government, not a museum. 
John Buchanan, director of the Portland Museum of Art in Oregon, said his museum took the China exhibition last summer because of its artistic value, but he noted that the idea of city bureaucrats initiating art exchanges raises questions. 
"The opening salvo in these negotiations came from the governments," he said. 
"And that was nervous-making to my colleagues, who are used to talking curator to curator."
But to city leaders, any doubts about the shows are overshadowed by the bottom line: the tourism they attract stimulates local economies. 
Even when a "Wonders" show operated at a loss, which some have, the city of Memphis still earned $3.54 in tax revenue for every dollar invested, a city study showed.
That is a major reason Memphis keeps the nonprofit series solvent through a revolving $4.2 million loan. 
Any profit from "Wonders" ticket- and gift-shop sales is funneled back into the next exhibition. 
Organizers keep the expenses low by using more than 2,000 volunteers and sharing costs with other cities on the tours.
For this and other reasons, the people behind "Wonders" and its spinoffs do not apologize for their efforts. 
Instead, they say their work complements that of museums, and they cite a number of reasons.
Not having a permanent museum collection, they say, enables them to focus all their resources on display. 
They pay fees for the works they borrow because the "Wonders" organization, unlike big museums, cannot trade on prestige or the promise of reciprocal loans.
Education is a built-in part of the concept. 
Free study guides are sent to every teacher in the area, and thousands of children are given free tours. 
Shows are staged in uncommon venues only when local museums do not have enough space to handle the large exhibitions and huge crowds.
Their most heartfelt defense is that the "Wonders" exhibitions do not commercialize art; they popularize it. 
"I'm a populist," said Mr. Kyle, the former "Wonders" staff member. 
"I believe art is for the people."
He and his colleagues argue that there is nothing wrong with bringing the exhibitions to people who may never be able to afford a trip to New York, much less Russia or China, or to those who find museums intimidating.
Cheryl Reddick, who drove 12 hours from Georgia with a friend to see the Titanic show, is one of those people. 
"Museums are too overwhelming," she said. 
"With 'Wonders' you can see the whole exhibit in a couple of hours."
If nothing else, the "Wonders" concept democratizes art, said J. Carter Brown, director emeritus of the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the creator of a blockbuster of his own last summer at the Olympics in Atlanta. 
"I think these exhibits challenge the idea that only the priesthood can see art and the great unwashed cannot," he said.
It's a view shared by Thomas Hoving, the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, who is credited with originating the blockbuster phenomenon when he brought the King Tut show to America in 1977. 
" 'Wonders' is a trailer-park blockbuster," he said. 
"But it's good. 
They reach a whole group of people who never got an art education, and it might end up drawing them into other museums. 
Half a generation from now, I bet there will be bunches of people who will remember 'Wonders' and say it is what got them interested in art as a child."
He added, "The shows are great, not second-rate at all."
For each show, organizers recruit recognized experts to be guest curators. 
The Napoleon exhibit was curated by Bernard Chevallier, director of Malmaison in France, who gathered more than 175 pieces of art from 50 museums all over the world. 
"The people they get to curate are the top people in their fields," Mr. Hoving said.
FOR ALL THE SUCCESS OF these shows, however, a "Wonders" exhibition can still be a risky proposition. 
St. Petersburg is struggling with an $11 million loss on its series, mainly because of lower-than-expected attendance and a financial arrangement in which much of the gift-shop revenue went to Mr. Broughton, the original "Wonders" director, instead of to the city.
Mr. Broughton has left to form an independent company to produce similar shows for other cities. 
His next show will be called "Nicholas and Alexandra."
Meanwhile, in Memphis, an exhibition of several hundred ancient Peruvian treasures will open next spring. 
An exhibition from Versailles is set for next summer in Jackson. 
And cities like Topeka, Kan., and Wilmington, Del., have discussed beginning their own series.
Despite challenges and naysayers, the "Wonders" concept persists. 
"The elitist crowd has some valid points of criticism," said Mr. Hoving. "But these shows are going to keep coming."
