
A violent-yellow sign stenciled with interlocking black rings and a single word hangs over Kennedy F. Shortridge's laboratory. 
That word is "Biohazard."
"We're trying to get things cleaned up here," Mr. Shortridge muttered, after a flock of assistants in white lab coats had left the room. 
"In here," he continued, opening the chrome door of an incubator, "we will grow the virus."
As dozens of scientists around the world, principally in Hong Kong and at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, labor to understand the new flu virus that has spread from chickens to humans here, so far killing two, Hong Kong has been swept by apprehension over the possibility of a new influenza epidemic.
The flu, called H5N1, is a previously unknown strain of influenza virus that has jumped directly from chickens to humans, a direct leap that apparently had not occurred in previous flu outbreaks.
For Mr. Shortridge, however, the emergence of a new influenza virus, while not necessarily this particular one, seemed inevitable, given both ancient agricultural practices in China and the current system of farming in Guangdong province, the source of much of Hong Kong's food.
A microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong, Mr. Shortridge has spent much of his two-decade career here examining the ecology of flu viruses in southern China -- where they come from, what their hosts are, how they mutate, how they are transmitted. 
Many of the answers to these questions are still only partially understood, he said, but one thing now seems increasingly clear.
"China is the principal reservoir for influenza," he said, "and southern China is the influenza epicenter."
China's role as an incubator of influenza viruses can be traced to the first domestication of the duck, which occurred about 2,500 B.C., near the beginning of Chinese recorded history. 
Mr. Shortridge has traced the evolution of these viruses and determined why they seem to be incubating in southern China.
"Studies suggest that aquatic birds -- ducks -- are the principal hosts for influenza in nature," he said. 
And the two principal habitats of these ducks were on lakes in the far reaches of Siberia and in the rice paddies of southern China. 
Migrating ducks, which were hosts to great numbers of flu viruses, "seeded" southern China with the viruses as they moved south, and the virus took hold in domesticated ducks.
Although ducks were domesticated 4,500 years ago, it was not until the early years of the Qing dynasty, in the mid-17th century, that Chinese peasants began keeping ducks in rice paddies.
"Ducks were used as an adjunct to rice farming," Mr. Shortridge explained. 
"Ducks ate insects and crabs, but didn't eat the rice grains. 
You develop a perfect ecological system. 
This, in my view is the most serious concentration of influenza viruses."
And because in most southern Chinese villages, ducks and chickens and pigs and people all live in very close contact, often with the animals next to or even in houses, influenza viruses moved into pigs and then to humans. 
Pigs, Mr. Shortridge said, have in the past been the "mixing vessels," in which the avian flu virus is genetically rearranged so that it can infect humans.
But even with this broad understanding, Mr. Shortridge said, the sudden appearance of H5N1 and its apparent direct transmission from chickens to humans raises a welter of questions about the future course of the disease and whether it could erupt into a pandemic that sweeps the globe.
"The important question to me is: how is the virus getting across from birds to humans?" said Mr. Shortridge, a lanky Australian who eagerly foists reams of scientific papers on a visitor. 
"The second important question is: will this virus undergo any transformation that will allow it to infect humans and cause an epidemic or a pandemic?"
Already, tens of thousands of chickens have been killed by the virus. 
And of the eight known and two suspected cases of humans with the H5N1 flu here, direct contact with chickens is the closest health authorities have gotten so far to establishing a path of transmission.
Blood and respiratory swab samples from chickens as well as human patients and those they have been in contact with are now being analyzed by the C.D.C. in Atlanta. 
As yet, there are no answers on how the flu is spread.
"We are not able to rule out either possibility, bird to human or human to human," said Dr. Thomas Tsang Ho-fai, the principal medical officer for the territory's Department of Health.
He said 2,500 bird samples had been sent to the C.D.C. along with samples from people who had contact with those who had been infected, and added, "It will probably take 8 to 12 weeks for any definitive answer."
Today, Dr. Daniel Lavanchy, the head of the World Health Organization Influenza Program, arrived in Hong Kong from Geneva to meet with local health authorities.
On Saturday, Dr. Lavanchy told reporters that he expected that, with better surveillance, the number of known cases would rise. 
But he added, "I can personally assure you there is no cause to panic."
Meanwhile, Mr. Shortridge is preparing his laboratory, a room of black-topped benches, pipettes, bottles filled with solution, computers, refrigerators and incubators to analyze H5N1.
"This virus isn't behaving like viruses in previous pandemics," he said. 
"It kills cultures overnight. 
This virus kills cells very quickly."
In an incubator in the corner of the laboratory, near the biohazard sign, Mr. Shortridge said he would try to grow the virus in 9-day-old embryo eggs and live culture.
"We don't know what will happen with this virus," said the microbiologist. 
"We've had no contact with this virus before. 
For all we know it might go to humans and completely fade away."
And even as he struggles to get his laboratory in shape, Mr. Shortridge was juggling a parade of visitors, including representatives from Japan's Ministry of Health.
"They're worried," he said. 
"They said they have a large elderly population and they want to know whether this will spread to Japan."
Not everyone in Hong Kong seemed to share the spreading alarm over chickens, however. 
In Sheung Wan, only a mile or so from Mr. Shortridge's laboratory, a housewife who gave her last name as Cheung stood patiently as her butcher tugged a chicken from a wooden cage, lopped its head off, stripped off the feathers and quartered it.
"My family loves chicken," said Mrs. Cheung. "I think everything's going to be all right."
