
It was just another school day for Liu Huamin when the father of one of her students burst through the classroom door and said his teen-age son was threatening to commit suicide by jumping off the fourth-floor balcony of the family's apartment building.
Why? asked Mrs. Liu, a chemistry teacher at Waluji Middle School here.
Because, the man replied, the boy's mother would not cook his favorite meat dumplings for breakfast.
He did not jump, but the story of his breathtaking display of willfulness incites a look of instant recognition across the faces of many Chinese teachers today.
Indeed, it seems at times as if the willfulness of China's generation of "little emperors" -- children growing up without siblings under China's one-child population control policy -- knows no bounds.
In Guangdong Province a power failure prevented a housewife from cooking dinner for her 14-year-old son, who flew into a rage and went out to watch television with a friend. 
When the boy returned, there was still no dinner, so he seized a meat cleaver and killed his mother with 10 blows to the head. 
Then he hanged himself.
An extreme case, but the fact that China's Government-run news organizations gave it prominent display last year also illustrates the concern of many Chinese that its first generation of only children is rapidly maturing into a generation of spoiled, self-absorbed tyrants.
After decades of famine and political turmoil in China, parents who grew up in troubled and often violent times under Mao, suffering long periods of deprivation in the countryside and interrupted schooling, are now rearing -- in many cases doting on -- a generation of only children.
And these new parents are filled with anxiety about whether they are doing it right.
"This is a fixation," said James L. Watson, an anthropologist at Harvard University who has studied the Chinese family. 
"I would call it kind of a compensation complex. 
The generation of parents that we are dealing with now, many of them are Cultural Revolution veterans who themselves did not have much of a childhood, and I think that many of them are trying hard to make sure that their own children get all the benefits and more that they missed out on."
But they are doing it with little cultural guidance. 
The current generation of parents has been cut adrift from both the traditional Confucian values emphasizing reverence for elders that were once the foundation of China's extended families and from the Communist values imposed for three decades under Mao.
Neither has much credibility in China today.
Specialists say it is too early to say whether China's "little emperors" are growing up to be a generation of self-centered autocrats, whose politics may be more aggressive than the generation that grew up under Mao, or whether they are so overindulged at home that they will be ill prepared for the competitive pressures and harsh realities of China's market economy.
 
Off to Bad Start, Teachers Say
"Seems like it could go either way," said David Y. H. Wu, an anthropologist at Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
"You could either raise a generation of rebels against the controls of the Communist Party or you could raise a generation that would feel more nationalistic and assertive as Chinese.
"Talking about personality traits and trying to project to the whole nation is very difficult, but I can see a whole generation perhaps more independent and willing to challenge authority, or simply more authoritative because of their intensified relationships with their parents, and the symbol of parents is government."
Either way, if today's teachers are any judge, the "little emperor" generation is off to an inauspicious start.
"As life and economic conditions get better and better, the moral principles of students and their sense of responsibility to society and family get worse and worse," said Mrs. Liu, the chemistry teacher, who has an 18-year-old son. 
"We teachers often wonder how these students can take up their social responsibility when they get older."
Teachers around the world have long complained about the quality of the next generation. 
But in China, a generation of children is growing up in the midst of a profound economic revolution, where social and political values seem suspended in time as the country waits for the death of Deng Xiaoping, the 91-year-old paramount leader, not knowing whether that event will usher in a new era with a new value system.
"My most terrifying concern," said Zhang Xiaoyun, 33, who teaches literature at the China Youth Political College in Beijing, a former Communist Party school, "is that you must raise a child within some system of beliefs, but our generation has no beliefs, so how can we educate our children?"
The demographic shift from multi-child families under strong patriarchs to small, nuclear families centered on only children "is going to have a profound effect" on Chinese society, Professor Watson said.
 
Increased Spending On Toys and Books
One of the ways that Chinese are overcompensating in bringing up the country's only children is by spending the greatest portion of family income ever on toys, books, educational materials, personal computers and food.
The national obsession with children is fostering multibillion-dollar opportunities for business.
Baby food, which barely existed in China a decade ago, is now a staple of family life and a major item in family budgets.
China's "little emperors" are the single greatest force in determining consumer decisions today, experts say.
"I met a woman who took her daughter to McDonald's in Beijing twice a week to give her modern nutrition," said Yan Yunxiang, a Chinese-born anthropologist at Johns Hopkins University, who frequently returns to examine the culture he grew up in.
When he asked the woman why she was spending as much as half a normal worker's income each month on McDonald's, she replied: "I want my daughter to learn more about American culture. 
She is taking English typing classes now, and next year I will buy her a computer."
Professor Watson said: "It turns out that most Chinese don't even like the food, but what they are buying is culture. 
They are buying connectedness to the world system.
"The idea is that if these kids can connect with McDonald's, they are going to end up at Harvard Law School."
One of China's most popular amusement parks, Window on the World in Shenzhen, has no rides and no arcades. 
Chinese come from all over the country to pay, in some cases a week's wages, to show their children miniatures of Manhattan Island, the Statue of Liberty, the Eiffel Tower and the Taj Mahal.
 
A Generation Driven by Rewards
"Most of our time and money are spent on this child," said Wen Geli, the mother of a 2-year-old boy who seems less attentive to the park's attractions than to gorging himself on ice cream. 
"We want to give him an introduction to the world and expand his outlook."
"My generation grew up with hardship," said her husband, Zhang Xinwen, a communications officer in the Chinese Army. 
"We were born in the 1960's, and that was a period of bitter shortage, but this generation is growing up in richer times and we want to take advantage of this better environment."
Not far away, a retired sports teacher, Cai Kunling, 59, was squiring his 5-year-old granddaughter, Fu Hua, past the wonders of the world. 
"She should be in kindergarten today," he said, "but she wanted to take me to this place," he added in a tone that reflected who was in charge.
The two of them sat for their photo in front of a miniature of Niagara Falls and then strolled over to the little Manhattan.
To Mr. Cai, who lived through the Mao period, it was like a dream world.
"My generation made a lot of sacrifices and had a lot of devotion to the country," he said. 
"But this generation needs a reward if you want them to do something. 
If there is no compensation, they don't want to do it."
Sitting around a dinner of baked carp with three other teachers one evening, Mrs. Liu and some of her colleagues vented their anxieties.
 
Free-for-All Future Worries the Parents
Li Shunmei, 31, a high school teacher with a 3-year-old daughter, said: "I worry a lot about my daughter's future, because I have doubts about whether she can survive under the harsher and harsher competition of Chinese society.
"Nowadays, there are many children who commit suicide. 
I think it is because parents obey their children's every demand, so they are not able to endure any reversals or hard times."
This strain of anxiety is very prominent in Chinese families.
The old "iron rice bowl" society of cradle-to-grave social welfare protection is giving way year by year to the new market economy, where life is beginning to look like a terrifying free-for-all to many Chinese used to something more secure.
"The home can be very sweet and gentle for these toddlers, but the world out there is a cruel world," said Jing Jun, a Beijing native who now teaches anthropology at City College in New York. 
"When we were growing up, the state arranged everything for you, but now parents know the state is not going to do anything for them and the job market is pretty grim."
Mr. Jing said he believed that China's "little emperors" would have to pass through a tough period of adjustment. 
"They are under so much pressure," he said, "and their parents have such great expectations for them. 
Whether they are psychologically prepared for that, I cannot say."
Professor Watson said, "A lot of people, including Chinese psychologists, are concerned whether the next generation is going to be able to 'eat bitterness,' whether they are going to be able to work hard or whether they will be willing to sacrifice themselves as was true under socialism."
Some Chinese feel that the "little emperors" will adjust.
"I'm optimistic," said Wang Xujin, a teacher at Beijing Business College with a 9-year-old son.
But, he confessed, "although the students each year are smarter and smarter, I like them less and less."
