
On an old stone stairway beside the Potala Palace, the empty fortress where the Dalai Lama once presided over Tibet, an elderly woman navigated her way down a long procession of steps after coming here to pray.
"I always come carrying the hope that I will live long enough to see the Dalai Lama here again," said the woman, Chanchup Lhamo. 
"But I am getting old, and now I am afraid I may never get the chance."
Tears spilled down her cheeks.
"People tell me that good things will come in the future," said Mrs. Lhamo, 76, wiping her eyes with the sleeve of her sheepskin-lined robe. 
"But I wait and wait and never see it. 
It never comes."
An intensely religious people who revere the Dalai Lama as a god and a king, Tibetans nurture a fervent desire to see their leader return to the Potala Palace, vacant since the day he fled to India in 1959. 
Many do not hesitate to say they would happily sacrifice all of their material possessions to see the Dalai Lama in Tibet for a single day.
With each passing year, fear grows that any return or visit by the Dalai Lama is less likely. 
Beijing exercises tight control over Tibet and has little incentive to negotiate with the exiled religious leader.
Yet international pressure on China to relax its grip on Tibet has mounted in recent years, and the Dalai Lama himself is proposing a new initiative that he hopes will lead to talks with Chinese leaders. 
Ultimately, he would like to see an agreement allowing more self-rule for Tibet under Chinese sovereignty and, of course, to visit his homeland.
Courting support for his proposal, the Dalai Lama is expected to meet with Vice President Al Gore at the White House during his current visit to Washington. 
During his last visit, President Clinton dropped by, and he may well do so again this time.
Tibetan exiles have said the Dalai Lama would like to meet the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, at a holy Buddhist mountain in northern China. 
A secluded location where the Tibetan leader can technically travel as a monk, not as a political figure, may be conducive to quiet talks.
On the surface the political atmosphere in China seems more open to negotiations on Tibet than at any time in a decade. 
Within the conclave of Beijing's secretive politics, President Jiang has been steadily gaining power, giving him potential leeway to shift ground on China's most sensitive foreign policy problems, Tibet and Taiwan.
Hopes among Tibetan exiles lifted when Mr. Jiang seemed to respond with mild favor to a suggestion by President Clinton during his visit to Beijing last June that Mr. Jiang someday meet the Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his nonviolent work to gain greater freedom for Tibet.
But China's position on Tibet has yet to soften. 
Chinese officials have reacted negatively to news reports about the Dalai Lama's new proposal, voicing irritation that it has been discussed publicly rather than sent to Beijing quietly through the informal back channels that Chinese leaders ordinarily prefer.
Essentially, Beijing's position is that it will not recognize the Dalai Lama as a religious leader of Tibetan Buddhists until he declares total allegience to Beijing, affirming that Tibet has always been an inseparable part of China.
For the last 40 years, China's main concern has been to keep a firm political and military grip. 
Even a one-time visit here by the Dalai Lama could set off utter pandemonium among worshipers, who uncontrollably mobbed delegations that included siblings of the Dalai Lama in the 1980's.
Chinese officials have often said they regard the Dalai Lama as an agent of anti-China forces who relies on political and financial backing from large foreign powers, namely India and the United States.
The Dalai Lama's calls for greater autonomy, Beijing insists, are a way to gain international support for his longer-term goal, making Tibet an independent nation, which is Beijing's greatest fear.
So Beijing insists on verbal declarations of allegiance to the Chinese nation by the Dalai Lama and insists on the same from other prominent Tibetan Buddhist lamas, who are considered "living Buddhas," or reincarnations of deceased lamas.
"All living Buddhas have to be patriotic," said Ma Chongying, deputy director of the Minority and Religious Affairs Bureau in Tibet. 
"If you're not patriotic, there's no such thing as being a living Buddha. 
This is an unchangeable principle."
Equally unchangeable, it seems, is the common reverence here for the Dalai Lama, despite relentless denigration by the Chinese authorities. 
A visitor to Tibet who mentions the Dalai Lama's name to a local resident is rountinely greeted with a toothy smile and a big thumbs-up.
No open worship of the Dalai Lama is permitted. 
A favorite practice, displaying his picture, is banned except in private homes. 
Monks and other worshipers sometimes ask visitors for a likeness of the Dalai Lama, but only out of earshot from the men and women in plainclothes who loiter around religious sites in large numbers.
In the long run, Chinese officials evidently hope that the Dalai Lama issue will disappear. 
Looming behind all the current efforts at negotiation is the critical question of succession, traditionally decided through a highly mystical procedure of locating the Dalai Lama's reincarnation in a young boy somewhere on the Tibetan plateau.
Chinese leaders are likely to prevent Tibetan religious leaders from choosing a new reincarnation of the Dalai Lama or to control the process so tightly that Beijing in fact determines the choice. 
The current Dalai Lama is 63.
"When the Dalai Lama dies, he dies," said Mr. Ma, the religious affairs official. 
"There will be no replacement."
Yet at the Potala Palace, a 1,000-room mansion that majestically crowns the entire valley surrounding Lhasa, Tibet's holy capital, pilgrims come each day to worship the Dalai Lama, even if they do not mention his name too loudly while doing so.
Inside one room of the Dalai Lama's former living quarters, a small throne draped with green and white silk embroidery, offset by a long row of gold-encased cabinets filled with Buddhist statues and jewelry, is covered by thousands of white scarves brought by devoted pilgrims.
On a recent morning, an elderly couple dressed in the long black and maroon robes of herdsmen from the countryside stepped forward to prostrate themselves on the worn stone floor. 
Their two children followed suit on the floor behind, as did a granddaughter in a bright yellow parka.
A Lhasa policeman, with a mild paunch and dark sunglasses, watched silently from the back of the room. 
After the family moved on to the next room, he stepped forward and put a 10-yuan note, the equivalent of about a dollar, on a silver chalice.
 
Tibet at a Glance
 
GEOGRAPHY -- Bordered by the Himalayas, Tibet is often called the Roof of the World. 
It is more than twice the size of France, and has large deposits of gold, copper and radioactive ores.
 
POPULATION -- 2.4 million in the Tibetan Autonomous Region, which does not cover the whole of the Tibetan plateau. 
All told, there are 7 million Tibetans in China.
 
HISTORY -- A powerful kingdom for centuries, Tibet was ruled by a Dalai Lama from the 17th century, but fell partly under Chinese sway from 1720 until 1911, when Tibetans reasserted their independence. 
After the Communists took power in China in 1949, Tibet became a "national autonomous region" of China in 1951. 
The Chinese suppressed a revolt in 1959, during which the current Dalai Lama escaped to India. 
In 1965, the Tibetan Autonomous Region was formally established. 
During the Cultural Revolution, thousands of Tibetan monasteries were destroyed. 
The ban on the Tibetans' religion was lifted in 1978, but they continue to chafe at Chinese rule.
      
