
With one high-ranking North Korean official still holed up in the South Korean mission in Beijing, two gunmen today shot and critically wounded another North Korean defector here in an attack apparently ordered by the Communist country.
A senior police official said North Korean agents were suspected in the shooting of Li Il Nam, known in South Korea as Lee Han Yong, a 36-year-old nephew of the girlfriend of North Korea's leader, Kim Jong Il.
Mr. Li was the first North Korean defector to be shot in South Korea since an armistice ended the Korean War in 1953, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Mr. Li was shot outside his home in Bundang, just south of the capital, Seoul, late this evening, the official said. 
A nurse at a nearby hospital said Mr. Li later underwent surgery, but she gave no details of his condition. 
The gunmen escaped and were being sought by the police.
The police official said he suspected that the gunmen were North Korean agents and that the shooting was intended as a warning to South Korea after the defection this week of the highest-ranking official ever to flee North Korea.
The latest North Korean defector, Hwang Jang Yop, one of 11 members of the secretariat of the ruling Workers' Party, has been holed up in the South Korean mission in Beijing since Wednesday, when South Korean officials said he arrived in a taxi and asked for political asylum in South Korea.
North Korea insists Mr. Hwang, who is ranked 25th in the country's hierarchy, was kidnapped by South Korea and has said it would retaliate if he was not returned, without specifying how.
Mr. Hwang's apparent defection has caused a huge loss of face for a North Korean Government, and Seoul has taken the threat seriously, ordering tighter security at all its overseas missions.
The defection of Mr. Hwang, 72, a thin, bespectacled man who served as an ideological theorist for the North, could potentially be the most damaging ever to North Korea, where the Government is already reeling from severe food shortages and economic disaster brought on in part by floods last year.
Mr. Hwang, who was once a tutor to the North Korean leader, would have had access to much of the inner workings of the secretive Pyongyang Government, which rules one of the world's most isolated states.
If he is willing to talk, he could provide a bonanza of information to Western intelligence officials, analysts said this week.
The Chinese Government must now decide on Mr. Hwang's future -- whether to allow him to be flown to Seoul, where he could be expected to reveal crucial secrets about North Korea, or to send him back to Pyongyang.
South Korea suggested today that it was prepared to go along with China's decision to take its time in finding a way to resolve the diplomatic crisis.
"I think we have started a good discussion with China and we have to wait and see," Foreign Minister Yoo Chong Ha told reporters. 
"I don't think that its right now to make any judgment on this."
A North Korean delegation arrived in Beijing today, but it was unclear if the group was there to discuss Mr. Hwang's case. 
The identities of the North Koreans were not known, and the North Korean Embassy in Beijing declined to comment.
Although recent signs indicated that North Korea might be seeking to ease its isolation, tensions between the two Koreas remain high.
Late last year, in an unusually conciliatory gesture, the Pyongyang Government apologized after a submarine incursion along the South Korean coast in September.
