
No matter who wins the hotly contested presidential election on Saturday, the outcome will almost certainly be the weakest, most divided government since Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists fled to the island in 1949.
At fervent rallies tonight that brought hundreds of thousands of flag-waving citizens into the capital's streets, the three main candidates made their final appeals in a race that appeared too close to call.
Polling has not been allowed in the final 10 days, adding to the suspense of an election that has been fought with all the exuberance of a young democracy facing profound choices.
The contenders are Vice President Lien Chan from the governing Nationalist Party; James Soong, a former Nationalist official who is running as an independent; and Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressives, the main opposition party.
Hanging over the campaign were heavy-handed warnings from Beijing, which considers Taiwan a region separated from the mainland since the civil war of the 1940's and threatened war if the island indefinitely delayed reunification talks.
But a more immediate problem for the Nationalists, who have firmly governed Taiwan through 51 years of dictatorship and then a democracy that they ushered in, is that this election represents a wrenching turning point, transforming the island's politics.
The Nationalist candidate, Mr. Lien, is in serious danger of losing in a three-way, winner-take-all race that has disastrously divided the party's traditional majority. 
Even if he wins, the prospect is for debilitating internal clashes.
"Everyone is focusing so much on the cross-straits problem," said Steven M. Goldstein, an expert on Taiwan politics at Smith College, in Massachusetts. 
"But no matter who gets elected, there's going to be a constitutional crisis."
The once impregnable Nationalists have been seriously weakened by charges of corruption and by an internal rift that produced Mr. Soong's breakaway candidacy and improves the chances of victory for Mr. Chen.
However, in an unusual prospect of a divided government here, either Mr. Chen or Mr. Soong, if elected, would have to contend with a Nationalist majority in the legislature, which is not up for re-election.
Even if Vice President Lien gains a plurality, allowing the Nationalists to hold on the presidency, the party will face new challenges to its vast business holdings and freewheeling political deals.
Both Mr. Chen and Mr. Soong have gained from their campaigning against "black gold" in politics, the term here for the business manipulations, alliances with mobsters and vote buying that have plagued Taiwanese politics. 
Many supporters of Mr. Chen and Mr. Soong are united in disgust at what they call the continued corruption of the Nationalists under the departing president, Lee Teng-hui.
"We have to get rid of the corruption and organized crime and vote buying," said Lu Chiu-chien, 42, a social worker from Keelung City who furiously waved a Chen flag here tonight.
Mr. Soong's credibility was hurt by evidence, released by the Nationalists, that he diverted party money to personal accounts in the past. 
But supporters like Mary Lu, 45, a homemaker who was out cheering for Mr. Soong, say he has been persecuted by a vindictive Mr. Lee.
Also, although he is stepping down as president, Mr. Lee has said he wants to serve out his remaining one and a half years as chairman of the Nationalist Party, a position that has arguably been more powerful than the presidency.
"Suddenly, the same person will no longer be both president and chairman of the party," said John Hsieh, the Taiwan-born director of the Center for Asian Studies at the University of South Carolina. 
"A serious confrontation is likely."
But attitudes toward Taiwan's independence remain the fundamental cleavage in the electorate, said Mr. Hsieh, an expert on public opinion here. 
The campaign has not only brought out festering animosities within the Nationalist Party, but also between those who basically favor independence and the majority, who want to leave well enough alone.
Cheng Yin-fu, 41, a furniture seller who was wildly waving a Chen Shui-bian flag at the stadium tonight, expressed the attitude that China -- and some worried Taiwanese -- dread to hear. 
"Spiritually and morally I support independence," he said. 
"But as for the actual action, we can wait for a while."
President Lee has outraged Chinese officials with his insistence on Taiwan's equal status with the mainland, a position that is widely shared here. 
But in recent days, Beijing has pointedly attacked Mr. Chen, the opposition party challenger, warning that his victory would be dangerous.
Alone among the candidates, Mr. Chen long championed a Taiwanese declaration of independence. 
But in this campaign, he moderated his position, saying a formal declaration would be unnecessary because Taiwan was effectively sovereign.
Although he has tried to press the anticorruption theme, he has had to spend much of his campaign trying to assure voters that he will not act recklessly and will seek peace.
Given China's deep suspicions, his election would open a period of serious tension, anxiously watched in Washington, because the United States has pledged to help defend Taiwan and would be drawn into a cross-strait war.
With a wide sense that Mr. Chen was gaining ground, Vice President Lien started trying to scare voters with warnings that electing Mr. Chen would court a military attack. 
Tonight he told cheering supporters that Mr. Chen and his party represented "chaos, disaster, war!"
Holding high Mr. Lien's hand at tonight's rally, President Lee continued this line of attack, shouting that Mr. Chen "is inexperienced, and everything he says will give jitters to everyone!"
But Mr. Chen's generally ardent supporters, including many younger people who yearn for a fresh and cleaner government, as well as an independent Taiwanese identity, have not been deterred.
"Taiwan, stand up!" was a loud chant at the Chen rally tonight, the largest and most frenzied of the three, which spilled far into the streets from a packed football stadium.
Considered by many to be a weak candidate, Mr. Lien, who has an American doctorate in political science and has held several top government posts, has offered little more in his campaign than appeals to experience and stabilityI.
After having been pushed aside by his former mentor, President Lee, Mr. Soong, a onetime Nationalist stalwart, has driven his independent run by attacking the corruption of the party that he had long served and by billing himself as a more competent leader than Mr. Lien.
At the same time, Mr. Soong, who also has an American doctorate in politics, is more willing to discuss the mainland's core principle of "one China."
He says he would be best able to negotiate with the mainland. 
But the independence-leaning supporters of Mr. Chen fear that he would sell out Taiwan's interests.
All three candidates say they will seek to broaden economic ties with the mainland. 
But whether any of them can meet Beijing's demands for unity talks is unclear, because the vast majority of voters prefer their current status of undeclared independence. 
And political experts wonder how the island will cope with pressures from Beijing if its government is seriously divided.
At the Hsingtien Buddhist temple here today, hundreds of people attended daily services. 
Most were older women. 
"At the beginning of the prayers, everybody here made a wish for peace and stabilityI," said one, Zhang Pai-tsai. 
She was worried by China's threats and said she would vote for Mr. Lien.
Outside the temple, Lin Tsai-cheng, 32, an electrician, said he was leaning toward Mr. Soong. "It's time for a change, but since Soong comes out of the KMT, it won't be too drastic a change," said Mr. Lin, using the initials for the Nationalists.
Mr. Chen's supporters tend to shrug off the mainland warnings.
"I don't give a damn about the threats from the mainland," Li Jing-huang, 50, a guide for Japanese tourists, said. 
"I was in the Taiwanese marines in Vietnam and I saw real war. 
But I don't think they'll attack. 
China can't afford a war."
