
The nations of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, which represent more than half the world's economic output, all say they agree in principle with President Clinton that the path to further prosperity is to lower ever more barriers to trade and investment.
But as leaders from the United States and the other 17 member countries gather here for a summit meeting, the notion of achieving even a vague commitment for a giant Pacific free-trade zone from Chile to China, even far in the future, has led to apprehension as well as expectation.
The Pacific zone was pressed vigorously by President Clinton a year ago, when he spoke in Seattle of an Asian Pacific "community."
The leaders are gathering here to decide whether to begin turning that concept into reality by setting a target date for free trade.
Foreign ministers and trade officials will meet on Friday and Saturday here in the capital. 
On Tuesday heads of state, including President Clinton, will assemble in Bogor, a scenic area just outside Jakarta. 
In between, the leaders will pair off for bilateral meetings.
To be sure, any declaration that emerges from Bogor will be vague and nonbinding. 
Exactly how to achieve free trade will be left to future meetings. 
And the deadlines being contemplated, 2020 for developing nations and perhaps 10 years earlier for some other countries, are far enough away so that it will not have much immediate impact.
But in an organization that spans four continents and levels of wealth ranging from Japan's per-capita output of more than $30,000 a year to China's $400, there are certain to be conflicting agendas.
Initially there were fears that the West wanted to create a model of the European Union, an idea that raised fears of an integrated association that could threaten the sovereignty of member nations.
And many of the Asian nations with closed markets have suspicions that despite Washington's talk of community, it is merely interested in using the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation group, known as APEC, to break down trade barriers that prevent American companies from selling more products to the fast-growing markets of the East.
"Asia is an area where there is potential economic opportunity for the United States, and that is as far as it goes," said Derek da Cunha, senior fellow at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore, describing his view of Washington's priorities.
It is too soon to tell whether Mr. Clinton's ability to influence events here will be weakened by the triumph of Republicans in mid-term elections this week. 
But the Republican sweep has raised some doubts about whether the Democratic-controlled, lame-duck 103d Congress will approve the GATT agreement at a special session after Thanksgiving. 
Most nations at the conference are counting on GATT to spur their economies.
The first skirmish of the meeting in Jakarta has already broken out. 
In preparatory talks this week, the United States objected to a proposed voluntary code aimed at liberalizing foreign investment in member countries, saying it did not go far enough.
China has expressed reservations about a timetable for free trade. 
"In view of the diversity of the Asia Pacific countries, this timetable should be very flexible," President Jiang Zemin said before leaving Beijing earlier this week.
Even more firm in his opposition is Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia, who fears APEC will diminish the importance of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, six countries that are already moving to form a trading bloc. 
Mr. Mahathir has also championed an East Asian Economic Caucus, which would include Japan but exclude the United States, Australia and other Western members of the larger group.
Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's Minister of International Trade and Industry, said this week that an effort to establish a trade timetable was a meaningless exercise because the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum has no means of enforcement.
Still, many analysts say the prospects for movement forward are probably better now than they were a year ago.
"There is discussion and debate about whether there should be a target or not, but nobody disagrees on trade liberalization," said Ippei Yamazawa, a professor of economics at Hitotsubashi University in Tokyo and a member of the so-called Eminent Persons Group, a committee of private citizens that drafted proposals for APEC trade liberalization.
Last year, Asian nations were also fearful that linking up in a big community would subject them to more pressure from Washington on human rights, although those fears were eased somewhat by the decision to detach human rights concerns from China's trade status.
Moreover, this year the free trade agenda is being pushed most strongly by Indonesia, the host country. 
It is harder for developing nations to resist the appeals of one of their own.
Indonesia last year resisted the United States trade proposals. 
Some experts say Indonesia's about-face this year reflects the desire of President Suharto to leave an international legacy by making the Bogor declaration something to remember.
Even without the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation group, the Asian region is moving toward economic integration. 
The member nations' economies are becoming too big to grow simply by exporting to the United States and Europe. 
Now, they must sell to to one another.
Japan's exports to Asia now exceed its exports to the United States, in part because Japanese companies have built a network of factories in Southeast Asia that must be supplied with components and machinery. 
Some of the biggest investors in China are ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs from Hong Kong, Taiwan and Southeast Asia.
The six Asean nations -- Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand -- recently accelerated plans to lower tariffs among themselves.
Even some of those who favor free trade, however, wonder whether APEC should be the organization to bring it about. 
The group was started in 1989 as a forum for discussion. 
The fact that its name, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, does not end with "organization," "association" or a similar noun attests to the reluctance of its founders to make it an institution. 
It operates by consensus, without any mechanism for voting, and many members would prefer to see it stay that way.
"At this stage, making it rigid might not be the right emphasis," said Rizalino Navarro, secretary of trade and industry of the Philippines. 
"The emphasis should be on the direction, not the timetable or the institution."
But APEC is rapidly growing more institutional. 
Two years ago members decided to create a permanent secretariat based in Singapore, and this year there is talk of expanding it. 
More committees have been formed. 
The number of members has grown. 
And Chile's enrollment at this year's meeting extends the forum into South America.
A big step toward increasing the group's importance came at last year's meeting in Seattle, when the heads of state were invited for the first time.
Another question is whether an APEC free-trade plan is needed and whether it would conflict with or complement the global trading system under GATT or the smaller, more tightly integrated trade zones like the North American Free Trade Agreement and the new Asean Free Trade Area.
"With progress made in the GATT and with progress made in unilateral liberalization, the need for regional arrangements weakens a great deal," said Djisman Simandjuntak, a member of the board of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
