
WHILE most of the glitzy soirees being planned for the handover are private affairs, there is still much for the visitor to see and do that opens doors to Hong Kong past and Hong Kong future. 
Crowded in among the mirror-slabbed office towers that are sprouting like stands of bamboo are small lanes and quiet byways through which the visitor can amble, reflecting on the Hong Kong that was even as the territory's metamorphosis looms nearby.
A two- to three-hour excursion, not particularly strenuous despite some steps, covers the highlights. 
It begins with the tram, a glorious double-decker throwback to the first years of the century that trundles along narrow-gauge tracks through cars, trucks and people, to the end of the line in Sheung Wan. 
Pay HK$1.60 (about 20 cents) as you get off and walk across the tracks to the red brick Edwardian-style Western Market.
With its louvered shutters and great stone arches, it began life as a food market, a role it played for 83 years until it was renovated in 1989 and converted into a small shopping center filled with stalls selling antique cameras, cloth merchants in tiny shops packed with bolts of silk, organza, velvet and cotton prints, tourist shops selling T-shirts and a kiosk with old photographs of Hong Kong.
Leaving the market on the east side, walk south on Morrison Street. 
Across the street from the Western Market is the Starite Book Company, mostly a stationery store now, but on the tables along the sidewalk, piles of string-bound fortune-telling guides are for sale. 
For HK$14 (about $1.80), you can buy a guide, called Tong Sing in Cantonese, which, while a jumble of obscure Chinese numerology and stargazing, is one of those garish items worth collecting.
Wander up Morrison Street and turn left on Bonham Strand, a crooked lane walled by shops dealing in the exotic and plain. 
On your right, the first store sells handmade brooms, grass mats, low wooden stools used by old women huddling in circles to gossip and old men to smoke, and the huge, circular woven-grass peasant hats that rise to a peak for only HK$20 (about $2.60). 
Along the street, there are shops with immense sacks of a dozen varieties of dried mushrooms, dried orchid petals and bags of nuts. 
And farther on is Dai Fat Swallow's Nest Company, one of several such establishments selling the fragile and jarringly expensive swallows' nests used in special -- very special -- soups. 
A plastic box the size of a butter cookie tin will set you back HK$17,500, or about $2,273. 
Across the street, at the Lam Kie Yuen Tea Company, bins of tea, from Pu-erh to plain green, are surrounded by shelves of tiny blue-clay teapots, considered best for steeping Chinese teas. 
Pots are priced from HK$30 (about $3.90) to HK$350 ($45).
At Cleverly Street, turn right and about five doors up find Kau Kee Birds Shop, an open-air market of birds, delicate red cages and bags of crickets. 
Everywhere in Hong Kong you will find people walking their birds, in exquisite cages, through parks and along lanes; at building sites, construction workers take their birds and hang the cages on nearby trees or scaffolding.
A few doors up from the bird store is Tai Hing, a small craft shop where a carpenter makes the red lacquer and gold-tinted devotional cabinets that many people keep in their homes as shrines to one god or another. 
A few more doors down is Hop Lee, a storefront selling bundles of incense, or joss sticks, and stacks of paper money -- the brand name here is Hell Bank Note -- in $50 million denominations, papier-mache cars and telephones and television sets and cardboard stacks of gold bullion, all of which is burned on funerary occasions to send the departed into the next world with all the basics and some pocket money.
Walking up Cleverly, across Queen's Road Central, you will come to the steps of Ladder Street, which lead up to Upper Lascar Row and the Cat Street antique market. 
Here, along a narrow lane hemmed in by tables and kiosks of antique and knickknack dealers, can be found much of the detritus of Chinese culture -- bad ceramic vases, imitation Tang dynasty horses and clunky bronze Buddhas -- along with the occasional treasure: a fine Yixing teapot or nice ivory mah-jongg set. 
Here you can find a white porcelain history of Communism: busts of Marx and Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Mao.
Turn left at the end of Lascar Row and walk up a small flight of steps, across Hollywood Road and up Sai Street to Tai Ping Shan Street. 
On the right, in what amounts to a cul-de-sac, is a small temple to the god Kwan Yin. 
Often there is a huddle of ancient neighborhood women sitting in front of the temple discussing their families and their neighbors. 
A tabby cat with a crooked tail hangs around as well.
Make a U-turn and head east on Tai Ping Shan, down a typically old-style Hong Kong street, a jumble of low-rise apartments over storefronts, all the apartments with garden boxes and clothing drying from bamboo poles slung over the street. 
As you walk, on the downhill side small lanes squirt downhill and often there are tiny temples tucked away in shaded corners, wisps of incense betraying their presence. 
Work your way along the street, turning with it left and then right, past the coffin makers', and wind up at the Man Mo Temple, containing two separate but abutting halls of stone with deep red beams and soaring roof peaks. 
On the corner is one of Hong Kong's oldest mailboxes, a red, round cylinder stamped with the seal of King Edward VII.
The Man Mo Temple, dedicated to the gods of literature, Man, and war, Mo, is believed to date from 1842. 
Its large temple bell was cast in bronze in Guangzhou in 1847, while several teak sedan chairs inside glass cases date from the mid-19th century. 
The air of the temple swirls thickly with incense as neighborhood people and visitors perform prayers in the temple.
Beyond the heart of Hong Kong, there are still the remnants of colonial rule, the remaining edifices of more than 150 years of British suzerainty. 
In the Central district, amid the clumsy and elegant office towers, huddles the Legislative Council building, a granite structure with an Ionic colonnade that was opened in 1912 as the Supreme Court Building. 
One of the few old buildings to survive the wrecker's ball, it now houses Hong Kong's elected legislature, a body that will be ousted on July 1 and replaced by a legislature appointed by Beijing.
Up the hill, in the lower reaches of Hong Kong Park, is the territory's oldest surviving colonial-era structure, Flagstaff House. 
A graceful two-story house surrounded by thin columns and a second-floor verandah, the house is now the Museum of Tea Ware. 
Currently under renovation until June 23, the house was occupied in 1846 by Maj. Gen. George Charles D'Aguilar, who was the commander of Britain's land forces in China. 
In those days, the house offered a breathtaking view of Hong Kong's harbor and the mountains of Kowloon; now, the towers of international commerce hem the white house in on all sides, its view but a sliver of a harbor fast vanishing under developers' landfill. 
The new K.S. 
Lo Gallery has been recently opened exhibiting a collection of ceramics and Chinese seals.
Farther uphill, on Upper Albert Road, is the home of Britain's last Governor, Chris Patten. 
By the time it was completed in 1855, Hong Kong was on its fourth governor. 
Set amid spendid formal gardens, the ivory house is a sober, neo-classical example of colonial architecture, modified during World War II by the Japanese, who added a central tower hinting at Japanese architectural style. 
Mr. Patten will leave this house on June 30, but his successor, the shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, has decided not to move in, claiming that the house is possessed of inauspicious feng-shui, the traditional Chinese belief in harmonizing the placement of manmade structures in nature.
But as much as Hong Kong remains redolent of British colonialism -- many of the territory's streets are named after governors, prime ministers, harbormasters, assorted British royals and even a ship -- the future lies northward, toward China and Beijing. 
Already, of course, there are dramatic examples of China's presence.
Perhaps none is more startling than the origami-like I. M. Pei tower of the Bank of China, a mirror-walled, knife-edged building slicing skyward from Hong Kong's Central Business District. 
And perhaps no building in Hong Kong provokes more heated opinion, with students of architecture often rapturous and Hong Kongers usually fiercely hostile, an attitude that stems not from any distaste for Mr. Pei, but a firmly held view that the building reeks of bad feng-shui: its sharp angles are seen as daggers and the two antennas at the top are reminiscent of chopsticks shoved into a bowl of rice, a distinctly ominous sign. 
Indeed, many offices in sight of the building are hung with small convex feng-shui mirrors intended to ward off the bank's bad aura.
Along the seafront, the new Hong Kong is rising as well. 
In Wan Chai, jutting into the harbor by the Grand Hyatt Hotel, is a convention and exhibition center designed by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, a glass-walled building covered with an undulating, overlapping roof intended to emulate the wings of a gull. 
The center, still unfinished, is scheduled to be the setting for the handover ceremony. 
There, on July 1, China will formally assert its sovereignty over Hong Kong.
