
ALTHOUGH Mount Kailas, at 22,028 feet, is not one of the highest Himalayan peaks, it is among the world's most beautiful mountains. 
A delicately curved pyramid with a rounded top, its most striking feature is concentric bands of dark rock on which snow accumulates, forming stripes of black and white.
But it is something beyond physical beauty that, for more than a thousand years, has drawn pilgrims, who perform a kora -- a 32-mile walk around the mountain, ascending almost 5,000 feet along the way -- to pay homage to the gods. 
Kailas, the most sacred mountain in mainland Asia, is considered the home of gods of three faiths: Hinduism, Buddhism and Bon, the ancient religion predating Buddhism in Tibet.
Last May, my husband, Philip, and I drove across western Tibet to Mount Kailas (also known as Kailash) and nearby Lake Manasarovar, and to the splendid murals in the monasteries of Tholing and Tsaparang, capitals of the medieval kingdoms of Guge. 
Accompanied by three Sherpas provided by a trekking agency in Nepal, we rode from Katmandu to Zhangmu on the Tibetan border, a trip of seven hours. 
There we met our Tibetan crew and transferred our gear onto a large truck that also carried 10 55-gallon drums of gasoline, since there are no service stations in western Tibet. 
From there, we rode in a Land Cruiser (the terrain makes it essential to travel in vehicles with high ground clearance) with our Tibetan guide and driver.
Upon arriving in Tibet one is catapulted within a few hours to high altitudes. 
Our route lay across the Changtang, the wild, desolate plateau of northwestern Tibet, where on average we traveled and slept at altitudes equal to the more than 14,000-foot height of the Matterhorn.
As we drove across the Changtang I suddenly remembered a line of Pascal from my college French class, about the terrifying immensity of enormous spaces. 
Scoured by fierce winds, under a sky glowing from one horizon to the other with golden light, and set between snowy mountains that seem to float in the blue, the Changtang is an immense space made for the deities with which the Tibetans have populated it through religious beliefs. 
Nearly empty, inhabited mainly by nomads (and, these days, by clusters of Chinese soldiers and officials), the Changtang is alive with spirits.
In May its color was golden, but our guide said that during the summer rains its thin, sparse grass would turn green. 
Wildlife was abundant: kiang (wild asses) ranged in the distance, small, slender gazelles darted across our track and woolly hares bounded away from our vehicle. 
An eagle stood on the ground -- no trees to perch on here. 
Although the land is barren, we saw numerous lakes, each a slash of vivid turquoise, the color so bright it seemed to burn against the golden land.
Across the huge, empty space and in the clear, dry air even a solitary creature, however distant or small -- yak, horse or person -- is startlingly visible, a black shape against the yellow plain, arousing anticipation and excitement. 
At long intervals we would see a nomad in Tibetan dress -- sheepskin cloak, felt boots, fur cap (one man wore a wolfskin cap), perhaps alone on horseback, more often herding yak or sheep. 
We saw one man herding his yaks on a bicycle. 
A herd of the massive, shaggy creatures on the move was an impressive sight.
Occasionally we saw a single nomad's tent or a cluster of two or three, and stopped several times to follow our guide into one, where he would sit cross-legged on a rug on the ground, smoking, offering cigarettes and accepting cups of Tibetan tea (a brew made in a churn with salt and butter). 
The tents, some woven of coarse black yak wool, were held up by wooden poles, with a slit overhead to let out smoke from the open hearth.
In one tent we found only a child and his gaunt, bent grandmother, tending a metal pot steaming on the fire. 
A little portable shelf served as an altar, on which were laid the yak-butter lamps Tibetans use for worship, and an object covered with a white cloth. 
Glancing at her for permission, I raised a corner of the cloth and saw photographs of monks: I then clasped my hands and made the worship gesture of touching head, mouth and heart, evoking a smile from the old woman. 
At another encampment we saw women in spectacular jewelry: silver amulets, necklaces of turquoise and coral and long earrings. 
One had silver coins worked into her braided hair.
We averaged about 18 miles an hour and 156 miles a day, following traces of tire marks considered to be roads. 
We jounced, bounced, pitched and churned in the Land Cruiser; I sat on my down jacket to cushion the shocks, and sometimes posted as if riding a horse. 
Our Sherpas took turns in the extra car seat, otherwise riding in the open back of the truck. 
At day's end their bones hurt, and they were covered with dust.
The austere beauty and silence of the landscape are interrupted at intervals by clusters of square, squat concrete buildings sprouting antennas and satellite dishes -- Chinese Army and Government posts that our guide called "administrative centers."
Sometimes we camped, sometimes we stopped in an administrative center at a guesthouse, a kind of rough Tibetan motel. 
Rooms held a few cots, a little iron stove and a bucket of sheep-dung pellets for fuel; some had an outdoor latrine, some not even that.
The only town along our entire route was Gar (called Ali by the Chinese), with grandiose buildings lining a wide main street. 
We stopped at a large hotel with an imposing facade and a huge, cavernous lobby, where we had some difficulty finding a light bulb for our room. 
None of the toilets were functioning and guests had to use the latrine. 
Guests (who were mainly traveling government functionaries) often use a blowtorch to cook in their rooms, as did our Tibetan guide's cook.
A LONG, tough ride to the western edge of Tibet brought us to the monasteries of Tholing and Tsaparang, where despite severe damage during the Cultural Revolution, there are important murals from the 15th through 17th centuries in relatively good condition; the statues had fared worse. 
The murals depict deities and high lamas and scenes of court life, showing foreign emissaries in Islamic and central Asian dress paying respect to Tibetan royalty.
From there we turned southeast to reach Darchen, the small settlement at the base of Mount Kailas and the starting point for the kora. 
Here for the first time we met other groups of Westerners at the guesthouse, which offered camp beds in narrow concrete rooms and an unroofed latrine outside the gate. 
Strolling through Darchen, carrying a rock or two to ward off the fierce Tibetan mastiffs guarding the houses, we watched a group of nomads separating a large flock; the women, heads and mouths wrapped in huge shawls against the relentless wind and dust, swung ropes to drive the sheep.
Our guide hired a few Tibetan pilgrims to carry our gear for the kora and we started the next morning. 
On the first day we walked about six and a half hours through a long, deep valley between walls of sheer red rock. 
Along the kora route are numerous sites associated with spiritual masters and supernatural beings, where pilgrims perform devotions. 
The east face of Kailas loomed above: a forbidding, serious place, desolate, silent, swept by the wind -- a fit home for the gods.
We followed the orthodox Buddhists, who circumambulate in a clockwise direction, but occasionally we saw Bon pilgrims, who walk counterclockwise. 
In late afternoon we stopped at a little six-room guesthouse belonging to a small monastery, with walls and floors of dried mud and rough wooden planks for a bed, upon which some men in sheepskin cloaks and turquoise earrings, their hair in wild, tangled braids, laid out dirty cotton mattresses and covers for our crew. 
With intense cold and a wind that did not stop buffeting us until early in the morning, my husband and I slept in our tent.
The next morning we rose before 5 to make an early start for the pass one must cross to circle the mountain. 
In late May the pass was still covered with snow and icy patches. 
As we climbed, we passed a woman who was prostrating her way around the mountain, an act of the highest devotion, which can take 13 days or more. 
Making the prayerful gesture of touching clasped hands to head, mouth and heart, and then raising her arms high, she flung herself upon the frozen, rocky ground, then rose, walked the few steps to the place her fingertips last touched, and prostrated herself again. 
She wore a thick apron and canvas shoes on her hands to keep them from being scraped raw.
AFTER nearly four hours, reaching the pass at 18,600 feet, where prayer flags placed by pilgrims and monks fluttered atop a cairn, we shouted "Lha Gyalo!"
(Victory to the Gods!) like all pilgrims. 
The snow and pile of rocks were strewn with colorful scraps of clothing left by the faithful as marks of devotion.
From the pass we descended to another long valley and after nine exhausting hours stopped to camp outside a shelter of mud rooms; we completed the kora at noon the next day. 
We took the standard two and a half days to walk the 32 miles, with an ascent of 4,920 feet, but some Tibetans can do the kora in one.
The weather cleared as we drove southward for 90 minutes to Lake Manasarovar, where we first visited Chiu Gomba, a little monastery (recently rebuilt) perched on a craggy knoll above the plain. 
A group of nomads about to start a circumambulation of the sacred lake were worshiping here, eyes bright with reverence. 
The women wore brightly colored cloaks on which were sewn applique in bold geometric patterns and contrasting colors, such as red and gold on a green background, and many necklaces, amulets and earrings.
From a ridge behind the gomba, we had a splendid view of the lake and of Kailas, rising high above the nearby mountains, an image of utter purity -- inviolate, unclimbed because it is sacred. 
There are no buildings, no hotels or guesthouses, no promenade walk along the lake shore to spoil the prospect, the integrity of this holy place. 
We had spent 16 days in Tibet, driving 1,380 miles. 
We continued on foot with our Sherpas for five and a half days, over 65 miles on some of the roughest trails in Nepal, to the airstrip at Simikot and a flight to Katmandu.
Three colors -- blue, gold and white -- linger in my image of Tibet: the blue of the sky and the unearthly azure of the lakes, the golden plain and golden light, the snowy mountains. 
Silent, often empty. 
Cleaned to the bone by the winds. 
A beautiful, wild place, where the human spirit feels it can stretch without limit. 
And where the Tibetans still believe in their beloved gods and in spirits that cling to the mountains and ride on the wind.
 
Arranging for the trek and getting equipped
 
Planning a Journey
Our trip for two was organized by Himalayan Explorers, Post Office Box 1737, Sanu Gaucharan, Katmandu, Nepal; telephone (977 1) 422-656, fax (977 1) 471-529, a trekking agency in Nepal that obtained our visas for Tibet and made all arrangements. 
The agency provided our food and sent three Sherpas who cooked, managed our camping and led our return trek through northwestern Nepal. 
We brought our own camping gear, but the agency will supply it if necessary for about $50 a person.
Above the Clouds Trekking, Post Office Box 398, Worcester, Mass. 
01602-0398, (800) 233-4499, is also reported to be another good organizer of similar trekking tours.
Our trip took 25 days (16 spent in Tibet) and cost $4,980 a person, including visas. 
The Simikot-Nepalgang-Katmandu flight at the end cost $180 a person extra. 
We spent about $400 on incidentals, including tips (about $50 for each Sherpa, more for the lead guide). 
Travelers should bring United States currency because traveler's checks are not accepted in Chinese banks in western Tibet.
 
Weather and Altitude
In May, the Tibetan plateau was mainly sunny and cool during the day, ranging from the upper 40's to the 60's. 
Temperatures at night were in the 20's or 30's.
Because of high altitude, sunglasses and sunblock for skin and lips are essential; ski goggles or industrial safety goggles and bandannas are helpful against wind and dust, as are eyedrops for irritation. 
The Mount Kailas region can be severely cold and windy. 
Travelers should take warm sleeping bags. 
To walk around the mountain, take warm, windproof clothing and good boots.
Medical care is not available, so a medical kit, including antibiotics, is necessary.
From Kailas you can return to Zhangmu by a four-wheel-drive vehicle. 
If you plan to trek out through Nepal, altitudes will decrease and temperatures will be warmer. 
The exceedingly rough and occasionally dangerous trails of the Humla district make a pair of collapsible trekking poles useful. 
M. R. L.
