
The invitation to the fund-raising event for Gary Locke, a Democrat who wants to be Washington State's next Governor, makes no mention of party affiliation or wedge issues. 
Instead, it says, "Help us make history."
Mr. Locke, one generation removed from China, is campaigning on a personal story as old as America, with a Pacific Rim twist: an immigrant's son whose supporters believe that he is likely to become the highest-ranking Asian-American political figure in the continental United States.
"This is beyond people's wildest dreams," said Assunta Ng, who publishes The Northwest Asian Weekly, a newspaper based in Seattle.
If the early polls are to be believed, it may be more than a wild dream for Mr. Locke, who, if elected, would be the first Asian-American governor in the mainland United States. 
Polls show that Mr. Locke is leading throughout the state among a wide field of candidates seeking to replace Gov. Mike Lowry, a Democrat who is not seeking a second term.
Mr. Locke's parents were born in China. 
He grew up in a household where Mandarin Chinese was the main language, and nobody ever talked about politics, he said.
After emigrating to Seattle, his father, James Locke, fought with the 10th Armored Division under Gen. George S. Patton against the Germans in World War II. 
The younger Mr. Locke was reared in a housing project for returning soldiers, worked in his father's restaurant at an early age, became a Boy Scout and fell in love with the great outdoors of the Pacific Northwest, then went to Yale University and Boston University Law School.
At 46, Mr. Locke is the King County Executive, leading a county of 1.6 million people. 
From his office in downtown Seattle, he overlooks a site where Chinese-Americans were routed out of their beds and marched at gunpoint aboard ships nearly 100 years ago.
The event, recalled every year in a solemn ceremony, ended at the dock's edge after a judge ordered the mob to cease. 
The people were angry at the Chinese, who had been brought to America to help build the railroads, because they were thought to be taking jobs from others.
"A lot of people support him not because he is Gary Locke but because this is something to hold up to their children and grandchildren," Ms. Ng said.
The primary election in Washington State -- the second most populous state in the Far West, after California -- is not until September, so Mr. Locke's candidacy has attracted little attention in other regions in this busy political year, with one big exception. 
Among Asian-Americans on both the West Coast and the East Coast, Mr. Locke is the main attraction at fund-raising events and political gatherings.
At least three such events have been sponsored by the Asian-American community in Seattle this month, and the campaign is also raising money in San Francisco, New York and Washington.
"You have to remember that Gary Locke is as American as somebody named Wilson or a fellow named Clinton," said Henry Tang, the New York co-chairman of the Committee of 100, a nonprofit group of Chinese-Americans who are active in public affairs. 
"But just as the Irish-American community was excited about John F. Kennedy, there is that great interest among Chinese-Americans for Gary Locke."
People of Asian descent make up 3.7 percent of the population of the United States and are the nation's fastest growing ethnic group. 
In 1994, more than a third of all the nation's immigrants came from Asia. 
Roused by Congressional proposals to limit immigration, Asians-Americans have vowed to take a more active political stance this year.
"In general, people say that Asian-American political fortunes have regressed, which is one reason why people are so excited about Gary Locke," said J. D. Hokoyama, executive direction of LEAP, a nonprofit Asian-American education and leadership group in Los Angeles.
Mr. Locke can raise money from Asian-American communities far removed from Washington State, Mr. Hokoyama said, because "in many ways he will represent all of us."
There have long been a handful of Asian-American members of Congress, and a few Asians have been big-city mayors; Representative Norman Y. Mineta, Democrat of California, was Mayor of San Jose in the early 1970's. 
But outside Hawaii, no Asian-American has ever been governor of a state.
With a politician's touch for remembering the names of his constituents, Mr. Locke was a powerful member of the Washington Legislature before he was elected King County Executive. 
He is perhaps best known locally as the person who helped broker a new baseball stadium for the Seattle Mariners and for going into battle with the owner of the Seattle Seahawks when an attempt was made to move the football team to Southern California.
When asked about his early life, Mr. Locke recalled a trip to visit his grandmother in Hong Kong, then a city on the cusp of the modern age, when he was 10 years old. 
"I remember open sewage in the streets, people sleeping in doorsteps, and there was my grandmother living in this tiny hut, 8 foot by 8 foot," he said. 
"She had one front tooth and was very sick. 
That image remains."
Mr. Locke says he never experienced racism as a child and did not feel poor. 
His father ran a small Chinese-American restaurant, called Sadie's Cafe, in the Pike Place Market section of Seattle. 
The most persistent value he learned at home was hard work, he said.
"My mother worked at a sewing factory, and my father at his restaurant, seven days a week," Mr. Locke said. 
"All of us kids started working with him starting at age 12."
He is the second of five children.
Mr. Hokoyama said Mr. Locke helped to dispel a stereotype of Asian-Americans as a "model minority" enamored primarily of math and science. 
"Asian-Americans have not always been very active in politics," Mr Hokoyama said. 
"To do that, you have to excel in people skills, not just the things that make up the old model-minority myth."
A governor, Mr. Locke said, can expand Americans' understanding of Asian-American issues.
"This is a state that is so dependent on trade, and also a state where everybody, except the Native Americans, came from somewhere else," he said. 
"So it is incumbent on the Governor to speak out on these issues."
The Asian-American vote, of course, is not monolithic. 
Nor in Washington State is it unusually large -- about 4.5 percent of the total electorate. 
One of Mr. Locke's main rivals for the Democratic nomination here is Mayor Norm Rice of Seattle, the first black to be Mayor of this city. 
About 3 percent of the state's residents are black, and Mayor Rice has long had strong support from Asian-Americans.
"You're going to see Asian-Americans supporting Rice and African-Americans supporting Locke," said Martha Choe, a member of the Seattle City Council who is a Korean-American. 
"But there is a real sense of urgency among Asian-Americans this year, of getting out the vote and getting people registered."
Republicans say Mr. Locke has a record of supporting too many tax increases while in the Legislature. 
If he is the nominee, Republicans say, he will be attacked for his view of a government much bigger than most people favor.
To the surprise of some political experts, Mr. Locke is running strong in the polls in rural eastern Washington, where it is generally thought that being a member of a minority from Seattle is political poison. 
An eastern Washington legislator, Dale Foreman of Wenatchee, is running for the Republican nomination for Governor.
To Mr. Locke, it is no mystery why he has support beyond his immediate base. 
With unblinking optimism, he says he does not expect there will be a racial overtone to the vote.
"I don't expect anybody to vote for me because I'm Asian-American," he said. 
"Nor should anyone vote against me because of that. 
I'm running simply as a guy who gets things done."
