
BEFORE the Yellow River turns yellow, before it is even much of a river, its blue-green waters meander gently through the sandstone crags of China's Qinghai Province. 
A one-lane road, rutted and unpaved, winds alongside. 
Last spring, two friends and I hired a guide and a car and traveled this road for three days, until we reached its terminus high in the Anyemaqen Mountains.
Then we drove back.
This is not a common tourist excursion. 
Qinghai (pronounced ching-high) is in the very center of China, on the northeastern flanks of the Tibetan plateau. 
Much of the province sits over 10,000 feet above sea level; for visitors, a low-grade headache is likely to be a continual accompaniment.
Beyond Qinghai's main city, Xining, there are few tourist facilities. 
Only the most basic of accommodations are available, often without plumbing or electricity. 
In many places, yak meat and bread are the sole obtainable foods. 
No one speaks a word of English.
One of my travel partners, Kyle Westgard, lived on mainland China for eight years and still does business there. 
He is fluent in Mandarin. 
I had been introduced to Kyle through a mutual acquaintance. 
We exchanged E-mail, and I agreed to hire him as interpreter and facilitator. 
Within days of meeting him in Beijing, we became fast friends. 
Despite Kyle's language skills, he could communicate with few people in Qinghai -- on the route we followed, Tibetan is the primary tongue. 
Inconveniences aside, Qinghai is where I wanted to go. 
Cities in China are often crowded and polluted. 
Qinghai, I'd heard, was empty and pristine.
It is rich with Tibetan culture; until the 1700's, Qinghai was part of Tibet, and is still often referred to as Lower Tibet. 
But in the province, one faces neither the permit hassles necessitated by a trip to Tibet nor any chance of stumbling upon a Hollywood star in the lotus position.
Further, Qinghai, like Tibet, is endowed with dramatic mountains. 
I am attracted to all things alpine -- the expansive vistas, the rugged peoples, the challenging weather -- and have devoted many of my travels to visiting the great ranges of the world. 
The second of my travel partners, Chris Anderson, feels the same. 
All three of us are avid skiers, and we hauled ski equipment along, in hopes that we could make a pioneering descent.
Kyle had mentioned a mountain in southern Qinghai called Anyemaqen Mountain (also known as Maqen Gangri). 
The mountain, 20,610 feet high, is sacred to Tibetans, a sight of great pilgrimages in which supplicants circle the peak, clockwise, on weeklong treks filled with chanting and prayer. 
We made the mountain our destination.
Flights into Xining are erratically scheduled, so we flew from Beijing to Lanzhou, capital of Gansu Province, just east of Qinghai. 
We then took a four-hour ride on a modern, comfortable and uncrowded train to Xining, rolling through eroded, badlands-like countryside while munching on dried squid flakes and steamed chicken feet, specialties of the train's snack cart.
Qinghai is a province of minorities. 
Besides Tibetans, there are sizable populations of Kazakhs, Mongols and Hui. 
The few ethnic Chinese -- Han Chinese -- live primarily in and around Xining. 
The city is neither enchanting nor off-putting, just rows of squat buildings fronting wide avenues, the traffic equal parts bicycle and auto.
Kyle made a few phone calls from Beijing and hired a guide, Wang Wan, of the Government-run China Qinghai Tourist Corporation. 
Mr. Wang, a Han Chinese in his mid-50's, speaks both Mandarin and Tibetan. 
It was for this skill that we hired him. 
We spent much of our first evening in Qinghai haggling about the price of our tour. 
Eventually, we settled on the equivalent of $55 a day, including use of a car and a driver, Mr. Xie. We left Xining the next day.
The Anyemaqen Mountains, of which Anyemaqen Mountain is the centerpiece, are about 500 miles southwest of Xining. 
Between the city and the peak are a half-dozen lesser ranges; between each of these are vast stretches of open prairie. 
We drove over mountain passes 11,000 and 12,000 feet high, vermilion cliffs tight against the twisting road.
Mr. Xie, our professional driver, exhibited an unorthodox style, upshifting when a lower gear was called for, fishtailing on the icy spots. 
(He also seemed to harbor a serious aversion to using headlights, ostensibly to save gasoline.) Then we'd plunge down into the broad valleys, sometimes with the engine off and the car in neutral, another of Mr. Xie's gas-saving ideas.
In the valleys, young women in pink head scarves were bent over hoes, working the potato fields. 
Men guided wooden plows pulled by burros. 
Mud-brick homes were tucked against the hills. 
The only trees were scrubby, corkscrewed pinyon pines. 
There were herds of yaks, slow-moving and hairy, like hippie cows.
Most of the road traffic was on foot, or burro, or yak. 
One woman, carrying her infant son, wore a backplate ornamented with a mosaiclike pattern of turquoise and orange stones that extended from her shoulders to the backs of her knees. 
At her hip hung a silver scabbard.
Several men, on their way to market with a mule-drawn cart, modeled head wear of the most baroque styling, an explosion of fur radiating a foot in every direction. 
Everyone appeared to own a long, thick yak-hair coat, brown or black -- in late March, it's still winter at such high elevations -- which was worn in a curious manner, left arm in the left sleeve, the right sleeve traditionally wrapped around the waist.
We spent the night in the village of Guide (pronouced guai-duh), a few dozen homes pressed together along the dusty road. 
Our hotel room, three dirty cots and a broken sink, pit toilet down the hall, cost 10 renminbi (or yuan) -- about $1.25. 
We played pool at an outdoor billiards hall, 7 cents a game, while a crowd gathered to scrutinize the foreigners. 
At the sole restaurant, where a pair of saddled yaks were tied to the hitching post out front, we had our choice of pig ear, pig stomach, pig brain, pig heart or pig tongue with noodles.
That evening, we went to the disco. 
It was a narrow room, crowded, with a modest stereo and a Christmas tree's worth of blinking lights. 
The music was Chinese techno. 
Kyle had a long conversation with a Mandarin-speaking man, who informed him of the proper rules of comportment. 
Kyle relayed the rules to us.
At first, Kyle said, we should dance only with members of the same sex. 
And so we did. 
Several of my male partners danced as though they were being administered electric shocks. 
There was a long stretch during which the dance floor emptied and everyone milled around eating sunflower seeds, spitting the shells on the floor. 
Then dancing disco style with the opposite sex was allowed, but only with partners considerably older or younger. 
Finally, after I'd shuffled beneath the lights with several of the town's elders, it was acceptable for me to ask a woman closer to my own age to dance.
IN the morning, a few miles outside of Guide, we spotted a woman who was weaving dark wool on what appeared to be a giant loom. 
"She's making a yak-hair tent," Mr. Wang said. 
Most families who raise yaks live in tents during the summer, when their stock are moved to higher pastures.
We pulled over. 
Mr. Wang introduced us as tourists from America. 
The woman invited us into her one-room home, where we met her husband and son and were served yak-butter tea, the water heated on a stove fueled by yak dung. 
We sat cross-legged on blankets laid over the dirt floor. 
The husband said we were the first foreigners he had ever seen, except once, in town, on television.
"On TV, the Westerners all looked scary," he said, speaking Tibetan. 
"Big and blond and with blue eyes. 
You do not look scary at all."
We had a long conversation about yaks, my questions translated into Mandarin by Kyle and then into Tibetan by Mr. Wang.
The next village we came to, Lajia Si, is the site of the area's largest monastery. 
The road was crowded with monks, swaddled head to toe in magenta robes. 
There were prayer wheels everywhere, hundreds of them, painted with joyous kaleidoscopic flower patterns and inscribed with intricate Tibetan script. 
Some were barrel shaped and as big as water towers, at least 20 feet in diameter. 
Each time a monk walked by a wheel he'd give it a spin; their chattery clicking sounds pulsed through the street, every rotation of every wheel releasing yet another prayer into the cool spring air.
By this point the Yellow River, our faithful companion for nearly 400 miles, had grown as wide as an interstate, though its waters remained Caribbean clear. 
We finally parted ways just before the city of Dawu, the water taking the path of least resistance around the mountains, Kyle, Chris and I heading directly for Anyemaqen.
We spent the night in Dawu, a comparatively cosmopolitan place, brick buildings three- and four-stories high, with bicycle taxis plying the streets, electricity for all, and even a mile or two of paved road, covered with a thin coat of snow. 
The markets were stocked with imported vegetables from other Asian countries; the hats were even more expressive than those I'd seen in the road to Guide.
Our hotel room had real beds and warm water, and set us back $8. 
The city is more than 11,000 feet above sea level but the view south from town is all upward, the Anyemaqen Mountains, huge and white, serrating the skyline.
It was in Dawu that we encountered problems. 
Mr. Wang, out of the blue, told us he could no longer take us to Anyemaqen. 
Past Dawu, he said, we'd be in a national park where he did not have the authority to guide us. 
We asked why he didn't mention this earlier. 
He was unable to provide a reasonable answer.
Kyle scoured town and discovered a business called the Anyemaqen Area Travel Service. 
Anyemaqen Mountain, Kyle confirmed, is indeed in a national park. 
The park is free for Chinese citizens. 
For foreigners, the entrance fee is an absurd $100 a person a day. 
Our agreed-upon price with Mr. Wang had included a trip into the park. 
Now, in a part of the world where credit cards are useless, we would have to deplete our cash reserves for even the briefest of visits.
We stayed up all night sorting out the mess. 
By dawn, we had dismissed Mr. Wang, hired a guide from the Anyemaqen Area Travel Service, and received enough of a discount on the entrance fee to allow us to remain in the park for two days. 
In all, it cost about $200 a day for the three of us.
We also learned why the fee was so high: there is a pervasive perception in Qinghai that all tourists are rich. 
When I asked Suo Ba, the general manager of the Anyemaqen Travel Service, to guess how much our plane tickets from New York to Beijing cost, he estimated $40,000. 
He was astounded to learn that the round trip was under $1,000.
Our new guide was Tai Shu, an insightful, energetic 27-year-old Tibetan. 
He dispensed with the formalities used by the Chinese, and asked us to call him Tai. 
He spoke both Tibetan and Mandarin.
We drove out of Dawu and deep into the mountains. 
It began to snow. 
At a small Buddhist temple, Tai instructed the driver to pull over. 
We followed Tai up a hill behind the temple, where thousands of prayer flags were snapping in the wind. 
This, said Tai, is a Tibetan cemetery. 
There were no signs of any headstones.
TAI pointed to two bed-sized slabs of rock. 
He explained that when a Tibetan dies, he or she is brought to these rocks -- one used for men, one for women -- whereupon a monk cuts the body into small pieces, and the pieces are carried away by eagles and eaten. 
The ground was strewn with knives; a new knife must be used for each ceremony. 
In front of the women's rock was a pile of braids.
Traditionally, a Tibetan woman never cuts her hair during her life; only in death are her braids removed. 
Then, Tai motioned skyward. 
High overhead were dozens of eagles, soaring and circling and riding the updrafts.
We stayed that evening at the home of Shenja Gehreh, a friend of Tai's. 
Shenja, 49, introduced us to his wife, his daughter, his two sons, his daughter-in-law, his yaks, his horses, his sheep and his cat. 
His home, made of brick, had glass windows and several rooms, signs of a successful family.
He owned a solar panel, and if the day was sunny a single light bulb illuminated the main room. 
We ate yak ribs for dinner, washed down with yak milk, and swapped stories late into the night. 
Kyle, Chris, Tai and I all slept in the same wide bed.
The morning skies were perfect and blue, and the three of us, Tai and Shenja's sons all hiked into the mountains, our ski equipment in tow. 
We worked our way through the snow up a rounded mountain called Gong Bao Lari, with a plaque at the top inscribed with a portrait of Buddha, and a steep, skiable gully plunging back down.
It was there that we finally beheld the whole of Anyemaqen Mountain, the wind shearing a snow-cloud off its pyramidal summit, the sun refracting off its glaciers, snow melt trickling down the valleys, gradually working its way to the Yellow River. 
And then we pushed off, the three of us skiing down the gully, the others hiking down. 
We met at Shenja's house, where we were greeted with steaming cups of yak milk.
 
If you go
A trip to the rural outposts of Qinghai Province requires a fair amount of planning. 
Getting to Xi ning, the province's largest city, is relatively easy -- there are occasional flights direct from Beijing, and daily flights from Beijing to Lan zhou, a four-hour train ride away.
Once in Qinghai, though, English is not spoken, and it is strongly recommended that at least one person in the group speak either Tibetan or Mandarin. 
Though I visited in early spring, the best time to go is from May through October, when even the highest elevations receive pleasant weather, the chances of joining a Western tour group are good (though the area gets few tourists over all) and the weather in other areas of China is also enjoyable.
Flexibility and a willingness to rough it are essential in Qinghai. 
Hotels are extremely basic; bathroom facilities usually consist of an outhouse. 
Food is always available, though there may not be much of a choice: yak meat is ubiquitous. 
There's no bottled water. 
I drank well water with no ill effects, and tea is served everywhere.
A good place to start planning is the recorded information from the China National Tourist Office, in New York, (212) 760-9700, or in Los Angeles, (818) 545-7505, which can provide visa applications and a list of outfitters offering tours to China.
Lonely Planet publishes a guide to China ($29.95), which includes some information on Qinghai and a lot on China in general. 
Call (510) 893-8555 or see www.lonelyplanet.com.
Kyle Westgard, one of the people I traveled with, is the president of the China Ski Corporation, a company devoted to developing ski resorts in China, but was not traveling to Qinghai in any official capacity. 
He is also available to organize tours off the beaten path in Qinghai. 
Call (303) 277-0500 or see www.chinaski.com.MICHAEL FINKEL
