
Taipei lacks both charm and beauty, a rather damning assessment on the face of it. 
But beneath the gray, polluted skies, the monotonous low-rise buildings and the mad scooter drivers who swarm the roads, it remains the most vital and vibrant city in the Chinese-speaking world. 
The back lanes of every neighborhood (just walk behind whatever hotel you stay in) are crammed with cafes, tea houses, restaurants, herbal medicine stalls and pocket temples. 
The city is changing daily, adding buildings, restaurants, shopping centers. 
Nonetheless, visitors tend to come to Taiwan primarily for what is older, enduring, traditional.
The newest piece of Taipei is an overhead light rail system, a project that has been riddled with corruption, cracking cement pillars and balky French-made rail cars. 
After years of frustration, certainly among the Taipei citizens who endure horrendous traffic conditions, the placing of steel corsets around doubtful pillars and endless test runs of the rubber-wheeled driverless cars is finished and the train is open for business. 
It scoots passengers through the city a bit bouncily, but efficiently. 
Fares depend on how far you're going.
April is perhaps the best month to visit Yangmingshan Park, a 30-minute drive from Taipei. 
Set in the hills, the park's cornucopia of flower gardens, particularly its azaleas and the endless cherry blossoms -- now in bloom -- are a major attraction for Taipei's residents. 
In addition, the park has waterfalls, hot springs and a profusion of hiking trails that snake through the hills.
By far the most significant attraction in Taipei is the National Palace Museum, which while not new, still surprises visitors. 
The building, constructed in Ching dynasty palace style by the defeated Kuomintang Government of China after its retreat to Taiwan, houses the spectacular collection of Chinese paintings, ceramics, bronzes and antiquities, some of which is currently on view at the Metropolitan Museum in New York. 
After a political uproar, some of the rarest treasures scheduled for the American exhibit stayed at home, the only place one will be able to view them.
