
Charles Yah Lin Trie, the Chinese-American restaurateur and businessman who raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in questionable contributions for President Clinton's legal defense fund, has always been a hard worker and a quick learner, say those here who have known him. 
And the lesson he learned most astutely, they say, is the importance of knowing people in high places.
"Charlie learned in America not only how to work hard but how to get in with people and get what he wanted out of life," said Julia Hughes Jones, who learned to like and admire Mr. Trie while serving as Arkansas state auditor from 1981 to 1995. 
"He knew who was important, and he made a point of making over them."
Jim Dailey, the Mayor of Little Rock, had similar impressions. 
"He sort of is one of these collectors of people," Mr. Dailey said. 
"When I was in Washington once I went to his place and there were people from all different departments of government and Chinese officials. 
It just amazed me."
Now Mr. Trie, who has lived for most of the last 20 years in Little Rock but now spends most of his time working in Washington and China, has become the latest in a series of businessmen of Asian origin whose fund-raising practices for Mr. Clinton and the Democratic National Committee have come under scrutiny.
Mr. Trie, who could not be reached for comment today, has acknowledged to reporters that a $15,000 gift from one of his companies to the Democratic National Committee in 1994 came from foreign funds, an apparent violation of Federal law. 
He has said he was unaware that the law prohibited United States companies from donating money generated outside the country.
Shortly after Mr. Trie delivered $460,000 to the defense fund, on March 21, his proposed appointment to a 16-member advisory panel on Asian trade was approved by the White House. 
Jim Farris, a former Arkansas business associate of Mr. Trie, said Mr. Trie had long asserted that he would parlay Mr. Clinton's election into a Federal appointment. 
"He bragged for years that he would get an appointment once Clinton was elected," Mr. Farris said.
Mr. Trie, who is said to be in his 40's, came to the United States in the mid-1970's from Taiwan, where his family had moved from China in 1949. 
Ms. Jones said Mr. Trie had told her that his father, a member of the Chinese Air Force, had commandeered an Air Force plane and flown his family to Taiwan while Mr. Trie's mother was pregnant with him. 
Mr. Trie could not be reached for comment today.
Beginning as a busboy in Chinese restaurants, Mr. Trie worked his way up to the ownership of a series of restaurants in Little Rock, one of which was only a few blocks from the Capitol, where Bill Clinton served as Governor. 
Mr. Clinton apparently was an occasional diner at the restaurant, Fu Lin, and like many of the government officials who frequented the restaurant, he was warmly received by Mr. Trie.
"The food was excellent," said Mr. Dailey. "But the place had its ambiance because Charlie circulated and knew everybody and always had that big smile on his face."
Mr. Trie was considered a benevolent employer within Little Rock's small Asian community, said Ruey Wang, who worked for Mr. Trie as a cook and now owns his own Chinese restaurant. 
"He treated his employees very well, a really nice guy," Mr. Wang said. 
Mr. Wang's son, Jay, who was translating for his father, said, "When my father had a quadruple bypass and was laid up in the hospital, he told him, 'Don't worry about it, you come back when you feel better.'
"
Over the years, Mr. Trie opened and then sold a number of Chinese restaurants in Little Rock. 
He apparently does not have financial interests in restaurants now, having spent most of the 1990's running a number of export-import and real estate companies, most of them with Chinese connections.
On numerous occasions, Mr. Trie took delegations of Arkansans, including Mr. Dailey and Ms. Jones, on trade and good-will missions to China that he organized and apparently financed. 
"We were on his credit card," Ms. Jones recalled.
Neither Mr. Dailey nor Ms. Jones said they knew how or why Mr. Trie had managed to raise so much money for Mr. Clinton and the Democrats. 
"Everything I've seen is that he does it with the best of intentions," Mr. Dailey said. 
"But he does love to be known as somebody who knows people in the right places."
Ms. Jones added that she quickly fell out of Mr. Trie's circle after switching from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party in 1993. 
"Charlie came by and said goodbye," she said. 
"He wanted to be in with Clinton and he knew I could only do him harm. 
As I recall, his statement was that his business was dependent on the Democrats and he was sorry. 
I understood."
