
A request for political asylum in the United States by the leader of one of China's largest spiritual movements has put Washington in the difficult position of harboring a possible criminal or handing over to Beijing a man hunted for his beliefs.
After trying to keep the case quiet for months, the United States delayed a decision on the request by Zhang Hongbao, the founder of a meditative discipline popularly known as Zhong Gong, at a court hearing in Guam on Friday.
Granting him asylum would amount to the United States telling China that it does not believe the country's criminal charges against him and reinforce China's perception that Washington acts as an agent for domestic groups that Beijing believes are intent on eroding the power of the Communist Party.
The case comes during a widespread crackdown on spiritual groups in China that began with the banning of the larger Falun Gong movement a year ago. 
Like Falun Gong, Zhong Gong is based on qi gong, traditional Chinese breathing and meditation exercises that seek to channel the vital energy of body and the universe to various ends.
Last year, the United States declined China's request for help in returning Falun Gong's founder, Li Hongzhi, who now lives in New York.The United States aid that Mr. Li was a permanent resident and that it regarded China's charges against him as politically motivated.
But Mr. Zhang's case is more nettlesome because he arrived in Guam in February without a visa and, if he is to stay, the United States must play an active role in keeping him on American soil.
And China's claims that Mr. Zhang is wanted for criminal activity have a more complex history than the charges against Mr. Li, which were related primarily to his role in organizing a protest against the Beijing government.
By the mid-1990's, rumors of a dark side to Zhong Gong began to circulate. 
A close disciple defected from the group and wrote a scathing expose alleging that Mr. Zhang was a fraud and had illicit sex with followers.
Those rumors were amplified by self-appointed "cult buster," Sima Nan, who has made a career of exposing fraudulent claims by qi gong masters. 
He alleges that Mr. Zhang is guilty of rape and may even be responsible for the murder of some former followers.
Chinese officials have repeated the rape allegation to United States officials, though they have not presented any evidence or documentation of formal charges.
Mr. Zhang disappeared from public view in 1995 as criticism of his group grew. 
It operated a nationwide network of schools and healing centers based on his particular brand of qi gong before China outlawed it earlier this year.
While his followers insisted for years that he had simply retired from the world to seek further enlightenment, the group's Web site (www.zgzg.net) now says the police have been trying to arrest him since he disappeared.
The United States has no extradition treaty with China, but last month the two countries signed a mutual legal assistance pact that was intended to provide a framework for the return of criminals by either side.
The United States has asked China for the return of two men wanted in the slaying of five men in a gambling den in Boston's Chinatown nearly 10 years ago. 
China, in turn, has asked the United States for help in finding Mr. Zhang, saying he is wanted on criminal charges.
Mr. Zhang's request for asylum now complicates any proposed law enforcement cooperation, which in any case has long been plagued by a lack of trust on both sides.
Earlier this month, United States officials said they had not informed China of Mr. Zhang's whereabouts, hoping to keep the case quiet until the Boston extradition request had been resolved.
But on Friday, an immigration court judge in Guam said at a hearing for Mr. Zhang that China had formally requested that the United States return the spiritual leader. 
As a result, the judge delayed a decision on his asylum request.
Another Zhong Gong member was granted political asylum in Guam on Friday, said Frank Lu, a human rights advocate in Hong Kong.
Mr. Zhang was born in the northeastern Chinese city of Harbin in 1954. 
He spent 10 years working on a state farm before studying metallurgy and working at a succession of northeastern gold mines. 
He later went to study in Beijing, where he learned qi gong in his spare time. 
He started Zhong Gong, his own school of qi gong, in 1987.
The group, whose full name translates as the China Life Preservation and Intellect Improvement Discipline, was one of dozens of schools started by self-styled masters during the period of loose social controls that led to the pro-democracy demonstrations of 1989.
After the violent suppression of the democracy movement by military force, millions of people flocked to the qi gong movement for spiritual solace, a sort of mass recoil from the perils of political engagement and the soulless materialism then sweeping the country.
During the early 1990's, Zhong Gong became the most popular of the various schools, but as controversy gathered around Mr. Zhang and his group, the rival Falun Gong group gained in popularity, eventually superseding Zhong Gong as the largest movement of its kind. 
In the book that Falun Gong followers regard as their bible, its founder, Mr. Li, makes veiled criticisms of Mr. Zhang, calling him a "sham qi gong master."
China's growing unease with the spreading qi gong movement eventually forced Mr. Li to leave the country in 1998. 
And a mass demonstration by Falun Gong followers at the central government compound in Beijing last year set off a crackdown on it and other groups.
Falun Gong, Zhong Gong and a handful of other qi gong schools have since been outlawed and hundreds of their senior members have been arrested. 
Before the crackdown, Zhong Gong claimed 38 million followers, though that number, as with Falun Gong's claim of 100 million adherents, is certainly grossly inflated.
Despite its widely broadcast propaganda campaign against Falun Gong, China has moved quietly in its ban of Zhong Gong, charging that the group has misguided people and closing dozens of Zhong Gong schools around the country.
The movement's hospital near Qingcheng Shan, a mountain in Sichuan Province sacred to Taoists, has been shut down for practicing unlicensed medicine. 
Only last year it was in full operation, with dozens of patients.
There, one young doctor in a white lab coat demonstrated Zhong Gong's method of treatment to a visiting reporter by waving two fingers ray-gun-like at the head of an 8-year-old girl with a large brain tumor that had penetrated her scalp, leaving her head a misshapen mass of scabs and sores.
The doctors asserted that the girl had regained the ability to walk thanks to their treatment, and several people at the hospital said they had been cured of serious illness by Zhong Gong.
Many others said Zhong Gong had given them paranormal powers, including the ability to go without food for months at a time.
Much of the hospital and school were like a shrine to Mr. Zhang, who was depicted in paintings with an improbably high pompadour and a German shepherd by his side. 
Even Mr. Zhang's old Russian car, the tires flat, sat unmoved from where he had last parked it.
