
Yang Lan traveled from Shanghai to New York City to attend graduate school because, she said, her fans back home in China would not have left her alone to study. 
Oprah Winfrey could sympathize.
Like Ms. Winfrey here, Ms. Yang has been one of her country's most popular television talk-show hosts. 
Her weekly program, "Zheng Da Variety Show," was the top-rated talk show in China from 1990 to 1993. 
Unlike Ms. Winfrey, Ms. Yang quit her gig in 1994 to enroll at Columbia University, where she is about to earn a master's degree in international relations.
Two weeks shy of her 28th birthday, Ms. Yang is plotting a return to the small screen when she goes home in June. 
She is developing a weekly syndicated series, "Yang Lan Horizon," which will be devoted to Western popular culture and the influence that people like Steven Spielberg and Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber exert on Chinese culture.
With her polished manner, telegenic looks, and razor-sharp grasp of the economics of show business, Ms. Yang is emblematic of a new generation of Chinese who are taking the first steps toward transforming Chinese television from a creaky, Government-controlled public utility into a more entrepreneurial American-style business.
With the support of her new husband, Bruno Z. Wu, a Shanghai television entrepreneur, and a little help from a well-financed former music executive, Robert J. Morgado, Ms. Yang even hopes to develop and star in programs that would be broadcast in the United States -- reversing, if only slightly, the tide of American television that flows into Asia.
"I'm only getting started," Ms. Yang said over lunch recently at Tang Pavilion, a Shanghai-style restaurant in Manhattan, "but I want to start early."
As a television personality, Ms. Yang has already shown her ability to appeal to a mass audience. 
Now, she and her husband are using Western-style business practices in an effort to make Ms. Yang a one-woman television franchise in China.
By Hollywood standards, Ms. Yang is already a major star. 
She was selected to host "Zheng Da" in an open audition at the age of 22, while still a senior at the Beijing Foreign Studies University.
The program, which Ms. Yang described as a cross between "Good Morning America" and "Donahue," became an instant sensation: Its frothy mix of interviews with Chinese celebrities and games involving a studio audience routinely drew the highest ratings of any program on Chinese Central Television, the Government-owned national network.
Ms. Yang, who carried on a spirited repartee with her older, male co-host, Zhao Zhong-Xian, also became a favorite of Chinese Government officials, who asked her to act as a host at various events, including the United Nations women's conference in Beijing last September.
By the age of 25, though, she felt burned out. 
Ms. Yang, who is a native of Beijing and whose father is a professor of linguistics at her old university, said she wanted to attend graduate school to gain the intellectual resources to tackle more serious topics on television.
At Columbia, Ms. Yang has been in the International Media Communications program, which is part of the School of Public and International Affairs. 
To hone her skills as a journalist, Ms. Yang also took classes in reporting and writing at the Graduate School of Journalism.
Donald H. Johnston, a Columbia professor and the director of the media communications program, recalls the day that Ms. Yang came as a prospective student for an interview. 
"She knocked me over because she was dressed like someone from Fifth Avenue, and she was as poised as anyone who ever came out of American television," he said.
Ms. Yang's academic pursuits faithfully reflect her professional interests. 
She said, for example, that she was researching a term paper about American talk shows.
"These shows seem to be very liberal and progressive on the surface," she said in flawless English, "but when you listen to the hosts talking, they are actually reinforcing stereotypes about people."
For all her criticism of American talk shows, Ms. Yang studiously avoids controversial issues as they apply to her country. 
She describes herself as basically apolitical and said that in her new series she would eschew politics for coverage of cultural issues.
"I'm in a position to do something beyond ideology," she said.
Ms. Yang met Mr. Wu at a lunch with friends in New York last year. 
They were married in October in a lavish ceremony at the Plaza Hotel -- and have forged a partnership that may prove as important to her professional future as anything she learned in graduate school.
Mr. Wu, who is 29, owns a syndication company that distributes American and Australian programs to Chinese stations. 
His big break came in late 1993 when Time Warner's music division signed a deal with his company, Youban Entertainment Group, to distribute a music-video program called "Warner Music Stars" on Chinese television.
Mr. Morgado, who was then the chairman of Warner Music Group, played a key role in negotiating the deal. 
And when Mr. Morgado started a firm this year to invest in small overseas media companies, his first move was to acquire Warner's minority stake in Mr. Wu's company. 
Mr. Morgado has pledged to invest further in Youban, and Youban is helping to finance Ms. Yang's series.
Mr. Wu said his company had syndicated "Yang Lan Horizon" to 51 regional and municipal television channels in China, which reach about 80 percent of the nation's 200 million television households.
For now, China is still dominated by Government-controlled broadcasters: Chinese Central Television, with its five channels; 30 regional networks based in the provinces; and more than 700 local channels operated by the major cities.
But experts on Asian media said that emergence of cable and satellite television would inexorably expand that market -- and create a keen desire for programs like Ms. Yang's. "Once the change in leadership stabilizes and the Government liberalizes, there will be tremendous new demand," said S.K. 
Fung, the president of NBC Asia.
Those are big uncertainties, of course. 
But Ms. Yang means to be ready in any event. 
She has returned to China during each break in classes to tape specials. 
"I keep appearing on the TV so they won't forget me," she said with an easy laugh, sounding for all the world like Oprah.
