
When it opened last June to huge crowds, the Beijing Aquarium seemed destined for success: a high-tech blue glass dome housing a rain forest, shark pools, fish and corals galore and -- as its centerpiece -- a serene island habitat complete with caves and bridges, the stage for its dolphin, sea lion and whale show.
In a common business arrangement here, a Chinese company built the aquarium, with a Western partner providing technical expertise. 
JV China Inc. of Lompoc, Calif., acquired and trained the marine mammals, cared for them and oversaw the life support systems that created their delicate ecosystem.
But less than a year later, the partners are involved in a contract dispute so vicious that the United States Embassy has intervened. 
And the animals, who just months ago waved fins and jumped through hoops to delight children, are now effectively on strike, with their ownership and safety hotly contested.
"My Chinese partners have endangered my animals and failed to meet contractual agreements," said Tim Desmond, JV China's president, producing stacks of angry memos he has sent. 
"I would have walked if there wasn't an ethical dilemma with the animals."
And so, on Feb. 
29, JV China suspended its shows, saying the aquarium was months behind in payments and had skimped on promised life support systems. 
The aquarium, denying the danger, in turn tried to evict JV China, turned off chlorine to the pools and then claimed ownership of the animals for themselves.
At one level it is "an ordinary commercial dispute," as it was called last week by Wei Hongying, the aquarium's executive director. 
But with China trying to enter the World Trade Organization, it is also a cautionary tale about the perils of business in this booming country where the rule of law and standard business practices have not fully taken hold.
And then there are dolphins held hostage.
"In the U.S. and Western Europe, the law is more closely interwoven with business," said Stanley Lubman, a California lawyer who has represented many companies in business disputes here. 
"In China you're dealing with a much looser texture of rules. 
And when things go wrong, there's a more fragile legal system for resolving them."
The executives of JV China anticipated that they could handle China's rough-and-tumble business world, having trained animals for zoos and aquariums and for movies including "Free Willy."
The contract, signed in September 1998, says that JV China "shall provide the criteria for and shall be solely responsible for the standards for the operation of the facility, including the life support system and other equipment and facility and specifications of the quality of the water at the facility."
Ms. Wei refused to discuss the specific terms before the outcome of legal action. 
But Chiu Man, a Hong Kong-based businessman who identified himself as a founder, major investor and board member of the aquarium, said the aquarium was justified in all of its actions toward JV China according to his interpretation of the document.
"We all agree that contractually the animals belong to them," he said in a phone interview. 
But he added that now "we have the right to buy the animals -- sorry, that word isn't 'buy' -- we have the right to keep the animals. 
And that's because JV China owes us a great deal of money, since their performance has not been up to fulfilling the agreement."
Mr. Chiu conceded that the aquarium had never complained about JV China's work previously but said that "there wasn't a need to rake them over the coals."
From the start the contract did little to resolve tensions in a troubled partnership. 
At an inspection visit before JV China delivered 9 dolphins, 10 sea lions and 6 whales early last year, Mr. Desmond found that only half of the chlorine jets worked, filters had been filled with a cheap, ineffective sand and workers had not been properly trained.
In a memo from February 1999, JV China said that one of the three sets of pumps in the sea lion pen was broken and that its chlorine level was more than 10 times the acceptable limit, enough to cause blindness.
In July another memo listed high bacteria levels in the water from "repeated failure of the system," as well as hazardous sharp gratings in the pools.
Just one month after the show opened, JV China was threatening to leave. 
And the aquarium was already behind on payments to the company specified in the $11 million contract.
By September payments had stopped.
Ms. Wei said the differences had arisen from legitimate "technical debates" over animal care. 
Both Ms. Wei and Mr. Chiu said a Chinese company call General Oceanic Environmental Engineering Consultants, partly owned by Mr. Chiu, now controled the life support system, essentially overriding the contract.
They defended the new company's decisions, including turning off the chlorine, used as a backup disinfectant, a move that JV China insists is hazardous because primary life support systems are not functioning properly.
"JV China are not water quality experts," Mr. Chiu said. 
"They know about animals. 
I think they've been very dumb and don't use common sense."
He said the water now fell within the standard ranges that JV China had stipulated for things like acidity and bacteria counts and therefore was adequate to meet contractual obligations -- two points that JV China disputes.
In January an independent scientist from Idea Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., was hired by both sides to inspect the aquarium, whose regular exhibits remain open to the public, and serious problems were discovered:
*Pool water contained oxygen levels that were four times normal because of problems with the ozone system, leading to a dangerous overgrowth of bacteria.
*Fine filters had never been installed in the aquarium's air system, forcing the marine mammals to breath Beijing's air pollution. 
The whales have had persistent respiratory problems.
*Water chemistry was beginning to drift out of balance, and the aquarium did not have a "supply of the dry chemicals" required to correct the problem.
But Mr. Chiu said: "All of our measures of water quality show that there are no problems, and if JVC has concerns, they need to produce numbers and to make reasonable suggestions. 
As for the air, Beijing is a heavily polluted city -- everyone knows that -- and that is not something we or JVC can solve."
Mr. Chiu said JV China had not been paid for six months because its performance was "far too poor."
Pressed for examples, he cited two: JV China had changed specifications for a tiny steel doorway, and the animals "were not performing as expected."
The contract lists 18 skills -- from tail walks to object retrieval -- for a whale and dolphin show. 
Mr. Chiu complained that while the animals together could perform the tasks, no one creature could do them all.
After JV China said in late February that it was canceling its shows, simmering tension turned to war. 
Aquarium board members and security guards ordered the company's employees out of the building, and when they resisted, citing contractual obligations, aquarium officials called the contract "a piece of paper," a JV China employee said. 
After a standoff, JV China's employees agreed to leave, with guarantees that they could continue to take care of their animals.
In a memo dated March 1, Ms. Wei said JV China's failure to possess proper permits for its animals had "necessitated the eviction," although that charge has since been dropped.
The American Embassy has written letters to Chinese officials expressing concern about the business practices and the animals' welfare. 
Two of the sea lions were imported from the United States and under American law must be kept in facilities that meet or exceed United States requirements.
"Most disputes are resolved amicably," an American diplomat here said. 
"But there are a large number of contract disputes in China that involve inappropriate action by Chinese."
Other experts place some blame for the current standoff, which seems headed for arbitration in the Chinese government arbitration system, on naive investors. 
"Foreigners come in without knowing what happened to their predecessors," said Mr. Lubman, the lawyer who has worked on business disputes here. 
"They are dazzled by the size of the market."
