
The United States is one victory away from winning a gold medal in softball.
But what a battle to get there. 
It took a typical pitching performance by Lisa Fernandez (a three-hitter and 13 strikeouts) and a 10th-inning bases-loaded single by Sheila Cornell tonight to beat a stubborn Chinese team, 1-0.
The victory sent the United States into the championship game Tuesday night against Australia or China. 
Australia beat Japan, 2-0, in tonight's second game, on home runs by Kerry Dienelt and Haylee Petrie and Tanya Harding's two-hit pitching. 
Australia will play China at 4:30 P.M. Tuesday, and that winner moves on to the 7 P.M. final against the United States.
International softball officials created the peculiar setup to reward the team with the best record in the round-robin preliminary round, in this case the United States (6-1).
After the game, the Americans were drained, and not just from the 87-degree temperature and 51 percent humidity.
"When you miss so many opportunities," said Dot Richardson, the American shortstop, "it drains you. 
This has been a very emotional tournament for us because of so many close games."
The doubleheader at downtown Golden Park drew a sellout crowd of 8,729, including Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee. 
Scalpers were asking $200 for $32 tickets.
Fernandez is a 25-year-old California-bred right-hander with a fastball that reaches 66 miles an hour, a huge problem for batters only 40 feet away.
For six innings, she pitched a perfect game, and the Chinese could not even hit the ball out of the infield.
The perfect game ended when Zhang Chunfang led off the Chinese seventh with a single. 
The only hits Fernandez allowed were chipped singles that fell in front of outfielders.
But for nine innings, her teammates could not get a run. 
In the third, Julie Smith, trying to score from second base on a single to right field, was thrown out. 
In the sixth, with two Americans on base, Zhang, the Chinese center fielder, misjudged Danielle Tyler's long fly before grabbing it just in front of the fence.
Softball games usually last seven innings. 
If the game is tied after seven, the eighth and (if necessary) ninth innings are played under normal rules.
If the score is still tied after nine, international rules dictate that each half-inning start with a runner on second base.
In the 10th, Richardson was that gift runner. 
Julie Smith, the leadoff batter, was hit in the right thigh by a pitch, putting Americans on first and second. 
Then Dionna Harris grounded to shortstop. 
The throw to third base to force Richardson hit her in the back, and the bases were loaded.
"I purposely didn't slide," Richardson said, "because I was trying to get hit. 
Luckily for me, it worked. 
I've never been so happy to get hit by a ball."
So now the bases were loaded with none out. 
China's relief pitcher, Wang Lihong, struck out the next batter, Kim Maher.
Up came Cornell, a 5-foot-8-inch, 178-pound first baseman and, like Richardson, a 34-year-old veteran of the Americans' 10-year climb to the top.
"When I stepped to the plate," Cornell said, "I said to myself, 'This is where I want to be.'
I love being able to make or break the game. 
I wasn't trying to hit a home run because we just needed one run."
Cornell ran the count to 3-0, then took a called strike. 
On the next pitch, she hit a sharp grounder between second base and the diving Chinese second baseman, Yan Fang. 
Before Cornell left the batter's box, she was grinning and pumping her arms because she knew the ball would get through the infield. 
It did, Richardson scored and the Americans won.
For Fernandez, the victory was revenge of sorts. 
Because she has a tender ankle, this was only her second appearance in these Olympics. 
The first was last Friday, when she struck out 15, retired 29 straight batters and pitched a perfect game against Australia until there were two out in the 10th. 
Then, with the United States leading by 1-0 and an 0-2 count against Joanne Brown, a rising pitch by Fernandez hung over the center of the plate, Brown knocked it over the fence and Australia won, 2-1, the only American loss here.
"In the top of the 10th tonight," Fernandez said, "China had a runner on second and I kept saying, 'Not again, not again, not again.'
I reached for something extra. 
I found my energy from my teammates."
