
Greg Louganis stopped by the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center earlier this week. 
He was working as a television reporter, and his presence was a nagging reminder of how much American divers have slipped since he wrung out his chamois for the last time after winning two more gold medals at the 1988 Summer Olympics.
The Americans ended up winning no golds in Atlanta, and the last time that happened in an Olympics in which Americans competed was 1912 in Stockholm.
They could not manage a medal of any color in tonight's final event: the men's 10-meter platform, in which Dmitri Sautin of Russia put an end to China's hopes of an Olympic sweep.
Sautin, the reigning world champion, did it with a superb, steady performance, receiving no score lower than a 7.5 on any of his six dives and consistently receiving scores of 9.0 or higher.
On his final effort -- a back one-and-a-half somersault with three-and-a-half twists -- he received the only perfect 10 awarded during the men's competition (the other six judges settled for 9.0's and 9.5's).
"I was very mad at myself," said Sautin of his surprisingly low fifth-place finish in the men's springboard competition. 
"So I came out and managed to accomplish what I needed to accomplish on platform."
Sautin, the first Russian or Soviet to win the Olympic platform title, finished sixth in this event in 1992. 
That was less than a year after he was stabbed in the stomach several times during a fight. 
He nearly died from loss of blood and spent two months in a Russian hospital. 
Since then, he has reasserted his imposing, if not always graceful, presence.
"Sautin's not a style diver," said American Coach Ron O'Brien. 
"He's a power, acrobatic, good-entry diver."
He took the lead from Jan Hempel of Germany after the first round in tonight's final and never relinquished it, scoring no lower than 76.50 on any of his six dives and winning by a comfortable 29.07 points. 
Hempel settled for the silver; Xiao Hailiang of China for the bronze, which means that China won 5 of the 12 diving medals awarded in Atlanta.
David Pichler of the United States was sixth; Patrick Jeffrey was ninth, which means that the United States won only two medals in Atlanta: a bronze from Mary Ellen Clark on women's platform and another bronze from Mark Lenzi on men's springboard.
That is hardly a major surprise. 
The Americans won no golds in the 1994 world championships in Rome. 
Nor did they win any in the four Olympic events contested at the 1995 Pan American Games.
The trend continued here despite the support of a large and unabashedly partisan crowd. 
The Americans were far from abysmal. 
All eight United States divers qualified for the finals, something no other delegation accomplished, not even the Chinese. 
But they could not rise (or better yet, fall) to the highest level.
"We need to take another look at our program," O'Brien said. 
"We have done it to some degree, but we were late reacting. 
It's not that our guys have gotten worse. 
It's just that others have made great improvements."
Today's finals were a case in point. 
Neither Pichler nor Jeffrey made a major error, and yet when the last dive had been completed, they were well off the pace. 
At 31, Jeffrey is the oldest male diver in Atlanta. 
He competed in the 1988 Olympics, where he contracted a virus and finished 12th.
"I'm a little disappointed, but I'm not upset," he said. 
"I'm walking out with my head up."
While Jeffrey was waxing sanguine, his competitors were dividing the spoils. 
The Chinese had won the first three events in Atlanta, with Fu Mingxia winning on both the women's platform and springboard and Xiong Ni winning on the men's springboard. 
But Xiao and the 16-year-old Tian Liang -- both competing in their first Olympics -- would be unable to complete the first Olympic sweep in 44 years.
"We were new divers; this was our first time in a competition like this," said the 19-year-old Xiao. 
"We wanted to win the fourth gold for our country, but we were not under any pressure to win it."
Sautin was simply too good, his scores too consistently high. 
They were the kinds of scores that once were the rule for a man named Louganis. 
But Louganis is now reporting for television, and the Americans are no longer dominant.
