
They have been together a long time close to a decade for some of them -- and tonight the American women won a prize they could not have imagined when they began assembling. 
By beating a spirited and talented China, 2-1, they won a gold medal in the first women's soccer tournament in Summer Games history.
Tiffeny Milbrett scored the historic goal in the 68th minute at the end of a fast break begun by Mia Hamm on the right side, who pushed the ball to Joy Fawcett in the middle, who set up Milbrett racing in from the left.
The attendance was 76,481, apparently the largest crowd to watch a women's game anywhere in the world. 
Last Sunday's crowd of 64,196 was the largest to see the women's team in this country, just shy of the 65,000 that saw them play the World Cup final in Guangzhou, China, in 1991. 
Team officials said there is no record of any women's team -- in any sport, in any country -- playing before a larger crowd.
However, almost nothing of the game was shown on NBC, and afterward, Hank Steinbrecher, the executive director of the United States Soccer Federation, blasted the network, saying, "NBC must think the world is full of divers."
In renovated Sanford Stadium at the University of Georgia, where the fabled hedges were cut back to allow for more seating, the public-address announcer called the sport "football," the way most of the world does.
This jittery championship, after the United States had been outhustled during the middle of the match, is the second world victory for the United States. 
The women won the first women's World Cup in 1991 in China, finished third in the second World Cup in Sweden in 1995 and paved the way for the 1999 World Cup to be held in the United States.
And they had played together long enough to be a real team, like the New York Islanders used to be, like the old Boston Celtics.
You could read it in the "caps," the soccer term for international appearances: Kristine Lilly with 121, the sore-legged Hamm with 120, Carin Gabarra, who replaced Hamm in the closing minutes, earned her 117th, and Michelle Akers would have had more than 109 caps but for her struggle with the debilitating Epstein-Barr virus in recent years.
Fawcett made her 101st appearance tonight. 
Fawcett celebrated the victory by holding her 2-year-old daughter, Katelyn Rose, in her arms as she waved to the fans after the semifinal victory over Norway.
Tonight, Carla Overbeck, the star defender, played her 100th game and received the traditional engraved watch, Julie Foudy reached 96 caps, Tisha Venturini 71, Milbrett 65, Tiffany Roberts came on late for Milbrett and played in her 54th, goalkeeper Briana Scurry reached 46 and Brandi Chastain toughed it out with her right leg heavily taped and reached 40.
And Shannon MacMillan, in the starting lineup tonight, reached 28 caps and scored the first goal in the 18th minute, a goal involving 378 games of international experience. 
The weary but wise Akers trapped a loose ball at midfield and sent it wide to the left for Lilly, who dribbled downfield and turned the corner, firing the ball left-footed. 
It ricocheted out to Hamm, who shot on goal, and the rebound went to MacMillan, who put the ball into the net.
Then the Americans went into a shell, apparently trying to contain the Chinese rather than attack. 
Akers was hobbling, apparently with leg cramps, and the Americans seemed listless. 
They paid for it in the 32d minute when Sun Wen got past Overbeck and chipped the ball over Scurry, who had left the goalmouth.
Some aggressive work by Hamm woke the United States from its lethargy. 
Women's soccer does not have the booming power or the intricate negative defenses of world-level men's soccer. 
The way to go in women's soccer is full speed ahead.
Hamm chases the ball obsessively, the way Pete Rose used to pursue base hits. 
She tore up her ankle in the second game of this tournament. 
Coach Tony DiCicco has been complaining about the rules allowing only 16 players a team for a five-game schedule in 12 days. 
The women had just enough left to produce the burst of energy for the gold medal.
China did not lack for support, with three separate clusters of yellow-and-red-clad fans waving bright red banners and flags and dancing to the halftime tunes like "Y.M.C.A." by the Village People.
Norway, which lost a heartbreaking semifinal to the United States on Sunday, won the bronze medal tonight with a 2-0 victory over Brazil. 
Linda Medalen deliberately set up a goal in front by Ann Aarones in the 21st minute and Aarones boomed an untouchable rocket in the 25th minute.
Soccer or football, it is now an Olympic sport for women, and it fills stadiums. 
And the first champion is a team that stuck together for a decade for this night, when the players would run around an American football field in front of 76,481 fans.
