
China's Finance Minister agreed today to allow some American and foreign banks to expand into some cities of China now closed to them and to accept deposits in Chinese currency.
American and other foreign banks have been pressing the Beijing Government to open more areas of the country to foreign financial service companies, which hope to play a lucrative role as a bridge between China's tremendous appetite for investment capital and the huge interest abroad in investing in the development boom here. 
Infrastructure investment in China alone between now and the end of the century is expected to top $500 billion.
 
Joint Effort Is Revived
Finance Minister Liu Zhongli's announcement of wider access in financial services came as part of a joint statement from himself and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, after a meeting of the two nations' Joint Economic Committee. 
The committee, founded in 1979, had been a forum in which China and the United States worked out economic problems, but it had not met since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. 
It was revived today by Mr. Bentsen and Mr. Liu.
They agreed to start meeting again annually and to establish sub-Cabinet groups that would deal with monetary and banking policy, exchange-rate reform and investment and economic cooperation.
 
Planning a Visit
Mr. Bentsen also announced that the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, planned to visit Beijing to consult with the Chinese authorities on monetary policy. 
The Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Bentsen also said, is discussing an agreement to help China establish and regulate "an effective securities market."
And, he said, the Treasury's Customs Service will provide China with assistance in monitoring trade.
All of this reflects the Clinton Administration's effort to step up engagement with China along a broad front. 
The idea is to give the Beijing authorities a greater incentive to meet American human rights demands that are the condition for renewing China's preferential trade benefits in June.
The most important initiative from the Chinese side was the Finance Minister's commitment to expand the range of opportunities in China for American banks and financial service companies, particularly the right of foreign banks to do business in local currency -- the renminbi.
American officials said that what this commitment meant was that some American and other foreign banks would be allowed to expand the number of cities in which they could open branches. 
Also, a few of them would be allowed for the first time to accept accounts in Chinese currency. 
This would also give foreign banks the opportunity to expand beyond the relatively limited area of financing trade, to providing small-business loans, mortgages, car loans and inventory loans -- all in local currency.
Most of the world's largest banks are doing business in China in a limited way now, including some of the largest financial institutions in Japan, Western Europe and the United States. 
Among the American banks are Citibank, Bank of America, Chemical and Chase Manhattan. 
Generally, these banks have representatives in Beijing and Shanghai or other cities in China to offer trade financing and other services. 
But they cannot accept deposits under existing regulations.
Like so many other Asian nations, China has been reluctant to open domestic banking markets to foreign financial institutions for fear of losing some control over the money supply. 
At a time when inflation in China is running at 20 percent annually and the Government is trying to better control credit, this is an important issue.
Chinese officials refrained, for now, from specifying which new cities will be open to foreign bank branches, or which foreign banks will be involved in the experiment with local currency deposits.
Secretary Bentsen said this experimental move was important, but he added that he had strongly urged his Chinese counterpart to liberalize the financial services market quickly to benefit "both China and the United States."
Before leaving Beijing for Shanghai, Mr. Bentsen summed up his talks with Chinese leaders by saying that "there has been progress but more remains to be done," if the Chinese hope to have their most-favored-nation trade benefits renewed in June.
While Mr. Bentsen expressed the Administration's satisfaction with Thursday's agreement allowing more inspections of Chinese prisons to insure that their factories are not producing goods for export to the United States, he stressed that this was only part of what President Clinton was demanding as a condition for renewing the trade benefits, which allow China to export its products to the United States at the lowest possible tariff rates.
An accounting of China's political prisoners and visits to them by the International Committee of the Red Cross were two other important American demands, which China is considering but has not yet met.
"I hope sufficient progress can be made so we can put this issue behind us and there will not be an annual review" of the most-favored issue any longer, Mr. Bentsen said.
