
The leader of the fast-spreading spiritual movement banned this week by the Chinese Government asserted yesterday that his group had no political ambitions and called on the Government to engage in dialogue.
"I hope the Chinese Government will try to resolve the matter through dialogue rather than through violence," Li Hongzhi, leader of the newly outlawed Falun Gong movement, which claims to use exercises to harness cosmic forces, said in an interview yesterday in New York. 
"The people's hearts cannot be changed."
"I don't want to get involved in politics ever," said Mr. Li, who in 1992 developed a cosmic theory and a movement that says it now has more than 100 million members worldwide. 
Estimates of the number of followers in China range from two million given by the Government this week to tens of millions claimed by supporters, numbers that cannot be verified.
From his self-imposed exile in New York, Mr. Li is embroiled in one of China's sharpest social rifts in years, as the Government tries to stamp out a movement that has been wildly popular among many retirees, middle-age women and others, mainly in urban areas around the country.
The Government this week described Falun Gong as an illegal political and social force and Mr. Li as an "evil figure who, by deceiving, has been seriously disrupting social order."
Mr. Li, a youthful-looking 48, was dressed in a navy blue suit and spoke in mild terms, becoming most animated when countering Government contentions that he has lied about his past and his personal gains. 
He seemed to be anything but the plotting charlatan portrayed in official Chinese statements this week or even the charismatic leader of a new spiritual movement that has spread quickly in a few years, putting the most populous country on a near crisis footing.
Alarmed by the rapid spread of a movement outside the control of the Communist Party, China's leaders detained scores of Falun Gong leaders and mounted a campaign of invective against Mr. Li. Authorities dispersed resulting protests by tens of thousands of followers in at least 30 cities
"I really can't understand what the Chinese Government is doing," Mr. Li said yesterday. 
"I think the crackdown is going to do damage to the state, do damage to human rights and attract the attention of international public opinion."
"If a state cannot even tolerate a part of its cultural heritage like qigong, then what can it tolerate?" he asked, referring to traditional exercises thought to channel cosmic forces on which major elements of his own movement are based.
Falun Gong was developed by Mr. Li after decades of study under various masters, he said in a personal history that the Government disputes. 
It combines elements of qigong, Buddhism and Taoism. 
In Mr. Li's formulation, by performing certain physical exercises people can harness cosmic forces to improve their health and well-being.
The movement takes its name from the falun, the "law wheel" that is said to spin in the abdomen, drawing in good powers and expelling bad forces. 
Advanced students gain supernatural powers, his writings suggest.
Many followers in China simply say that they feel better after having practiced the exercises and that they also enjoy the morning group exercises as a hobby. 
It is unclear how many Chinese are fervent followers.
But the Communist Party is unwilling to tolerate any competing allegiance. 
Surprised and shocked in April when 10,000 Falun Gong adherents held an unauthorized demonstration outside the leadership compound in central Beijing, the authorities apparently began planning the crackdown for this week.
"If they want to outlaw the organization, then let them do it," Mr. Li said. 
"We don't have an organization."
Followers insist that volunteers carry out all activities, teaching neighbors and friends. 
Mr. Li professed yesterday to have no control over the activities of practioners, who carefully study his books and speeches for direction in their meditation and exercise regimens. 
Critics have likened the group to a cultish religion, an idea that followers vehemently dispute.
Mr. Li has communicated with a spreading worldwide network of followers through the Internet, where his latest thoughts are often posted at several sites.
Chinese authorities this week called Falun Gong "highly organized," with 39 teaching centers, more than 1,900 instruction stations and more than 28,000 designated exercise spots around the country. 
The authorities said Mr. Li had amassed large sums of money from sales of his books and his lectures, had bought cars and houses through relatives and had "hoodwinked" and "corroded the minds" of followers.
Mr. Li angrily denied the charges of personal gain as "sheer fabrications."
He also said the authorities had highlighted rare cases of followers who had committed murder or suicide without noting that those people were mentally ill.
"It is a proven fact that more than 100 million people have become healthier by practicing Falun Gong," Mr. Li said. 
"And many patients with cancer or other terminal diseases are still living because of this practice."
In the interview, Mr. Li was more muted than in his writings about supernatural powers like X-ray vision, an ability to fly and the radically lengthened lives that may be achieved through proper harnessing of cosmic forces.
Mr. Li said he felt that the reason for the persecution of Falun Gong was that so many people had become involved, including many Communist Party members, and that the growth had made officials nervous. 
Authorities have tried to distinguish publicly between the "ordinary" practice of qigong as a health-promoting exercise and the practice of Falun Gong.
In fact, most Chinese loosely believe in the supernatural forces evoked by various qigong sects. 
The Communist Party has worked unsuccessfully to stamp out such beliefs as superstition.
In detailing the case against Mr. Li this week, the Chinese authorities said records showed that he quietly visited Beijing on April 22, leaving for Hong Kong on April 24, the eve of the giant demonstration in Beijing by thousands of followers who were protesting harassment of the group and who called for the group's official approval.
In his interview, Mr. Li said he had visited Beijing then, but insisted the timing was coincidental. 
He said that he was on a layover en route to Australia by the cheapest flight, and that he did not meet with any followers and had not known of any demonstration plans.
Mr. Li, his wife and daughter have lived since last year in Queens, where they moved from China. 
They moved in part because he feared Government interference, he said, but more because his daughter wanted to attend an American high school.
