
As he relaxes in his office, smoke circling from an endless parade of cigarettes while he cheerfully explains that gangsters are sometimes very honorable people, Toyohisa Etoh seems an unlikely figure to have created an international mess.
Yet Mr. Etoh, a benign-looking man with graying temples and a scholarly look, has emerged as a key figure in Japanese foreign policy. 
He heads a mob-affiliated rightist organization that has built a lighthouse on a remote cluster of uninhabited islands, claiming them for Japan and thereby setting off a major dispute with China and Taiwan.
"I don't deny it when people call us yakuza," or gangsters, Mr. Etoh said firmly, "because if you're doing the right thing, that's what matters."
Doing the right thing, as Mr. Etoh sees it, means supporting Japan's claim to the islands, which in Japanese are called the Senkakus. 
The Japanese Government has been reluctant to act on its own, for fear of provoking China and Taiwan, and Mr. Etoh is bitterly contemptuous of Japanese Government officials.
"I despise the current members of Parliament and Government officials," Mr. Etoh said, waving his cigarette furiously through the air. 
"They're pigs!
Really pigs!
They have no patriotism whatsoever."
Japanese rightists have had a longtime interest in the Senkakus, a group of five islets and three barren rocks that lie between Taiwan and the Japanese island of Okinawa. 
Chinese nationalists are equally passionate about the islands, which they call the Diaoyus.
"It's very bad," fretted an official from one of the Governments involved, who insisted on not being identified. 
"I'm afraid this is getting out of control. 
But it's very hard to say to your citizens, 'No, you can't go to a territory that belongs to us.'
"
"Maybe America can send ships to the area and ask for all countries to be restrained," said the official, who called a reporter at home to make the suggestion. 
"Otherwise, I'm afraid this will get out of control."
One Hong Kong man drowned last month while trying to approach the islands, and Chinese nationalist groups have called on China and Taiwan to use military force to seize the islands from Japan. 
Tensions rose this week when some members of a protest group from Taiwan and Hong Kong managed to break through a cordon of 50 Japanese coast guard vessels and planted the Taiwanese and Chinese flags before withdrawing soon afterward.
Governments covet the islands for a reason deeper than nationalism: oil. 
The geology around the islands is said to be promising for petroleum.
Still, the Japanese Government last week put off indefinitely an application by Mr. Etoh's organization for the new lighthouse to be officially recognized on navigation charts. 
Mr. Etoh's organization, the Japan Youth Federation, has been involved in the islands since 1978, when it erected its first lighthouse there. 
It was a second lighthouse, erected in July of this year and repaired last month, that caused the present furor.
Over the years, Mr. Etoh says, he has spent more than $1 million to build the lighthouses and assert Japan's claim to the Senkakus, but he declines to say where the money comes from. 
The Japanese police say the federation has close ties to the yakuza, and Mr. Etoh acknowledges that the group's founder was a well-known mobster, Kusuo Kobayashi, who died six years ago.
The Chinese Government has condemned Japan for allowing Mr. Etoh to build the lighthouse, but the Japanese Government retorts that Japanese are allowed to travel anywhere in Japan -- including the Senkakus -- and that therefore there is nothing the Japanese Government can do.
