
China has turned down efforts by the Vatican to arrange a visit by Pope John Paul II to Hong Kong when he tours Asia later this year, dashing hopes among Catholics in China that ties between Rome and Beijing might improve.
A Roman Catholic bishop in Hong Kong who recently returned from the Vatican said today that China had decided against a visit by the Pope.
"The mainland says the Vatican has ties with Taiwan" and no ties with Beijing, Bishop Joseph Zen told Reuters. 
"Therefore, such a visit is not convenient."
Although the Vatican is eager to improve relations with Beijing eventually, the real obstacle seems not to be Taiwan so much as the wariness among Chinese leaders about the Pope's moral authority over 10 million Catholics in China.
Many of them worship in underground churches to evade the Communist Party's ban on recognizing the Pope as the Catholic Church's supreme earthly authority.
A possible visit by the Pope to Hong Kong was supported by some Catholic leaders in China, even those who swear allegiance to the party, in the hope that it would be a first step toward warmer ties between Rome and Beijing.
Yet Beijing's negative answer did not come as a real surprise.
The Vatican's Secretary of State, Angelo Cardinal Sodano, has said in the past that Rome will gladly move away from Taiwan if it can establish ties with Beijing.
China's Foreign Ministry issued a statement today containing its familiar criticism of the Vatican's ties with Taiwan, which Beijing has considered a renegade province since the Chinese civil war ended in 1949.
"Currently, the Vatican still maintains so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan," the statement said. 
"Hong Kong is a special administrative region of China. 
The issues involving the Pope visiting Hong Kong are rather complicated. 
The Vatican is clear on this."
A Hong Kong newspaper reported today that Chinese officials had rebuffed inquiries from Rome made after the Pope expressed interest in visiting the territory, over which China resumed sovereignty in 1997. 
The newspaper, The South China Morning Post, ran an accompanying editorial saying the decision called into question the high degree of autonomy that Hong Kong had been promised.
Although Beijing's Foreign Ministry did not say so, the two matters excluded from Hong Kong's theoretical autonomy are foreign affairs and defense. 
Relations with the Pope, recognized as the head of state of the Vatican, clearly falls under China's jurisdiction over foreign affairs.
A visit by the Pope to Hong Kong would have been the first since Pope Paul VI visited in 1970. 
Hong Kong has about 370,000 practicing Catholics -- 250,000 ethnic Chinese and roughly 120,000 Filipinos, most of whom work as domestic helpers.
Mary Seung, a spokeswoman for the Catholic Diocese of Hong Kong said local Catholic leaders learned several weeks ago that the Pope would not be visiting.
"Officially we have not heard any explanation from Rome at all," Ms. Seung said.
As excited as Hong Kong Catholics would have been by a visit by the Pope, the larger issue that looms behind any such proposal is the question of a long-term rapprochement between Beijing and Rome, which have had not formal diplomatic ties since the Communist Party came to power in 1949.
A Catholic bishop in Shanghai said in an interview with an Italian magazine several months ago that the Vatican and China had held secret talks about improving relations but had yet to achieve any significant progress. 
The bishop, Jin Luxian, expressed a yearning for reconciliation.
"The Pope represents the supreme leader of all the world's Catholics, including those in China," Bishop Jin said at the time, adding that he dreamed of seeing a papal nuncio in Beijing.
China is officially atheist and bans Christian worship outside the "patriotic churches" set up under the control of the Communist Party, which is inherently suspicious of any organization it does not control. 
Many Chinese leaders are also wary of the role that the Catholic Church played in the downfall of Communist rule in Poland in 1989.
Human rights organizations in Hong Kong condemned Beijing's decision.
The Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor said the move represented a symbolic loss of freedom for Hong Kong. 
"The decision that the Pope is not welcome lends a disastrous message around the world that Hong Kong is no longer the free place that it was," the organization said.      
