
Harry Wu, a Chinese-American human rights campaigner known for his daring and secretive travels through China to document prison labor abuses, was charged with espionage today.
Mr. Wu has been detained since June 19, when Chinese border authorities discovered his identity at a remote checkpoint in western China as he entered the country from Kazakhstan with an associate.
His arrest comes at a time of fraying relations between Washington and Beijing, and the start of legal action that could return Mr. Wu to a Chinese prison cell for the rest of his life is certain to bring an outcry from human rights groups and members of Congress.
Mr. Wu, 58, spent 19 years in Chinese labor camps, from 1960 to 1979. 
In a memoir published last year, he wrote that his secret forays "meant risking my own rearrest and reimprisonment," but he insisted on taking such risks to expose the abuses in the system under which he suffered.
One human rights advocate in Hong Kong today called the arrest an effective "declaration of war against the United States on the human rights issue."
"This move by Beijing calls for the most robust and sternest response from Washington," said Robin Munro, Hong Kong director of Human Rights Watch.
Though Mr. Wu has been a singular irritant to the Communist Party leadership, the timing of the arrest and the seriousness of the charge are likely to worsen the strains between Washington and Beijing. 
In addition to conflicts over human rights, trade issues and missile sales, tensions have been growing since President Clinton's decision in May to allow a private visit to the United States by the President of Taiwan, Lee Teng-hui.
In the current inflamed atmosphere, it may be politically impossible for Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown to lead a business delegation here this summer as planned, or for Hillary Rodham Clinton to address the United Nations International Women's Conference to be held in China in September. 
A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton said on Friday that she was considering accepting such an invitation.
Western officials and some Chinese said today that Mr. Wu's risky enterprise made his arrest somewhat predictable.
Chinese officials say that since 1991, Mr. Wu, in an effort to deceive them, has entered the country under the names Harry Wu and Peter H. Wu.
The official New China News Agency, in a dispatch from the central city of Wuhan, said Mr. Wu had been arrested "on charges of entering into China under false names, illegally obtaining China's state secrets and conducting criminal activities."
Mr. Wu, the press agency said, "slipped into China's areas and units closed to foreigners on several occasions, engaged in espionage and bought secret information and stole secret documents."
"He carried these secrets abroad," the dispatch said, "and provided them to foreign organizations and institutions."
Senior State Department officials say Mr. Wu has had only one American passport, as Peter H. Wu, the name under which he was naturalized as an American citizen in January 1992.
Mr. Wu has often testified at Congressional hearings on human rights abuses in China after collecting evidence by sneaking into labor camps and secretly filming what he has seen there. 
In 1991 he used a hidden camera to film a report for the CBS News program "60 Minutes."
Last year, in cooperation with the British Broadcasting Corporation, Mr. Wu tried to document on film that China was removing organs from executed prisoners for use in transplants to wealthy or powerful Chinese recipients.
While human rights experts say they believe that abuses in the organ donor system occur in China, the BBC discovered that Mr. Wu's videotape, ostensibly showing kidney transplant surgery, was actually a routine heart operation. 
A BBC investigation is under way.
It was not clear what legal representation Mr. Wu will be afforded to defend himself against the espionage charges. 
In Washington, Nicholas Burns, the State Department spokesman, said the United States had been informed that "we will be allowed access to Mr. Wu."
"We have decided to send our top consular official to Wuhan with the expectation that we may be able to see him on Monday," he said, adding, "We very much regret the detention of Mr. Wu and the accusations made against him."
Attempts by an American Embassy officer to reach Mr. Wu after his initial detention in Xinjiang Province failed, and led to recriminations between Washington and Beijing over whether China was adhering to consular agreements.
Chinese officials said that since Mr. Wu immigrated to the United States from the central city of Wuhan, his case had been turned over to the Wuhan Public Security Bureau, which carried out the arrest.
Mr. Wu and his wife, Ching Lee Wu, has been living in Milpitas, Calif., 40 miles south of San Francisco, where he is the director of the Laogai Research Foundation. 
Laogai is Chinese for China's "reform through labor" prison system, in which sentences of up to three years are handed down without trial, legal representation or appeal.
Born in Shanghai in 1937 as a wealthy banker's son and educated by the Jesuits of prewar Shanghai, Mr. Wu was of the class of Chinese that had risen from chaos to an almost European living standard. 
This way of life was shattered when the Communists won the Chinese civil war in 1949, and Mr. Wu's family suffered the indignities of the enforced social leveling.
By the time he reached the Beijing Geology Institute in the early 1950's, Mr. Wu was a stranger in the new culture of the Communist Party. 
The capitalist background of his family put him under constant suspicion and, in 1958, when he accepted Mao Zedong's invitiation to "let a hundred flowers bloom, let a hundred schools of thought contend," his criticisms of the party, like those by thousands of other intellectuals, led to swift retribution.
He was judged guilty of being a counterrevolutionary rightist and put under the "supervision of the masses," a form of social persecution. 
For two years he was a virtual prisoner in his college and, the morning after his graduation, he was arrested and imprisoned. 
His stepmother, upon hearing of his arrest, committed suicide.
The next 19 years, including the tumultuous period of the Cultural Revolution, were spent in one "reform through labor" camp or another, unfolding for him the gulag that the Chinese Communists had built to capture millions of "bad elements," which included common criminals, former Nationalist opponents of the Communists and political dissidents of every stripe.
"Despair at life with no meaning after being dumped in China's human dustbin drove many inmates who should have been respected professionals to suicide," Mr. Wu later wrote. 
Human life, he said, had "no more importance than cigarette ash flicked in the wind."
After the death of Mao in 1976, it took three years for Mr. Wu's case to be reviewed so he could be released, and then he waited another five years for a passport to visit relatives in the United States. 
Once settled there, his fervor to document abuses in the Chinese penal system drew him back to China again and again.
"I felt urgently the responsibility not just to disclose but to publicize the truth about the Communist Party's mechanisms of control, whatever the risk to me, whatever the discomfort of telling my story," he said. 
"Each time I revisited my past, I hoped it would be the last time."
