
Though the poplar trees are showing green along the capital's busy boulevards, for China's beleaguered democracy movement, there is no "Beijing spring."
Its leaders are either back in jail or under tight surveillance. 
It seems hardly possible that mass demonstrations for democracy like those in Tiananmen Square in 1976 and 1989 could recur.
"The craft of suppressing the people is more sophisticated than before," said Xu Liangying, the 74-year-old translator of Albert Einstein's works who -- along with six other scientists and intellectuals -- petitioned the Communist leadership last month to free the country's political prisoners and embrace political reform.
As a result, he was placed under house arrest during the visit of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, and his apartment is still being watched.
Neither President Jiang Zemin nor Qiao Shi, chairman of the National People's Congress and a young revolutionary comrade of Professor Xu's 45 years ago, has responded to the petition, except by clamping down even more harshly on dissent.
After the surveillance on his building slackened recently, Professor Xu agreed to an interview and greeted his visitors at the metal grate that serves as the outer door to his chilly seventh-floor apartment in the Academy of Sciences compound.
Inside, the walls are lined with well-stuffed book cabinets. 
An uncurtained window bathes a cluttered desk with afternoon sunlight. 
A single strand of wire arches across the glass as a shortwave radio antenna, to improve reception for Voice of America and British Broadcasting Corporation news.
Professor Xu studied physics and the history of science. 
He helped to translate Einstein, who glares down from a wall poster with a favorite Einstein aphorism: "Great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds."
His gray hair in flighty disarray, Professor Xu shuffled in slippered feet to fill teacups for his guests. 
He said he had joined the Communist underground as a youth in his native Zhejiang Province, before the civil war that brought Communist rule in 1949, and he remained a dedicated Marxist until 1974.
In 1957, he admitted, he only winced when Mao Zedong purged thousands of Communist Party members who had taken up his invitation to criticize the leadership.
"I thought some of the actions taken by the Communist Party were a little cruel, but I never felt the actions were a violation of human rights," he said.
Still, he voiced his disagreement with the purges. 
It cost him his post at the Institute of Philosophy and his Beijing residency permit and began 20 years of persecution. 
Toward the end, he realized that he had been carrying around the intellectual seeds of democratic thought all his life.
He recalled that in 1938, as he was going off to college, he had read Einstein's "Ideas and Opinions" and underlined this passage:
"May I begin with an article of faith?
It runs as follows: The state is made for man, not man for the state. 
I regard the chief duty of the state to protect the individual and give him the opportunity to develop into a creative personality."
But what is democracy for China?
Dissidents are likely to give different answers.
Some of the younger reformers -- even some of the older ones -- want to work within the Communist Party system. 
Professor Xu calls the most enthusiastic of these "boot lickers."
Middle-aged dissidents tend to be deeply influenced by their Maoist upbringing, and they articulate their democratic yearning for the government to empower and serve the proletarian masses. 
Professor Xu has concluded that they are at times misguided.
"The people who were brought up in the 1960's and 1970's did not know much about democracy," Professor Xu said, adding that the reason was they had no access to the literature of democracy from the West.
Many of China's democracy advocates, he said, "believe that if you are not satisfied with the Government, you ought to stand up and overthrow it."
After all, Mao taught them that power comes out of the barrel of a gun.
Professor Xu's close friend Fang Lizhi, who was China's most famous dissident until he was exiled in 1990, also disapproves of this view. 
Now a professor of astrophysics at the University of Arizona, Mr. Fang said by telephone: "Even many Chinese students here, they don't know democracy. 
They still use the concept of Mao, which is mass democracy: the majority can do anything it wants, and if there is a small number in opposition, the majority can ignore their existence. 
That is total dictatorship or proletarian democracy."
Professor Xu said he believes that the student leaders of the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989 did not really understand democracy, "and so they ended up making chaos," though he does not blame them for the military crackdown that followed.
"In 1989, I said the number of intellectuals in China who really understand democracy does not exceed 100," Professor Xu said. 
"Today I am still saying the same words."
Now Professor Xu and his colleagues are searching for a non-threatening forum to keep the discussion of democracy alive. 
He plans to write a book about the history and theory of democracy.
His wife, the historian Wang Laili -- who also signed the petition -- will be the co-author.
"My wife and I are a life-and-death couple," Professor Xu said. 
"Both of us were underground revolutionaries."
