
Ever since Prime Minister Li Peng signed State Council Proclamation No. 129 last month banning the purchase or possession of satellite dishes by ordinary Chinese, millions of people on the broadcasting and receiving ends of the television business in Asia have been trying to determine whether Mr. Li will risk the draconian steps necessary to enforce the order.
So far, no police officers have been sent to start ripping dishes off rooftops, but the Government is talking tough. 
Many in Beijing feel the Politburo has invested too much of its prestige to back down.
"The large majority of Beijing dish owners will have to tear their dishes down," said Wei Dangjun, a spokesman for the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television, whose Minister, Ai Zhisheng, is known for his zeal in attacking the "spiritual pollution" infecting China from the West.
"Most owners have already broken rules by installing their dishes without application," Mr. Wei said in an interview. 
"Those that didn't listen to orders prohibiting installation," he said, "and then didn't listen to orders to disassemble, we will punish according to relevant laws."
The most compelling test of this latest crackdown is whether it is too late. 
The thought-control officials in China's old guard may find that the genie of the information explosion has been out of the bottle too long.
In the Fang Village neighborhood of south Beijing, even the apartment buildings that house retired officers of the dreaded public security bureau are wired up for satellite programming from the United States, Britain and Hong Kong.
Inestimable millions of Chinese have already been swept into the information era by foreign newspapers that have arrived with the flood of foreign business people and through television programs arriving via the "heavenly thread," which is the literal translation of "satellite antenna" into Mandarin Chinese.
While there are an estimated 500,000 satellite dishes in the country, because of cable hookups on apartment buildings the Government estimates that there are 15 million subscribers to multichannel systems that import English-language programs.
 
A Sense of Crackdown
The announcement of the ban coincided with a conference in early October on state security attended by Mr. Li and President Jiang Zemin. 
It concluded that "hostile forces outside our country have never stopped endangering the safety of our country" using "all means to infiltrate, split and damage us."
The ban also followed the decision of the International Olympic Committee to award the 2000 Games to Sydney, Australia, a crushing setback to the Chinese leadership.
The order banning satellite dishes contributed to a sense of crackdown in the capital this month. 
Two prominent journalists have been arrested: Xi Yang, a reporter for the large Hong Kong daily Ming Pao, and Gao Yu, a mainland reporter who was detained days before she was to leave for an academic year at Columbia University.
For several tense weeks, tens of thousands of Chinese who have bought the dishes from private and state-owned companies, including from the People's Liberation Army dish factory, have been hoping that this order will simply go the way of previous threats to enforce the ban.
The companies marketing the dishes have suddenly taken a low profile, though purchases are still possible, as one Beijing resident discovered last week.
"Hello, I would like to know if you still have any satellite television dishes available in your store?" the resident first asked in a telephone call.
"No, haven't you heard about the new regulations?" the clerk asked. 
"We're not allowed to sell them now."
The same day, the caller visited the department store and approached the salesman at what had been the satellite antenna service counter.
The man behind the counter seemed to be speaking on a different frequency. 
If the customer really wanted a dish, he said, it could be arranged for the equivalent of $650, including installation.
The fact that the Government is moving deliberately to enforce the ban reflects the struggle in the leadership between those who believe China should continue to open up to Western influences and those who believe China's economic boom can be sealed in a cocoon of Communist ideology.
Satellite dishes have become a way of life in China in the last two years. 
Even as the Clinton Administration complains that China is jamming Voice of America broadcasts, the same Chinese leaders appear helpless as millions of Chinese tune in to the Star TV network.
Star TV is the Hong Kong-based communications company that beams its five-channel menu -- including the BBC and CNN news, sports and MTV music videos -- into 4.8 million Chinese households.
In July Rupert Murdoch bought 63.6 percent of Star TV and has identified the mainland as his largest future market.
"Some leaders have installed satellite dishes with public funds," complained one Government worker who insisted on not being identified and who owns a $570 dish and receiver. 
"It's the authorities who have the power to do whatever they like. 
We are the victims."
As reported in People's Daily, the penalties for failing to take down the dishes will be anywhere from $900 to nearly $9,000. 
This does not include the cost of the dish, which would be confiscated.
At the ministry, Mr. Wei said he did not know when the decision would be made to start tearing hardware off rooftops.
"We await specific measures from above," he said.
