
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said this weekend that the importance of China's trade with the United States had been overstated, and that China was prepared to return to the cold war status of no trade relations with Washington if the dispute over China's human rights record could not be resolved.
"For 23 years before President Nixon opened the door of relations between China and the United States," he said in an interview, "there was no trade whatsoever between China and the United States.
"I think you lived quite well. 
And so did we."
 
Clinton Said to Be 'in a Web'
Still combative a week after China's brusque welcome and harsh treatment of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Mr. Qian said that President Clinton had "enmeshed himself in a web of his own spinning" over the June deadline he had set for China to make "overall significant progress" on human rights or else lose its favorable trade status with the United States.
"If a politician always sets such deadlines," Mr. Qian said, "then he will only have his own hands and feet bound."
Mr. Qian's tone, and that of other senior Chinese officials interviewed in recent days, raises questions of whether Beijing is reconsidering its pledge to "make an effort" to respond to Mr. Clinton's demands on human rights this year, as President Jiang Zemin said in January.
Mr. Qian said China still believed that "progress can be made" on its differences with Washington, provided that discussions took place "on the basis of equality" and mutual respect.
But Mr. Qian, other Chinese officials and Western diplomats were at a loss to describe how negotiations would proceed in the 10 weeks before the June 3 deadline.
Most analysts here are somewhat baffled over China's apparently sudden decision to confront Washington over its admonitions that time is running out before Mr. Christopher must recommend whether to renew or withdraw China's "most favored nation" trade status.
That status, which has been under contentious review in Washington each year since the military crackdown at Tiananmen Square in 1989, entitles China to export to the American market on a low-tariff basis like most other trading partners of the United States.
After Mr. Christopher's visit, analysts here saw two possibilities as the most likely explanation for Chinese behavior.
One is that China's leadership is seeking to demonstrate its strength internally by showing a determination to stand up to the United States. 
From such a position of strength, any concessions on human rights would be easier to sell to hard-liners at home.
The other possibility is that China's hard-liners have already persuaded President Jiang that he does not have to make any concessions to Washington on human rights, because a combination of political and economic pressures at home will force President Clinton to renew China's trade status in June even without evidence of significant progress on human rights.
 
The Whitewater Factor
Some analysts have suggested that another factor is the Whitewater investigation. 
One senior Foreign Ministry official spent much of his time during a luncheon with an American journalist last week seeking to understand what potential the Whitewater matter held for weakening Mr. Clinton's presidency and his ability to conduct foreign policy.
In an interview on Saturday evening, Mr. Qian appeared to be softening his earlier criticisms of Mr. Christopher's mission. 
He said the meetings during the Secretary's four-day visit had "yielded some results" and had not been a waste of time because they afforded Mr. Christopher a chance to reacquaint himself with China after an absence of 10 years.
He said China understood that the United States, by setting conditions for human rights improvement, was seeking to move United States-China relations out of the shadow of the Tiananmen Square massacre to a new stage of cooperation.
"I believe the U.S. side wants to do that," Mr. Qian said, "and I hope that the U.S. side will be successful in doing that."
But he offered no specific commitment that China would contribute further to the diplomatic bargain.
Restating what has become a boilerplate phrase for Chinese leaders, he said China was hoping for the best, but prepared for the worst.
Mr. Qian and other senior Chinese officials have begun to play down the consequences of losing trade privileges in the American market.
A senior economist and research director for China's State Council, the cabinet-level body under Prime Minister Li Peng, said in an interview last week that a loss of trade status in the United States would seriously affect only 10 percent of China's exports.
The research director, Sun Shang qing, said that all of the affected exports could be redirected to Asian markets this year, and that even with the disruption, China's economy would still meet its 9 percent growth target for the year.
Addressing the same point, Mr. Qian said: "The United States often says that in its trade with China, China runs a $20 billion surplus. 
However, such a conclusion is not all that correct."
Much of that trade originates with Hong Kong, Taiwanese and other foreign-financed enterprises, including American joint ventures, set up in China to export to the American market, he said. 
Thus economic damage from a cancellation of China's trade privileges would have an impact on Hong Kong, Taiwan and American investors in China.
 
U.S. Businesses' Stand Recalled
"That is why when Secretary Christopher met with representatives of the big companies of the United States" during his visit to Beijing, "all of them voiced their strong opposition to the revoking" of China's trade status, the Foreign Minister said.
Some estimates have characterized the loss of China's most-favored-nation trade status in more severe terms for the Chinese. 
A World Bank study says that raising the average tariff on Chinese export goods by 5 to 10 times would reduce exports to the United States between 42 and 96 percent. 
The problem of redirecting these exports to other markets was not addressed by the study.
The United States exports about $9 billion a year in goods to China, and any retaliatory step by China could put that trade at risk, along with the 200,000 American jobs that are estimated to depend on it.
 
--------------------
CHRISTOPHER ON CHINA TRIP
WASHINGTON, March 20 (Special to The New York Times) -- Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that on his trip to Beijing he had sought to carry out Congressional policy toward China and that he had the "full concurrence" of President Clinton.
Mr. Christopher, appearing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," denied Chinese assertions that Beijing had asked that he postpone his trip.
"There was never any request that I not come," he said. 
"It's just a bit of Chinese disinformation, apparently, to perhaps justify the rough treatment."
