
When she walks down a city street, Jin Xing effortlessly draws attention with her noble bearing and her elegant clothes. 
But there is something else about her, and many people seem to sense it.
Jin Xing is a transsexual.
At 32, Jin Xing (pronounced jin SHING) already has an impressive resume: a prize-winning dancer and choreographer, a former colonel in the army, founder of China's first independent dance troupe, owner of one of Beijing's hottest nightspots.
Yet it is Ms. Jin's leap across the gender barrier, from male to female, that fascinates many people here. 
Ms. Jin is the first transsexual in China to talk about it openly, and it is making her a celebrity.
"If people pay more attention to my dance because of who I am, that's fine," Ms. Jin said between sips of cappuccino at an outdoor cafe near her home. 
"If more people think about who they really are, because of me, that's fine too."
Ms. Jin evidently revels in the attention she is attracting, voraciously soaking up publicity in any form. 
In addition to a cascade of requests that she choreograph or direct stage performances, spurred by her fame as well as her talent, she is also accepting invitations to pose for magazines.
"I like being famous," she said.
A growing number of people are undergoing sex change operations in China, and several have thanked Ms. Jin for setting such a public example, saying it gave them the courage to proceed.
Although no precise statistics have been made public, sex change operations have become numerous enough that Beijing Medical University recently published guidelines for people requesting the surgery, including a five-year waiting period, extensive psychological counseling and a year of hormone treatment before the operation. 
One doctor at the university has performed 26 operations.
It may seem remarkable that a Government as conservative as China's allows sex change operations, though the medical authorities recently disclosed that the first one was performed, in secret, in 1983. 
No law ever expressly forbade or permitted such operations.
Yet what seems an even greater surprise is the ability of someone like Ms. Jin to operate freely in Chinese society, a distinct sign of how permissible unconventional styles of life are becoming here.
Not long ago, China's control-obsessed Government made sure that all non-approved ways of life were kept out of view, including homosexuality and even premarital sex.
But deep social change in recent years, forced by economic loosening, has meant that ordinary Chinese have gained more freedom over private life and that transsexuals and the more eccentric branches of youth culture like punk rockers can express themselves without fear.
"I don't feel any discrimination," Ms. Jin said. 
"Many people do not understand, but no one is saying, 'You can't do this.'
"
Chinese society is highly homogeneous, and individual expression is often snuffed out at an early age. 
At the same time, overcrowding and a lack of privacy also put a premium on discretion. 
As long as no one feels threatened, Ms. Jin's sex change is regarded with fascination but also with acquiescent respect.
As a man, Jin Xing emerged as China's top dancer in 1987, winning a national competition and then going to New York for four years of study. 
Living in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, he opened his eyes to American society, among other ways by spending a night in jail when a rival Chinese dancer falsely accused him of robbery to try to keep him out of a dance competition.
Real artistic distinction came in 1996, a year after Ms. Jin's sex change operation, when she established China's first independent dance troupe and began performing a set of startlingly original pieces that explored issues of love and identity, winning accolades as China's leading modern choreographer.
China's state-run media, reporting on her performances that year, also wrote about her sex change, a sign of official approval.
Like many transsexuals, Ms. Jin said she had known from childhood that she had a gender conflict. 
Living in New York and in Europe, where she spent three years, Ms. Jin became aware that a sex change was a realistic possibility.
"My whole being is female," she said. 
"I always knew I should be a girl."
Coming from a military family, Jin Xing joined a dance troupe run by the army at age 9 in the northeastern city of Shenyang. 
Dance instructors remember a willful child, fiercely determined and extraordinarily talented as a dancer. 
And crafty, too. 
One time the young dance student went on a hunger strike for a week when the army blocked a move to study with a more advanced dance troupe.
"They sent me in to talk to him, and I told him he was hurting his body by not eating," recalled Zhang Aijuan, a dance teacher at the military troupe. 
"He looked at me with a long face and whispered, 'I'm not stupid, I'm sneaking chocolate.'
"
The military superiors eventually relented and allowed the transfer.
Ms. Jin credits her success, in part, to the discipline learned in the army.
"The more you give, the more you get," she said. 
"Success takes three things: talent, hard work and opportunity. 
I am very lucky to have had all three."
She did not discuss her decision to become a woman with her parents until she was about to go ahead with the operation, performed in a Beijing hospital in 1995. 
She was most terrified about telling her father, a military intelligence officer and a professionally conservative man.
Yet he surprised her, congratulating her for being so brave. 
His help was needed to get the sex designated on Ms. Jin's national identity card switched from male to female, which she says has been the most difficult bureaucratic obstacle she has faced. 
She felt no need to change her name, which means "gold star" and unlike many names in China is not gender specific.
Ms. Jin said she had not undergone the psychological therapy now required of sex change patients in China, and had refused to take hormones for fear they would make her fat.
"I'm a dancer," she said. 
"My appearance is very important."
Ms. Jin, whose broad shoulders and strong hands hint at a masculine past, said she had become accustomed to standing out in a crowd. 
Most days, she wears a qipao, a long body-hugging gown.
"People look very carefully at me," she said. 
"I have it much harder than ordinary women. 
They can dress sloppily, but I have to be perfect every day. 
People are looking for my faults."
She also feels that she grew up in a discriminatory atmosphere as a member of an ethnic minority, since her parents are ethnic Koreans.
"Chinese people can be very racist," she said. 
"I felt a lot of discrimination as a child. 
My teachers were always telling me: 'Don't let anyone know you are Korean. 
You will never get into competition.'
"
Finding the right mate is never easy, Ms. Jin also said, pointing out that even the most open-minded Chinese men were often intimidated by a strong woman.
Although dance has been her life, Ms. Jin says she would like to become an actress and perhaps a talk-show host. 
She was recently cast as a Chinese dance instructor in a Hungarian-Chinese film, to be shot next year.
After she won an award from the Culture Ministry last year, a seal of official approval, many Government-backed organizations commissioned her to choreograph performances. 
She recently staged a performance of monks from Shaolin Monastery who practice martial arts and is currently working with a children's acrobatic troupe at the military academy where she herself studied.
"They didn't dare approach me until they knew that the Government approved," she said. 
"It has taken a lot of work, but I am finally getting there."
