
"How much do you charge for delivery?" a customer asked, leaning on the handlebars of his bicycle in front of a truck- sized heap of cabbage on the side of the street in western Beijing.
"Charge for delivery?"
Wang Zhenping fired back in a mocking tone that turned a few heads in the Horse Tail Gully vegetable market. 
"Did you just crawl out of a cave or something?
It's free!"
The great cabbage migration has begun, and it's a buyer's market.
Mountains of Chinese cabbage -- 396 million pounds by the reckoning of the Beijing authorities -- began advancing on the capital this month, as one of old Beijing's agricultural rhythms persists against the onslaught of modern supermarkets and glitzy shopping centers that have sprouted here.
Rough-hewn peasants who have been sleeping with their crops for weeks in a 100-mile arc of farmland outside Beijing have converged for the annual ritual of selling what was once a survival crop for many Chinese.
They come in trucks, horse-drawn carts and pedal-powered three-wheelers, all straining under billowing loads of cabbage that within the space of a week fill acres of sidewalks and alleyway space.
Ten thousand city workers help the farmers with a fleet of 1,400 trucks, which haul cabbage to 500 city-run markets.
From these and from hundreds of freelance cabbage heaps, the hawking begins.
"People will always buy cabbage," Mr. Wang said. 
"That's the food you get through the winter on."
Lan Wei, a 26-year-old worker in a state factory who was out marketing the other day, said, "In the past, there used to be nothing else to eat."
Smiling, she repeated a ditty of the Communist era, "When you've got your winter cabbage, in your heart you feel secure."
Buying winter cabbage is no simple chore. 
Volume is the key, as is buying early to get the best price, as little as a penny per pound.
"It used to be that people would get in long lines and really stock up on the stuff -- 400 to 500 pounds," Ms. Lan said. 
It was stacked on balconies and in stairwells and hung outside windows as a strategic food reserve for every family.
By December it freezes and turns black from the coal soot that makes China's wintertime air famous for its density, but Beijingers just peel away the outside leaves and plop it in boiling water.
"You can fry it, you can make it into dumplings, you can put it into soup," said Wang Yanhong, a young woman who works for an American company in Beijing. 
She defended it against the disdain of today's youth in China.
"It's not that all young people don't like it," she said, "It's the same as any vegetable. 
If you eat it every day, you'll get sick of it."
Ms. Lan said that "in recent years, a lot of cabbage hasn't been sold."
The reason is that prosperity, greenhouse farming and year-round vegetable crops shipped from southern China have cut into the northern custom of stocking up on baicai, which in Chinese literally means "white vegetable."
(Chinese cabbage is not the soccer-ball-shaped stuff familiar in the West. 
The Chinese version is cylindrical, with broad white leaves that trend toward a green crown.)
But there seems to be a larger cultural shift afoot.
"Of course, young people don't like cabbage as much as the older generation does," said Hu Bei, 23, another shopper in western Beijing, "but it's also that lots of young people are too lazy to cook, especially the ones who are earning high salaries or working for foreign enterprises."
Many newly well-off Chinese simply identify the annual cabbage haul as a relic of past privation. 
And to the young, it seems downright unfashionable.
But if anything has spurred the sales of this year's crop of cabbage, it has been soaring urban inflation, which has pushed up vegetable prices 50 percent in the last year. 
Even households with new income are watching their food budgets.
"In the past few years people haven't bought so much cabbage," Ms. Hu said. 
"Now, though, they're worried about the prices going up on vegetables, so they're buying more."
It may seem hard to imagine that while millions of Chinese are getting rich, millions of other Chinese seem to be slavishly following the habits of an earlier era.
"The farther north you go, the more people rely on it," Ms. Lan said.
Back at the Horse Tail Gully market, Mr. Wang, his brother and sister-in-law, Gao Aijun, 27, had been selling for three straight days and it looked like it might take two more days to reduce their cabbage heap to the dregs.
"This year it's been a pretty good harvest," Ms. Gao said, "and we'll do a lot better this year than last," perhaps with a total profit of more than $1,200 on 55,000 pounds of cabbage.
That is, Mr. Wang added with a note of caution and a sideways glance up and down the street, "depending on whether any competition arrives."
In the cabbage business, a competing heap could come around the corner at any moment, he said.
