
Fears of confrontation rose today after China's announcement that it would conduct a week of missile tests near two of Taiwan's leading seaports, threatening a partial blockade of the island's commercial shipping.
A senior Chinese official said today that China had decided to test-fire surface-to-surface ballistic missiles beginning on Friday near the northern harbor of Keelung and off the southern harbor of Kaohsiung to curb what it saw as continuing efforts by Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, toward independence for the island.
The decision reflects the Communist Party's judgment that nine months of military maneuvers aimed at intimidating Taiwan have have failed to change President Lee's behavior.
The tests, announced on Tuesday, would be Beijing's most provocative action to date leading up to Taiwan's presidential election on March 23, which Mr. Lee is expected to win. 
China published the coordinates of the testing areas and warned commercial ships and aircraft to avoid the sites.
President Lee called on Taiwan's people to remain calm and said, "We should show them whether Taiwan will be bullied by them."
But Taiwan's stock market index dropped 1.4 percent before a Government-sponsored stabilization fund was employed to support prices. 
And there were reports that shipping companies were reassessing their schedules and routes for the testing period.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto of Japan told reporters today that he had ordered an investigation into "whether this would have some negative influence on sea lanes" in Asia. 
The Japanese Foreign Ministry called in a Chinese diplomat to demand that Beijing show restraint.
Beijing released few details about the tests, but Western diplomats said they believed that the Chinese would be firing their M-class surface-to-surface missiles, which were fired in tests near Taiwan last summer, and that the missiles would be launched from military bases in the Nanjing-Shanghai area under the control of the Chinese Army's II Artillery Corps. 
The M-class missile is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead.
Tang Shubei, the deputy director of Beijing's Taiwan Affairs Office under Prime Minister Li Peng, said in an interview today that China, "through such serious actions" as the missile tests, was showing the world that Taiwan, which has been estranged from the Communist mainland since 1949, "is still part of China, and we have the determination and the capability to safeguard our sovereignty and territorial integrity."
The tests represent a significant advance toward a deliberate interruption of Taiwan's commerce by military means, something that Beijing carefully avoided in earlier military exercises, in which target zones were no closer than 80 to 100 miles from the island.
Mr. Tang's remarks are significant because they demonstrate that Beijing has rejected recent conciliatory statements by Taiwan leaders and instead is preparing to resort to a new and alarming display of military force that Mr. Tang openly acknowledged was an act of military intimidation intended to change Mr. Lee's behavior.
Mr. Tang also repeated Beijing's threat to apply direct military force, if necessary, "to safeguard the reunification of the motherland."
The remarks are also significant in clarifying that Beijing now considers all actions by Taiwan's leader to secure a seat in the United Nations, travel under Taiwan's flag to foreign capitals, win diplomatic allies among nations willing to break relations with Beijing and purchase arms from the United States as actions that could lead to war.
"Recently the Taiwan authorities have deliberately created the superficial phenomenon of relaxation," Mr. Tang said, "but at the same time they have accelerated their pace of creating two Chinas" as well as "purchasing weapons and expanding Taiwan's military forces to counter the mainland."
"This shows that the remarks of relaxation are false and their actions in pursuit of Taiwan independence are the real goal," he added.
For now, Mr. Tang and senior Foreign Ministry officials said, China considers the new military exercises as "peaceful" persuasion intended to forestall having to resort to direct military confrontation.
"We still wish to see peaceful settlement of the Taiwan issue," Mr. Tang said, "but we would not hesitate to use all means, including military means, to achieve reunification of the motherland."
In Washington the State Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said, "We believe that the plans for these missile tests are irresponsible, and we have informed the Chinese Government that there will be consequences should these tests go wrong," apparently referring to the possibility of a missile hitting Taiwan or a commercial ship or aircraft. 
Mr. Burns did not say what the consequences would be.
The 40-member House Republican Policy Committee issued a statement rejecting the Clinton Administration's ambiguity on the question of whether the United States would defend Taiwan if it came under attack from China. 
The statement said the United States should commit itself "to the defense of Taiwan" and work to deter China from "invading, attacking or blockading Taiwan."
Mr. Tang and other senior Chinese officials said Beijing's assessment was that its nine-month military intimidation campaign against Taiwan had yet to persuade President Lee to end his drive to expand Taiwan's international recognition.
"He insists on Taiwan's marching toward the international stage and making the international community recognize the Republic of China in Taiwan," Mr. Tang said, referring to the official name of the Nationalist Government, which fled to the island after losing the mainland to the Communists in 1949.
Mr. Tang dismissed statements of conciliation emanating from Taipei as "superficial."
"He is playing tricks to fool international public opinion," said Mr. Tang, referring to President Lee. 
"They are covering up their activities with beautiful words, but actually carrying out activities to create two Chinas, or one China and one Taiwan."
Mr. Tang complained in the interview that since last summer, Taiwan had established diplomatic relations with Senegal, causing a rupture between the West African country and Beijing. 
He said that President Lee had plans to "visit many countries" as part of his campaign to create an independent political image for Taiwan, and, further, that Mr. Lee was seeking to "expand Taiwan's military forces to counter the mainland."
He also added that, "as far was I know, some congressmen in the United States are pushing for another invitation for Lee Teng-hui to visit the United States in 1996," Mr. Tang said.
The Taiwan leader's visit to Cornell University in June 1995 caused a major rupture in Chinese-American relations because no Taiwan leader had been allowed to make such a visit since 1972, when the United States reaffirmed a "one China" policy and started work toward normalization of ties with Beijing.
All of these efforts, including one to win a seat for Taiwan in the United Nations, have infuriated the Communist Party leadership here and fostered concerns that a military crisis could erupt in the Taiwan Strait.
Also, on Tuesday, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang, condemned Congress for passing a State Department financing bill that carried what Mr. Shen termed "anti-China" provisions, including a section that would require the President of Taiwan to be admitted to the United States for a visit "with all appropriate courtesies."
 
