
As a Cambodian Government request for help in bringing Khmer Rouge leaders to justice formally reached the United Nations today, China indicated that it would not support the creation of an international tribunal.
"The question of Pol Pot is Cambodia's internal affair," Cui Tiankai, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in Beijing, when asked whether an international court should be established to try Khmer Rouge leaders. 
"It should be decided by Cambodians themselves without foreign interference."
In New York, Secretary General Kofi Annan relayed to the Security Council and the General Assembly a Cambodian letter signed by the country's two Prime Ministers, Prince Norodom Ranariddh and Hun Sen, requesting help in prosecuting the Khmer Rouge. 
They did not mention Pol Pot by name, however.
At least a million Cambodians were killed by the Khmer Rouge through executions, disease, dislocation and forced labor while they were in power under Pol Pot from April 1975 until January 1979.
The letter from Prince Ranariddh and Mr. Hun Sen said, "Cambodia does not have the resources or expertise to conduct this very important procedure."
Human rights specialists have said for several years that the Cambodian judicial system is in disarray, with underpaid judges routinely intimidated by politicians.
Diplomats in both the Security Council and General Assembly said that the Cambodian letter was vague, and that they needed more information and time to study the request. 
Because Pol Pot is not in international custody, the question of what to do with him is still considered hypothetical by diplomats here.
Sergei Lavrov, Russia's representative and this month's Council President, will draw the letter to the attention of members on Wednesday, but there are no plans to put the request on the agenda at this time, Mr. Lavrov's spokesman said. 
The spokesman, Dmitri Choulga, said that the Russian Government had not yet taken a stand on the issue.
The General Assembly is in special session for a conference of world leaders to assess the state of the global environment five years after the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. 
Environmental issues are the only items on its agenda.
Hans Corell, the United Nations legal counsel, has told the Secretary General that the General Assembly has the authority to create a tribunal for Cambodia. 
Some diplomats and Cambodian officials have suggested going directly to the 185-member Assembly, even though it lacks enforcement powers, should China signal that it would block a move by the Council to create a court.
The United States is not taking the lead in pressing for an international war crimes tribunal for Cambodia as it did for the ad hoc courts set up for Bosnia and Rwanda. 
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright has instead tried to persuade Canada, Denmark or the Netherlands, all of which have laws allowing the extradition and trials of people charged with committing genocide outside their borders, to take custody of Pol Pot, if that proves possible.
Today Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada, who is attending the environment summit meeting here, told reporters that his Government had not made a decision on the American request. 
"We have received a request and we are analyzing it," he said, adding that the United States had put Canada "on the spot -- but it's not for the first time."
In Washington, Nicholas Burns, the State Department spokesman, said that Washington could not confirm the status or whereabouts of Pol Pot and that talk of a rapid extradition and trial was hasty. 
"No one would be happier to extradite him and put him on trial than we, but it's not imminent," he said.
 
--------------------
Cambodian Voices Doubts
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 24 (By The New York Times) -- First Prime Minister Norodom Ranariddh voiced doubt publicly for the first time today that Khmer Rouge guerrillas who are said to have arrested Pol Pot would hand him over to the Government for trial.
If he is not turned over in the coming days, Prince Ranariddh said, "We cannot trust them -- if we could not resolve the problem in a very short period of time, we cannot talk about trust, confidence."
By Prince Ranariddh's account, the Khmer Rouge leadership in northern Cambodia has ruptured and Pol Pot is being held by guerrillas who have turned against him.
But today he described the situation as murkier than he had in the past, saying some guerrillas still support Pol Pot and that "they need to cut themselves off from Pol Pot" before deciding to hand him over.
