
A company controlled by China's central Government has bought a minority stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications, the territory's dominant telephone company and a major subsidiary of Cable and Wireless of Britain.
The buyer, China Everbright Holdings Company Ltd., which is under the umbrella of China's State Council, the Government's highest administrative body, acquired 7.74 percent of Hong Kong Telecom for $8.6 billion (Hong Kong), or $1.11 billion (United States), from Citic Pacific, a publicly listed company that is also controlled, although far more loosely, by Beijing.
Some analysts here surmised that China was using the deal to gain access, and, down the road, possibly control, of one of the world's most sophisticated telecommunications companies. 
On July 1, China will resume sovereignty of Hong Kong after 156 years of British colonial rule.
"My view is they want to get into Hong Kong Tel and pick the bones of the knowledge base," said Robert Medd, an analyst with Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. 
"It's one of the most advanced telecommunications companies in the world."
Cable and Wireless controls 59 percent of Hong Kong Telecom. 
In trading this week on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, Honk Kong Telecom shares closed at $14.50 (Hong Kong), up nearly 10 percent from a week ago. 
The share price began rising Tuesday on rumors of a deal.
Already, China has moved, through various companies here, to acquire stakes or control of a range of British-owned companies, including two airlines and a local power company. 
Many analysts contend that China intends to exercise influence over a range of industries it considers "strategic," a term that seems to encompass airlines, power and telecommunications. 
Some analysts even believe that one of Hong Kong's banks, Hang Seng Bank, the leading consumer bank in the territory, is also being scrutinized by Beijing. 
Hang Seng is a subsidiary of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, which is owned by HSBC Holdings.
In a statement issued by the company here this afternoon, Brian Smith, the chairman of Hong Kong Telecom and Cable and Wireless Group, was quoted as saying: "We welcome the proposed investment by China Everbright Holdings in Hong Kong Telecom. 
This substantial investment of Chinese state capital demonstrates continued confidence in Hong Kong Telecom and Hong Kong through the 1997 transition and beyond."
Linus Cheung, the chief executive of Hong Kong Telecom, was quoted in Hong Kong papers this morning as saying that the company has maintained a close relationship with China's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, China's regulatory agency for telecommunications.
Lloyd Fisher, the regional head of telecommunications research at BZW Asia Ltd., said that he did not know what the impact on Hong Kong Telecom would be. 
"It is basically a transfer of shares from one Chinese entity to another," he said. 
"If the company was a telecommunications firm from the mainland, that would make this transaction more significant."
But, he said, one of Everbright's publicly listed arms, China Everbright Technology, "has a stated interest in expanding into Hong Kong's telecommunications market."
From Citic's perspective, Mr. Medd said, the deal brought the company some badly needed cash. 
"Citic definitely needs to raise cash," he explained. 
"If they held onto shares of Hong Kong Tel it would be very difficult for them to do a deal. 
To do another deal they still have to go out and raise money. 
Basically from Citic's point of view it's a cash-raising exercise."
But as to the originator of the deal, Mr. Medd and others said they were uncertain. 
"I have no idea who instigated this," Mr. Medd said. 
"At that point you're starting to get into deep tea leaf reading."
