
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed with a Chinese telecommunications company to set up cellular, wireless and long-distance telephone networks in two large cities in China.
Though few details were disclosed, the deal looks likely to give BellSouth a firm footing in one of the world's mostly hotly competitive markets, starting with Beijing and the nearby industrial city of Tianjin.
BellSouth executives said they expected to establish their joint venture by early next year, but would not discuss the financial terms of the agreement, which was signed at BellSouth's Atlanta headquarters on Monday night.
The agreement, described as a memorandum of understanding, calls for a joint venture with the China United Telecommunications Corporation, a Government-backed company set up in July to install and operate basic domestic telephone services.
Marshall Neel, president of BellSouth China, said Chinese regulations ban foreign companies from directly investing in or operating telecommunications companies, so BellSouth is technically restricted to advising on and planning telephone services.
Chinese officials have said they want to add 100 million telephone lines around the country by the year 2000. 
The demand for basic and cellular telephone service is so large it is difficult to measure: China currently has only one telephone for every 33 households, compared with almost one in every household in the United States.
BellSouth plans to start its business in China with a cellular network, which is relatively easy to set up, but for which there is a limited market. 
Getting a cellular phone in Beijing today costs nearly $2,000, according to Mr. Neel. Installation of a home telephone costs about $800, a significant expense for most Chinese citizens.
China Unicom, as the Chinese partner is called for short, is described by American analysts as a promising company backed by Chinese investors that is starting out in a lucrative but still uncertain field.
"In a developing country, the important thing is to have the right partner," Frank J. Governali, an analyst at CS First Boston, said. 
"You don't go by the technology, but by the local contacts they have."
BellSouth will probably help China Unicom negotiate with foreign equipment suppliers, coordinate telephone standards, and design telephone networks, Mr. Governali said.
Beijing and Tianjin already have telephone systems that are more advanced than in the rest of the country. 
But the demand there for more telephones is still great, analysts said.
BellSouth is the nation's second-biggest provider of mobile telephones after the McCaw Communications Corporation, Tim Horan, an analyst at Smith Barney, said. 
BellSouth has more than 4.5 million cellular customers and also services more than 19 million telephone lines in the Southeastern United States.
