
<DC>Has there been in the last thousand years a single best time to be alive?
In this age of faith in progress, it's easy to answer quickly: Yes, right now. 
But does that almost automatic response stand up to informed comparison with past times?
To answer this question, The New York Times Magazine convened a panel, moderated by the longtime New York Times columnist Russell Baker, comprising the following scholars:
Thomas Cahill, author of "The Gifts of the Jews" and "How the Irish Saved Civilization."
Ann Douglas, professor of English and comparative literature at Columbia, and author of "Terrible Honesty: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920's."
Elaine Pagels, professor of religion at Princeton, and author of "The Origin of Satan."
Orlando Patterson, professor of sociology at Harvard, and author of "Rituals of Blood: Consequences of Slavery in Two American Centuries."
Jonathan Spence, professor of history at Yale, and author of "The Chan's Great Continent: China in Western Minds."
Russell Baker: None of us are living in this time by choice. 
We're here because of somebody else's decision. 
Maybe, given our druthers, we would prefer to be somewhere else -- I would bet in most cases not in the future. 
The idea is to debate a little about the ideal time to live in, if you had your own choice. 
I suppose some people would say this is the ideal time. 
I'm prepared to argue against that, but for the most part I'm here to listen to your opinions. 
Mr. Spence, you would probably like to go back in time?
Jonathan Spence: Absolutely. 
I would be very interested to live my life in Hangzhou. 
I know where my villa is going to be: on the west side of the lake in the hills, looking down on what was then a totally unpolluted lake, and what was a kind of large and prosperous rural pleasure resort. 
A beautiful city.
Baker: What year is it on the Christian calendar?
Spence: I would be born around 1540. 
One of the problems here is I'd like to have a bit of money. 
I don't want too much, because the official agents from Beijing would take it away from me. 
This was one of the most urbane and cultured times in all of Chinese history. 
I've always studied the Manchu Dynasty and modern China and the revolution, and that was from 1644. 
But I would like to live in the Ming Dynasty -- not knowing, of course, that the Ming was going to fall. 
So I do need to die shortly before 1644. 
That was a great time of scholarship, and it was also a great time for scholarship for women. 
If it's all right, I want to be married to my real-life wife at the same time, but my Chinese language would be much better in this life. 
As a couple, we're always going to be able to play elegant poetry games, acrostic games, word games that the Chinese have always loved to play. 
And the reading -- the texts about that 16th-century period in Hangzhou show an amazingly energized society. 
People read very widely. 
It's a magnificent period in painting. 
The food is magnificent. 
It is not a slave society. 
Booze is available but not excessive. 
It's preopium, no heavy narcotics. 
And the distribution of food in that region is efficient. 
It was a rich time to live.
Baker: It sounds like a paradise. 
How about you, Mr. Cahill?
Thomas Cahill: I think that one of the most extraordinary things that must have happened in the history of archeology was the opening of the first Neanderthal grave in which the archeologists discovered that the Neanderthals had buried their dead with flowers -- with bright red flowers. 
At that moment, the archeologists knew that the Neanderthals were human, because they used symbols, they used language. 
They were using the language of flowers in a way that no dog or cat or dolphin had ever done. 
And given that, I think that the moment of the past I'd be most interested in -- and which I confess is outside the thousand years -- is the moment when we became human, the moment when we began to use language, whoever that "we" is and however we consider that language. 
That is the moment I would like to have been present for.
Sticking within the confines of the last thousand years, I find myself drawn to the 14th century. 
I would love to have gone to a Christmas party in medieval London with Geoffrey Chaucer. 
I would love to have been around when Giotto began to paint -- this man, influenced by the spiritual realism of Francis of Assisi, asking himself: What do human beings really look like?
And then trying to make them in that way. 
I would love to have been there when Joan of Arc began to muster the troops.
Baker: They burned her.
Elaine Pagels: I think that this would be a fascinating journey, but I'd want to go with a full set of inoculations and an American passport.
Cahill: That's a whole other thing. 
How long do you want to be present?
Baker: That's a central problem. 
Since this is an intellectual exercise, I think you have to assume that you're going to be part of the culture of the time. 
We'd all like to cruise around and watch Columbus come ashore.
Cahill: Well, even so, I would still put myself in these times that I'm talking about.
Ann Douglas: But if you had to pick one spot?
Cahill: Well, I find it difficult to reduce myself to one spot.
Douglas: But we all are reduced to one spot. 
And you'd live how long?
Thirty years in about 1390?
You'd hardly have time to get around to see everything you said you wanted to see.
Spence: In Hangzhou, there were long-lived people, maybe 90-year-olds, edging 100. 
They also had wonderful food, which didn't even require teeth!
Delicious rice pilaf dishes, soft lotus-root dishes.
Baker: Mr. Patterson?
Orlando Patterson: I chose three periods, excluding the period following the civil rights movement in America. 
That has obviously been the best time for Afro-Americans, but sticking to it would rid the discussion of any fun. 
Working backward, my third choice would have been to be a moderately prosperous New England farmer who lived around 1750 to 1830 -- embracing the Revolutionary period. 
I would have been about 26 in 1776, so I would have fought in the Revolutionary War. 
I would like to have had the opportunity to talk intellectually with Madison, to club with Hamilton, to tell Jefferson what a fraud I thought he was -- that really, it's not fair that he should have a place in history just because he wrote a great paragraph.
My second choice is to have lived in Tokugawa Japan, about the 18th century. 
I would not want to have been a samurai. 
By then, they were no longer warriors; they were basically quasi bureaucrats. 
And I wouldn't particularly care for the official culture that the shogun imposed, although it was quite fascinating -- those tea ceremonies. 
They would have been far too restrictive for me. 
I would like to have been a moderately prosperous merchant around the 1730's, participating in what the Japanese call the floating world, which is a kind of counterculture to the official world imposed by the shogunate. 
They had a ball!
I'd have been drawn to Kabuki dramas, to the fashion, to the way they subverted the official ideology so that when the shogun said, "You can no longer wear fancy clothes; you have to wear cotton if you're a merchant," they wore cotton on the outside and silk on the inside. 
I think the life expectancy may well have been much better living in Japan at that time than in Europe. 
And it was a very peaceful period. 
They threw out the Europeans and were able to develop their own culture.
Now I come to my first choice. 
It's in the 14th century. 
It's a city-state that produced some of the most beautiful art in the world. 
Can you guess?
Pagels: Siena?
Patterson: No. I wouldn't want to be in Renaissance Italy if you paid me. 
There were towns where a third to a half of the population was dropping dead from the plague!
The little city-state I had in mind would have been the town of Ife in Yorubaland, in what's now western Nigeria, somewhere about the mid-to-late 14th century. 
I would want to have been a sculptor, one of the people who produced those incredible bronze heads or the terra-cotta work that you now can see in the British Museum. 
Again, the life expectancy would have quite possibly been higher than for a working man in Europe at that time.
Pagels: Would you rather have been a man?
Patterson: I'd rather be a man because the sculptors were almost all men. 
I wouldn't want to have been a sculptor in Benin, which had a great artistic tradition, because they had this ghastly sacrificial religion that was almost as bad as the Aztecs'.
Douglas: We're all imagining ourselves as very privileged in relation to the society, which is fine; we're very privileged in the society in which we live, so that's a natural position.
Patterson: These sculptors were not very privileged people. 
They were just comfortable.
Douglas: All I'm saying is that I would not want to be a serf. 
I think that what matters most to me is to live in an age where there is conscious change going on, and where I as a woman could play a part in it. 
In other words, if I lived in 1789 in France or in the American colonies in 1779, I might not be able to play a direct part in the Revolution. 
So the time for me would be in 19th-century New England, the 1830's, 40's and 50's, at the time of the abolitionist movement, at the time that women become professional authors in this country. 
They could actually make a living not only as schoolteachers but also as writers. 
Some of the women writers of the time were in fact the main support of their families. 
I can't really push myself back much before that period unless I imagine myself as an abbess in the 15th century, and maybe I could take part in the Protestant Reformation or in a devotional return to Catholicism. 
I don't need to be a leader. 
I don't need to be a martyr. 
I just need to have some chance to go from my space, whatever that meant, into a wider world.
Pagels: It's true that when you make this kind of choice, you really do imagine yourself there. 
That's why I was thinking of being someone who could move between Egypt, Rome and Jerusalem about the years 140 to 240. 
Easier to be a man, but there were women who did that. 
And what I realized I love about that period is that what we think of as Western culture is not formed yet, and the interchange between India and Egypt and what is thought of as the East, Jerusalem, is very open. 
We're looking at a time of Greco-Buddhist art. 
You see the trade routes going back and forth between Greece and the East and the Buddha being shaped by the forms of Greek sculpture and vice versa. 
And I find that enormously exciting, that interchange of language and cultures and people.
Patterson: But what period would you choose in our millennium?
Pagels: It would have to be America from 1880 to 1920. 
That time is, again, when you begin to see enormous interchange culturally.
Baker: It's interesting, 30 or 40 years ago, everybody would have said, "Oh, I'd love to have lived in 18th-century Europe."
Nobody here is interested in the 18th century. 
What about Mozart, the French Revolution -- Bliss was to be alive in that dawn," or whatever.
Patterson: It would be nice to have been a bourgeois gentleman in Holland during the golden 17th and early 18th centuries, having your portrait done by one of their great painters, but the bastards were involved with the slave trade. 
The same was true of the British. 
You think about being an entrepreneur in late 18th- and 19th-century England. 
You saw this incredible transformation, the Industrial Revolution; the steam engine and all the rest. 
The trouble is, one can't help thinking about the plight of the displaced masses and the kids who were being sent down into the mines.
Baker: I wonder if I could change the focus to the idea of progress. 
Do we all believe in progress?
Spence: I was going to comment on that. 
It seems to me it's not so much comfort versus progress that we're talking about; it's those who actually are drawn to live in a period of extraordinary change and struggle and those who, I think, want a period of enormous cultural subtlety and development. 
I tilt toward the latter, a time in which the culture is still immensely lively, but the idea of progress would not exactly be the point. 
In China you'd be constantly searching for deeper wisdom about the culture and so you would study all your life. 
I was thinking about Elaine's remarks about meeting people from different cultures. 
One reason I was drawn to this late Ming period, the 1590's, is that when I am living in Hangzhou, I would be one of the first people to meet Matteo Ricci -- a most highly sensitive Jesuit with a magnificent scientific education. 
Not only would I be testing my culture against this extraordinary visionary from the West, but I'd also be trying to understand my own culture, for there is an intense revival of Buddhism, which looks at its own texts with rigor and begins to try and understand the Christian message. 
So it would be a challenging period but not quite as challenging as some of us want.
Cahill: I would speak for progress. 
We are at the end of the bloodiest of all centuries, to be sure, but I think there is a consciousness of the necessity for peace. 
It is not a universal consciousness, by any means. 
It's not any more universal at the moment than was Giotto's consciousness of rounded human figures in the 14th century, or than was Joan of Arc's idea of a united France or of the possibilities of what women could do. 
To give an even more precise example, the priest John Ball went up and down the lanes in England in the 14th century, preaching a sermon from the text "When Adam delved and Eve span/Who was then the gentleman?" which was really the first attack on the European class system. 
And now, here we are, sitting around the table, relatively devoid of class.
Pagels: Can I say something about progress?
All of us are going to be very careful about any use of a word that's associated with social Darwinism and 19th-century optimism. 
But I have to think, in specific areas, who could deny it?
First of all, I think of medical progress. 
With the best medical care in the year 160, the Emperor of Rome and his wife had 13 children and 9 of them died before they grew up; Mozart's wife had 9 children and I believe 7 of them died. 
And that is just taken for granted in so many cultures. 
Of course, there's also technological progress that has changed the nature of labor for millions of people in parts of the world, and it's going to continue. 
Most important is what I see happening today: more and more, people are impelled by communications into confrontation with one another. 
It's much harder to be unaware of people who are different from you. 
There's a different sense of human society and humankind.
Patterson: With respect to the idea of equality, one can see a measure of progress emerging, certainly in the West over more than a couple of centuries. 
But progress is not linear. 
When you look at a place like England, you see clear social and political progress being made in the late 17th century, but by mid-18th century, you realize that the aristocrats have taken over the electorate, which was smaller in 1740 than it was in 1690. 
The principle of spiritual equality, at least within Christianity, is another case. 
Of course, if you weren't a Christian, you weren't equal.
Baker: Can I shift the focus of the subject to the effect of population?
When I was born, the population in this country was 120 million people. 
It's now 260 million. 
In my lifetime it has more than doubled, and I'm aware -- I'm 71 years old -- of being in a crowd suddenly. 
I'm aware that in a very brief time, this particular place has changed rapidly. 
What about China in your age?
We're talking about a population a.
Spence: Their population in 1540 would have been around 150 million, and they were very used to running cities with more than a million. 
So much of their political strategy was to live together in harmony. 
The basic idea was that people could walk down crowded streets without getting in fights all the time; that eight people could live in a small room, covering three or four generations. 
I should add that the Tokugawa, the urban society that Mr. Patterson was talking about, was also a crowded society. 
Perhaps one of the proofs of civilization is that we can live together in large numbers in crowded spaces.
Patterson: There's one big difference between rural and urban conditions. 
An urban condition is always one in which there is greater freedom and equality. 
There is a German saying, "Town air makes free."
It's no accident that all the great cultures are really urban cultures. 
This is true of Edo -- later Tokyo -- which was the world's most densely peopled city in the early 18th century. 
It's also true of Ife. 
It's no accident that the Yorubans are the most urbanized of Africans, and that it's there that you find this incredible art and religion.
Spence: We forget that open spaces used to be terrifying. 
To go outside the city was to be in a world of terror. 
It wasn't this nice national park; it was full of dangerous animals and silences and dark places.
Baker: A last question: Doesn't the millennium make us think of the artificiality of the codes we live by?
I once lived in England back when they had the old sterling system -- 12 pence to the shilling, 20 shillings to the pound -- and I had to do the office bookkeeping every month. 
It was maddening. 
And I thought, Why have we chosen to parcel out our time artificially in millenniums rather than by base 12?
Spence: Which the Chinese use -- base 12 combined with base 10. 
That made sense to the 16th-century Chinese -- 12- and 10-year learning cycles overlapping, so you get a 60-year period. 
There'd be no point to a millennium or a century in China.
Patterson: Like many other aspects of life, the millennium is arbitrarily chosen and constructed, but once constructed, it becomes meaningful.
Pagels : And the millennium, the idea of a sort of expectation that something will happen -- catastrophic, extraordinary, terrific -- is part of our whole tradition.
