
A last-minute lobbying campaign by President Clinton and his Cabinet succeeded tonight in heading off a potentially embarrassing vote by the House of Representatives to restrict trade with China as a way to punish Beijing for reported human rights violations.
The House defeated, 270 to 158, a proposal to impose steep tariffs on imports from factories owned by the Chinese military. 
The original bill would have banned such imports.
The issue is one the White House had hoped it had put behind it when President Clinton decided in May to renew China's trading status even though Beijing had made few of the changes sought by Washington in its human rights behavior.
 
A Link to Human Rights
But the House, where support for trade sanctions on China has always been stronger than in the Senate, wanted to reopen the issue. 
Even in the face of a likely defeat in the Senate and a certain Presidential veto, House members hoped that passage of the bill would force the President to reconsider the question next year when China's trade status came up for annual review.
The significance of today's action lay in the willingness of many Representatives to vote for the first time to break the link between human rights and trade, after repeatedly voting by overwhelming majorities in recent years to establish that link.
President Clinton tried to sever the connection with his decision in May. 
After heavy lobbying from big American corporations, who feared retaliation by Beijing if Washington did not maintain trade access, the President announced that human rights in China could be improved more through commerce than by isolating Beijing.
Under a 1974 law aimed at helping Jews to emigrate from the Soviet Union, the President must review trade relations with Communist countries each year based on whether they allow free emigration. 
House Democrats have sought to have other human rights considerations included in the annual reviews.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, and other sponsors of the tougher bill had sought to re-establish the link between trade and human rights.
