
Even though the annual Congressional vote on renewing China's most-favored-nation trading status is still several months away, the Boeing Company has begun its lobbying blitz in Congress, along with a host of other American corporations that have billions to lose if the anti-China mood rolling through Washington vents itself in some form of trade action.
Boeing -- America's largest exporter -- is repeating its familiarpitch: that if Washington makes a misstep, China will simply do more business with Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium. 
At stake, they argue, is a $4 billion order for 100 planes that Airbus is already negotiating in Beijing this week, in preparation for a visit to China next month by President Jacques Chirac of France.
Airbus's best negotiating card may be France's decision two weeks ago to vote against a resolution at the United Nations Human Rights conference in Geneva condemning Beijing. 
The United States supported the resolution, which failed.
"When President Chirac arrives in Beijing in a few weeks, I am sure that he will be rewarded for that stance," said Larry S. Dickenson, Boeing's vice president for international sales.
Every year Congress has threatened to revoke China's privileges, which simply amount to the normal trading preferences that the United States extends to virtually every country in the world, save Cuba, North Korea and a few other rogue nations. 
And every year for 15 years, Congress has voted to renew China's most-favored-nation status. 
Last year the vote was overwhelming.
This time, though, the politics of trade with China has changed. 
For the first time, the Christian right has entered the fray, arguing that renewal of the trade privileges has become a moral issue. 
"The recent campaign-funding scandals have shown us that Beijing, while loudly protesting against our meddling in their internal affairs, is fully willing to meddle in our internal affairs," Gary Bauer, the president of the Family Research Council, a conservative group, said in this week's issue of Slate magazine.
"Companies controlled by China's People's Liberation Army stand accused of smuggling arms to L.A. street gangs," he said. 
"This should send a chill down every American spine. 
Can anyone believe that China's rulers would go on placidly trading with us if we had armed China's student democracy movement?"
The involvement of groups like Mr. Bauer's has created an odd alliance in Congress: labor union champions and liberals who have long complained that American jobs are being sacrificed to China find themselves joining forces with conservatives who describe China as a current economic threat and a future military threat.
"We've never seen anything quite like this," said a White House official who declined to speak for attribution. 
"This is driving a real wedge that leaves us with only the moderate Democrats and the moderate Republicans."
But interviews with several executives involved in the lobbying effort suggest that while the politics has changed this year, the lobbying effort by major businesses has yet to adjust. 
Executives say they are confounded about how to deal with the allegations that China was seeking to influence the 1996 election here.
"We don't want to discuss it publicly," said a senior executive of Ford Motor Company, whose written appeal to Congress points out that the Chinese auto industry is expected to become the "third- or fourth-largest in the world" by 2010, and argues that "it is time that U.S. manufacturers establish a strong, competitive presence in China."
"Whatever we say, we are either going to anger the Administration, the Republicans or the Chinese," the executive said.
What is clear is that American business has given up any hope of winning "permanent" most-favored-nation status for China, which would end the annual debate over trade and China's human rights record.
Instead, it is focusing on insuring that negotiations between China and the United States over China's entry to the World Trade Organization, the club of trading nations, do not collapse under the weight of the Congressional mood this year.
"If we lose the opportunity to get China into a rule-based organization like the W.T.O. now," said Mr. Dickenson of Boeing, "it will take us another five years to get back to the spot we're at today."      
