
The Communist Party theology here these days is that the economic reforms begun by Deng Xiaoping should prepare China for the next hundred years and that any Chinese leader who tries to reverse them will be overthrown.
But a new and ominous portrait of Mr. Deng's economic program has begun to appear here, suggesting that latent political opposition to the 90-year-old paramount leader is beginning to emerge. 
A book that was circulated during the summer suggested that Mr. Deng had led the country into a "trap" of rapid economic growth, where socialist values were eroding and the control systems that used to keep peasants productively engaged on the land were being destroyed.
That heretical challenge to party policy appeared in "Looking at China Through a Third Eye," and while the book's authorship is mysterious, its publication suggests cracks in the ideological conformity strictly enforced by Mr. Deng and his chosen heirs during the last five years.
The book said that China's 800 million peasants "are like a living volcano, which could erupt at any time," and it suggested that Mr. Deng's economic policies have neglected to provide any substitute social controls to prevent mass migration to the cities by peasants who might "stir up trouble."
The debate over the merits of establishing a "socialist market economy" was won by Mr. Deng's reformers. 
But Communist conservatives, repulsed by corruption, what they call "money worship" and the movement toward individualism, find fault with Mr. Deng's China. 
That faction, sometimes called Maoist or leftist, remains a potent force within the Chinese leadership and is expected to figure prominently in the power struggle that follows Mr. Deng's death.
The "Third Eye" book, now banned because of its "negativism," captured the attention of China's intellectuals during the summer. 
The publishing house in Shanxi Province identified the author as a "world famous German Sinologist" whose name is transliterated from the Mandarin as Luo Yi Ninggeer, and the book cover bears that name.
German academics are at a loss, however, to recognize such a colleague. 
The German Embassy here has conducted an unsuccessful computer search, and no one has stepped forward to clarify the matter.
Sensing conspiracy, many Chinese have looked in the direction of the best-known writer with similar views, a 45-year-old political essayist named He Xin. 
Mr. He is an erstwhile adviser to Prime Minister Li Peng and a defender of the military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement in 1989.
Mr. He, in an interview, conceded that he was familiar with the book and that it mirrored many of his ideas. 
Some Chinese have noted that he has seemed incapable of explicitly denying authorship. 
The closest he came in 90 minutes of conversation was, "The book has nothing to do with myself."
Whether or not Mr. He is the author, the anti-Deng forces are apparently preparing a case that blames Mr. Deng's reforms for the negative aspects of China's social and economic transformation.
The nature of Mr. He's assault is indirect, though. 
While heaping praise on Mr. Deng, Mr. He nonetheless made the case that a new disaster is building. 
He said, for example, that the genius of Mao Zedong was in political mobilization of the masses to do his will. 
Mao's disastrous economic policies of the Great Leap Forward resulted in starvation for 100 million Chinese peasants, 20 million to 30 million of whom died from 1959 to 1961. 
But Mr. He credited Mao for preventing "a famine of such great scale" from causing "a great disturbance" in modern China's history.
The Deng reforms, he said, freed tens of millions of peasants from the agricultural communes of the Mao era, and these peasants established the household and township-level industries that ignited China's economic boom. 
Once they were freed, however, Mr. He observed, the ability of the state to control their movement and channel their energies started to break down.
Now, he said, China's peasants are overwhelming an economy that lacks the capital and technology to provide jobs for all of the surplus labor. 
But the labor force keeps growing because China's population is growing by 15 million to 17 million a year.
What is Mr. He's solution?
"The problem is very complex, and so far I haven't found an answer for this," he said.
To ask the question, however, many intellectuals say, is to point at Mr. Deng's reforms as the source of the problem.
