
The Chinese Government and Merrill Lynch & Company patted themselves on the back yesterday after successfully completing a $1 billion offering of 10-year bonds. 
But a number of money managers who sat out the offering questioned whether investors might be at substantial risk because they became caught up in the excitement of the Communist giant's inching toward a market economy.
"Many people are eager to be involved with the Chinese," said James Calmas, a vice president of Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston, which did not buy the bonds. 
"And there's clearly plenty of economic growth to be had, but I don't know if you're being paid to take the political risk. 
What if China falls apart?
What if we have another Tiananmen Square?"
Indeed, the sale came just a day after the Clinton Administration reiterated its criticisms of China's human rights policies and said Beijing had a long way to go to earn a renewal of its special trading privileges with the United States. 
The loss of these trade concessions would be a serious blow to the Chinese economy.
 
12% Annual Growth
The bonds, offered at 6.5 percent, were priced Tuesday at $99.406, to yield 6.582, 85 basis points more than a 10-year Treasury note. 
At the heart of the prospectus prepared for the offerings, and clearly on the minds of many investors, is the fast-growing Chinese economy, which has expanded at a rate of 12 percent annually in the last two years.
Mr. Calmas noted that South Korea's debt had a higher credit rating than China's and its economic fundamentals are sounder, yet South Korean debt trades at 100 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, above United States Treasury securities.
Thomas G. Wolfe, director of fixed-income research at Neuberger & Berman, was another skeptic who passed on the deal. 
"Our feeling is that the political risk in China is difficult to quantify, and the bonds just don't provide value at that level," he said.
In his firm's view, he continued: "You can't just look at the financial numbers; you've got to look at the political risk. 
How do they work through a financial revolution without changing the political system at all, with a small dictatorship running the country?"
And Robert Citrone, portfolio manager of Fidelity Investments' New Markets Income Fund, said: "We think the fundamental levels are improving in China, but we're much more interested in buying Mexico, at about 160 basis points. 
And on the higher-quality side, we can buy Thailand and Malaysia for 70, 75 points. 
We feel that's better value than China at plus 85."
Yet a billion dollars' worth of investors clearly did not agree. 
Winthrop H. Smith Jr., the chairman of Merrill Lynch International, said at a news conference at Merrill Lynch's headquarters in lower Manhattan that there was "considerable interest on the part of retail investors."
He said that he did not have final figures from the syndicate that joined in underwriting China's offering but that Merrill Lynch's share was placed 60 percent with American investors, 20 percent with Europeans and 20 percent with Asians.
"I'm very pleased this issue has been a great success," Jin Renqing, China's Vice Minister of Finance, said at the news conference.
Both men said the global offering, which was preceded by a financial review that led to higher ratings for Chinese debt from two agencies, would pave the way for additional bond and equity offerings. 
Mr. Jin declined to provide any details, saying they awaited Government decisions in March.
Mr. Jin said the $1 billion raised this week would be used to improve China's energy, transportation and communications systems. 
Asked if the rapidly expanding economy, and the infusion of cash, raised a specter of inflation, he said, no, the bond offering "will help keep the momentum in the economy."
Mr. Smith of Merrill Lynch noted that energy supplies, railways and roads and telecommunications were all "bottlenecks in the Chinese economy."
Easing the problems, he said, would help combat inflation by lowering the cost of goods produced.
Mr. Jin said China currently carried about $70 billion in debt.
