
Ten tons of explosives are sitting in boxes in a warehouse in Millington waiting to be carted to the waterfront in Jersey City to be detonated this week.
The explosives experts who will be setting off the charges hope the results will generate a lot of "Ohhhs" and "Ahhhs" from those watching -- and impress the judges who will be awarding $25,000 in prize money. 
It's all part of an international fireworks competition at Liberty State Park, which begins tomorrow and runs through Saturday.
The hosts of the event, Garden State Fireworks, in Millington in Morris County, say the display will be bigger than any seen on July 4 at local boardwalks or municipal fairgrounds.
"These displays will be so enormous and so well put together, you can't see them anywhere else," said August Santore Jr., who put the competition and festival together. 
"These companies are here to show off their stuff. 
This is the best they've got."
Mr. Santore, a lawyer, is the son of August Santore Sr. and the nephew of Nunzio Santore, brothers who own Garden State Fireworks, one of the largest fireworks manufacturers in the United States. 
The company, which won several fireworks competitions in other countries during the 1980's and 1990's, is the host of the Jersey City event but not a competitor. 
Garden State will put on a fireworks demonstration Saturday night, when awards for displays seen earlier in the week are announced.
International fireworks competitions, featuring some of the more than 1,000 fireworks companies in the world, have long been held in other countries, usually sponsored by the tourism industry in the host country. 
For this week's competition, a company from China will demonstrate its expertise Monday, one from Spain on Tuesday, Germany on Wednesday, Switzerland on Thursday and Italy on Friday.
"The last time we competed, we set off fireworks that would have retailed for $300,000 to $500,000," Mr. Santore said. 
"No town can afford that for a Fourth of July display or to put on the boardwalk. 
That's why you can't see these things anywhere else.
"Each country has a little different style. 
The Spanish are famous for large rockets. 
But in a commercial display, a rocket might be 12 inches tall. 
For this display their rockets will be six to eight feet tall," he said. 
"A shell used in a normal display might be three pounds. 
The ones our company will be using Saturday will be 90 pounds. 
The burst will last 9 or 10 seconds instead of 1 or 2 seconds."
Teams of up to 25 people from each country will begin long before daybreak on the day they are to perform to set up the fireworks, which will be set off from an electronic firing panel 750 feet from the shells and rockets. 
A panel of nine pyrotechnics experts will judge the displays based on the overall presentation, colors, complexity, artistry, the rhythm and momentum of firing, and variety. 
The shape and color combination that emerges with each explosion depends on what chemicals are used and how they are packed around the central bursting charge, Mr. Santore said.
In addition to the fireworks competition that will be held at 9:30 P.M. each night, there will be games for children, and a variety of bands performing each day starting at 1 P.M. Saturday and at 3 P.M. the other days. 
International foods will be for sale, and there will be roving magicians and professional sports demonstrations. 
Part of the proceeds will go to the New Jersey Special Olympics. 
Admission is $12; $6 for children under 12.
 
The Rockets' Willow Glare
Nunzio Santore, a co-owner of Garden State Fireworks and the chairman of the jury for the International Fireworks Competition at Liberty State Park, discussed the characteristics of fireworks from the five competing countries.
 
CHINA -- Tomorrow. 
Fireworks use both very bright colors and pastels. 
Favored patterns are the peony and the denser chrysanthemum. 
Known for the perfect symmetry of these round patterns. 
Use less noise than entries from the other countries.
 
SPAIN -- Tuesday. 
Bright colors. 
Mainly round patterns, though not as symmetrical as the Chinese. 
Known for ground-to-air effects: giant skyrockets or rockets in big clusters. 
Noise -- booms and whistles -- is the chief feature.
 
GERMANY -- Wednesday. 
Exceptionally bright colors using magnesium. 
Patterns include serpentine shapes and twinkling stars. 
Known for shells with multiple components.
 
SWITZERLAND -- Thursday. 
Some magnesium-based colors. 
Known for wide variety, which might include rockets, large Roman candles, large breaking shells, and parachutes that make effects seem to float.
 
ITALY -- Friday. 
Fireworks favor softer colors like willow, a golden green. 
Specialty is multibreak shells, in which a rocket releases patterns at various points on its path. 
Noisier than any other except Spain's.
