
When Stephen Burrows of Anheuser-Busch traveled here recently to meet the general manager of the Tsingtao Brewery, he saw it as a chance to get acquainted with the boss of China's most famous beer company. 
His host, Peng Zuo Yi, saw it differently.
"I told him why so many foreign brands have failed in China," Mr. Peng said. 
"They can't run their factories in China any longer. 
They're all losing money."
Anheuser-Busch may be the largest brewer in the world, but in this seaside city where Chinese beer was born, Mr. Burrows was treated more like a vanquished intruder than a fellow beer merchant.
"We have struggled," Mr. Burrows acknowledged. 
"Struggling is something that happens when you go into a volatile market like China."
Mr. Peng's solution is an alliance between Anheuser-Busch and Tsingtao (pronounced CHING-dow), in which the companies would distribute each other's beer in China and the United States. 
Mr. Burrows, the chief executive of Anheuser-Busch International, called it premature to talk about such a deal. 
But he agreed that Tsingtao had changed markedly -- and for the better -- in the last five years.
"Tsingtao is a different company," he said. 
"It seems like they've got a clearer strategy."
As China stands nervously on the threshold of World Trade Organization membership, it will need companies like Tsingtao to push through the open door. 
Once a bloated state-owned enterprise, Tsingtao has transformed itself into a confident competitor. 
By learning marketing skills from its foreign rivals and exploiting its home-field advantages, Tsingtao has managed to stake out a dominant position in the crowded and chaotic Chinese beer market.
In a twist on the much-feared foreign invasion of China, Tsingtao is now negotiating to buy three breweries from their foreign owners. 
While a rarity, Tsingtao is not the only Chinese company to make it in the global economy. 
The Haier Group, an appliance maker also based here, began exporting refrigerators in 1992. 
It now has more than a quarter of the small-refrigerator market in the United States, and recently built a factory in South Carolina. 
Almost bankrupt in 1984, Haier had $3.2 billion in sales last year.
"People think that with China's entry into the W.T.O., Chinese national industry will be completely destroyed," Mr. Peng, who is 55, said. 
"I don't think so. 
I think the success of Tsingtao shows that competition can make us better."
Haier's chairman and chief executive, Zhang Ruimin, puts it differently. 
"We decided we didn't want to be eaten by the wolf," he said. 
"We wanted to dance with the wolf."
To be sure, many Chinese companies will be eaten by the wolves, which is why China's joy about the world's club of trading nations is tinged with apprehension. 
In the most sclerotic state enterprises, the feeling is closer to dread. 
Yet, in this upwardly mobile city on the country's northern coast, the big brewery and Haier are held up as models of how China can pull down the walls that surround its economy and still keep the predators at bay.
"We have a rich variety of manufacturing companies in this city," said Wang Jiarui, Qingdao's business-like mayor. 
"Some will jump into the world market; others will be edged out of it. 
But I still think there are more opportunities than drawbacks to joining the W.T.O."
Qingdao's namesake company, Tsingtao Brewery Ltd. 
-- the company retains the old transliteration of the city's name -- was founded by Germans, who colonized the place in 1903. 
The original brewery sits across the street from a park where German soldiers were once quartered; company lore has it that the beer was meant to slake the men's thirst.
Tsingtao was China's first beer, and it is still highly prized here. 
Critics praise the freshness of its water, which is piped from the Laoshan, the mountain nearby. 
Qingdao is steeped in the folkways of the German beer industry. 
The company built an ersatz German village on the outskirts of town for its annual beer festival. 
And if you squint, Qingdao's sturdy stone houses with steeply slanted roofs look almost Bavarian.
In 1979, as China was opening again to the outside world, Beijing made Tsingtao the official export beer. 
It is now a staple in Chinese restaurants from Seattle to Stuttgart.
The Chinese government capitalized on this fame in 1993 by selecting Tsingtao as one of the first companies to be allowed to sell shares on the Hong Kong stock market. 
The initial public offering was successful, but Tsingtao's state owners ordered it to give some of the proceeds to other troubled state companies. 
This made it an emblem of the dangers of investing in corporate China.
Shortly after that black eye, Tsingtao started facing competition from another quarter. 
Enticed by the prospect of more than a billion beer-swilling Chinese, more than 60 foreign brands -- including Budweiser, Foster's and San Miguel -- poured in. 
Teaming up with Chinese investors, they bought and built breweries all over China. 
They also spent millions on splashy advertising and marketing campaigns, next to which the Tsingtao name seemed faded.
The foreign brewers priced their beer anywhere from 60 cents to $1 a bottle, compared with about 40 cents for Tsingtao.
Around the same time, local governments began brewing beers that were even cheaper than Tsingtao and popular with frugal consumers. 
For example, Yanjing, a beer brewed in Beijing, sells for only 30 cents a bottle. 
Some lesser-known local beers go for as little as 12 cents. 
After decades of dominance, Tsingtao found itself overtaken in market share by Yanjing.
Adding to its problems, Tsingtao relied on an outdated network of distributors who did not push the brand hard enough.
"Our sales agents tended to focus on fancy restaurants while ignoring the needs of the common drinker," said Mr. Peng, a plain-spoken man who wears short-sleeve shirts and acknowledges that he does not really like beer.
The trouble is that 70 percent of China's consumers fit the definition of common drinker. 
They make enough money to buy beer, but will not pay for a premium brand. 
So Tsingtao was squeezed both ways: at the high end of the market by Budweiser and Foster's, and at the low end by the likes of Yanjing.
While China's beer market grew tenfold in the 1990's, Tsingtao's production increased by just 20 percent. 
From 1994 to 1996, the company lost money.
On a visit to Qingdao in 1996, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, then a cabinet member, became alarmed that China's flagship beer seemed to be going down the drain. 
Qingdao's leaders plucked Mr. Peng out of a successful state-owned food company and sent him on a rescue mission. 
He promptly got rid of most of the senior managers and set about overhauling the brewer.
Mr. Peng set up a new sales network, with 45 branch offices, to promote Tsingtao aggressively. 
And he started buying breweries to produce the flagship brand, as well as lower-cost local brands. 
Buying breweries in the hinterland enabled him to avoid one of the pitfalls of the Chinese industry: protectionism by local authorities who jealously guard their home brew.
Tsingtao, which reclaimed the No. 1 position last year, has acquired 22 breweries from Shenzhen in the south to Beijing in the north. 
Owning more breweries has allowed Mr. Peng to bypass China's clotted distribution channels. 
Tsingtao beer used to sit on store shelves for months. 
Now, people in Tsingtao's home province, Shandong, can buy it within a week of brewing.
"In effect, he's consolidating the industry," said Jack Perkowski, the chief executive of Asimco, an Asian investment company that owns two small Beijing beer companies, Five Star and Three Ring. 
"They want to be the first Chinese company to have a truly national presence."
While Mr. Peng was whipping Tsingtao into shape, the foreigners began discovering some hard truths about the Chinese market. 
The premium segment, in which the non-Chinese producers compete, accounts for barely 7 percent of overall sales. 
And as price deflation has rippled through the economy, Chinese drinkers have been more reluctant than ever to pay extra for an upscale brand.
The foreign companies also made heavy investments upfront. 
Mr. Burrows said Anheuser-Busch paid $52 million for its brewery in the central city of Wuhan. 
The company spent millions more to upgrade the factory, plus plenty on advertising and marketing. 
Although its main brand, Budweiser, is quite popular here, the sales are too small and costs are too high to turn a profit.
"You can't get enough volume," Mr. Perkowski said, "particularly if you set up a brewery that looks like a brewery in the United States."
Mr. Burrows said sales of Budweiser improved this year, after two lackluster years. 
He predicted that the parent Anheuser-Busch would turn a profit in China in five years, adding that with 200 sales agents in 31 cities, Anheuser-Busch was determined to stay in the Chinese market.
Other foreign brands, however, are sounding a retreat. 
Foster's of Australia sold two of its Chinese breweries last year, keeping one in Shanghai. 
Lion Nathan, a New Zealand brewer, said it may leave altogether. 
By the end of August, Tsingtao will announce three acquisitions of foreign-invested breweries -- two in Beijing and one in Shanghai. 
Mr. Peng declined to name the companies.
Clearly, though, he is looking beyond the breweries to a partnership with Anheuser-Busch. 
He said a deal would cut Anheuser's costs because it must now transport all its beer from its Wuhan brewery. 
It could avoid those long shipments by using Tsingtao's plants in Beijing and Shanghai. 
In return, Tsingtao would brew its beer in Anheuser's factories in the United States.
An alliance with Anheuser-Busch would carry some symbolism. 
Five years ago, Anheuser bought a 5 percent stake in Tsingtao, and the two companies discussed ways to cooperate. 
But the Americans were put off by the Chinese company's balky managers. 
Coming back to the table to make a deal would send a clear signal that Tsingtao is a global player.
It would also help Mr. Peng realize his dream of making Tsingtao one of the world's top 10 brewers by 2003, its 100th anniversary.
"The top leaders of China were worried that Chinese beer would collapse because of all the competition," Mr. Peng said with a mischievous chuckle. 
"But five years later, it turns out the Tsingtao has succeeded. 
Our attitude has changed from fear of the foreigners to driving them out of the market."
