
Britain and China struck a deal today on a court to protect Hong Kong's legal system under Chinese rule, presaging a possible warming of relations after a three-year war of words.
The deal, with compromises on both sides, was welcomed by the business sector and denounced by the leader of Hong Kong's largest party.
"Landmark sellout, landmark betrayal," said Martin Lee, the leader of the Democratic Party.
China has promised Hong Kong "a high degree of autonomy" after it recovers the colony in 1997, and a Court of Final Appeal is to replace Britain's Privy Council as guarantor of Hong Kong's separate legal system.
Civil libertarians are counting on the court to protect Hong Kong's freedoms, while the business sector expects it to guarantee the commercial laws that make Hong Kong a safe international financial center.
Negotiations to set up the court have been deadlocked since 1991.
Britain compromised by agreeing to exempt "acts of state" from the court's powers. 
The Basic Law, the constitution China has prepared for Hong Kong, speaks of "acts of state such as defense and foreign affairs."
It is the "such as" that some people in Hong Kong consider disturbingly vague and fear could be used to suppress anti-Beijing protests.
Britain also dropped its insistence that the court be in operation well before the handover. 
Instead, the court will start hearing cases from July 1, 1997, the end of 156 years of colonial rule.
China, in return, abandoned its demand for mechanisms that would let it overrule the court.
The agreement faces a rough passage through Hong Kong's legislature, which rejected an earlier deal in 1991. 
The Democrats, who have 17 of the Legislative Council's 60 seats and enough allies to form a majority, say they will fight for changes.
The agreement was reached in marathon talks on Thursday in the Joint Liaison Group, the British-Chinese body overseeing the transition. 
It was approved by the Hong Kong Government today, after which Gov. Chris Patten presented it to the legislature.
The Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce said the deal might mark "a breakthrough in the relationship between the Chinese and British Governments."
Relations have been chilly since 1992, when Governor Patten set about broadening Hong Kong's democratic system, in defiance of China's objections. 
China saw this as a last-minute spoiling tactic, after it had already guaranteed Hong Kong an elected legislature and a home-grown chief executive. 
It vowed to disband the bodies elected under Governor Patten's rules and to hold new elections.
In light of past disputes, today's agreement amounted to "one of the more successful cooperative efforts on transitional matters by China and Britain," said Zhao Jihua, the Chinese chief on the Joint Liaison Group.
But only one lawmaker praised the deal, and Mr. Lee, the Democratic Party leader, protested that Britain had dug "a big legal hole" by giving China latitude to decide which "acts of state" are above the court's jurisdiction.
