
Wading into a rising tide of anxiety over China's impending takeover of Hong Kong, Prime Minister John Major today sought to shore up morale and confidence here by promising Hong Kong citizens visa-free access to Britain and vigorous scrutiny of China's behavior in the territory after it regains sovereignty.
"Britain's commitment to Hong Kong will continue well beyond the summer of 1997," he told a gathering of British and Hong Kong business people this afternoon. 
"That is both our moral responsibility and overwhelmingly in our own self interest."
Under their current British colonial passports, citizens of Hong Kong may enter Britain without visas for a limited period as tourists. 
Mr. Major's announcement will extend those privileges under new documents which, like the current ones, do not permit immigration to Britain or work there.
But what Hong Kong politicians have been pressing for is full British citizenship for Hong Kong residents. 
Despite their attempts and those of Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, Britain's Parliament has repeatedly rebuffed pleas to grant citizenship to Hong Kong residents, often in a hailstorm of racial abuse.
Mr. Major today made clear once again that British citizenship, which many regard as the only real guarantee against Chinese mistreatment of the territory, would not be granted.
In Britain some Conservative back-benchers reacted with dismay to Mr. Major's announcement, and a few warned of dire consequences, saying that thousands could enter the country and stay on illegally, especially if there were a crackdown in Hong Kong once China took control.
Mr. Major's visit, the first in four years, comes even as China's plans for the region are moving swiftly ahead, largely with indifference toward either Britain's views or those of many elected officials.
Already, China has promised to replace Hong Kong's legislature, which was elected only last September, with lawmakers more amenable to its wishes. 
China has rebuffed efforts to link the territory's highest court more closely to the appellate court systems of Commonwealth countries. 
And China is sifting through names in search of a first chief executive of Hong Kong under Chinese rule.
All these moves are regarded by some here with a mixture of resignation and trepidation and by others as redress for historical wrongs and a reassertion of Chinese dignity.
But more than half of Hong Kong's 6.2 million people are refugees from China -- many of whom fled the worst atrocities of Communist rule -- and they have little confidence in the future. 
Indeed, the latest polls confirm that, as the 1997 takeover draws closer, a majority of residents continue to oppose Chinese rule.
Against this tapestry of doubts and concerns, Mr. Major delivered his small package of incentives intended, he declared, "to provide reassurance to you, the people of Hong Kong, about Britain's active interest in your future."
"Hong Kong," he said, "will never have to walk alone."
For the first time, he warned China that Britain would aggressively confront violations of the Joint Declaration, the treaty that sets forth the terms of China's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
"If there were any suggestion of a breach of the Joint Declaration, we would have a duty to pursue every legal and other avenue available to us," said Mr. Major. Later, however, he refused to say whether those avenues included representations before the International Court of Justice or before the United Nations, where the treaty is registered.
Mr. Major did say that ethnic minorities in Hong Kong -- about 7,000 or so people mainly of Indian and Pakistani origin -- would be eligible for full British citizenship if they "came under pressure to leave Hong Kong" by the Chinese Government. 
China has insisted that only ethnic Chinese are eligible for citizenship in Hong Kong. 
The Prime Minister also extended citizenship to some 27 widows of soldiers killed in World War II.
Mr. Major said that last week he had discussed with Prime Minister Li Peng China's intention of abolishing the current Hong Kong Legislative Council.
"We reached no agreement," Mr. Major said of the discussion, which took place in Bangkok. 
"We did not agree to disagree. 
We just disagreed."
He maintains that the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law -- a somewhat ambiguous document that will serve as a mini-constitution for Hong Kong -- support his contentions that the elected legislators should be allowed to serve their four-year terms.
"This is what Hong Kong people wish to see. 
That is what the world would wish to see."
Reaction to Mr. Major's announcements was mixed.
While the Chinese did not respond directly today to Mr. Major's comments, the Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, said in remarks to regional leaders gathered in Beijing that the Chinese Government is confident of a smooth transition of power in Hong Kong.
In Britain, Charles Wardle, a former Immigration Minister who resigned from the Government last year in a dispute over immigration policy, told the Press Association that anyone who denied a risk was "talking through his hat."
He said: "This is an unstable part of the world. 
Some of the people who will make their way here as visitors and will stay over illegally will include people originally from South China."
A Tory Member of Parliament, Nicholas Budgen, said an influx of illegal immigrants would trigger a backlash.
"Good race relations depend upon strict controls on immigration," he said. 
"Letting people into this country without any need for a visa is an open invitation for them to stay."
Another Tory back-bencher, Sir Teddy Taylor, declared that the Prime Minister's decision was fair but then added, "There would be a bit of a nightmare if things go wrong in Hong Kong after the takeover, because anyone arriving in Britain could apply for asylum and this could create mighty problems."
Recently Britain, along with other European countries, has tightened its asylum laws, making it more difficult for people to claim asylum and even cutting off benefits while their cases are being decided.
To try to calm the fears of Conservatives, Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind said it was "totally unwarranted" to envision Hong Kong residents coming to Britian and refusing to return.
"There are dozens of countries around the world which have visa-free access to the United Kingdom, just as we have visa-free access to many other countries," he noted. 
"If there is abuse, and some attempt to outstay a welcome, from whichever part of the world a person comes, then we are able to take steps to deal with that."
Here, Martin Lee, the head of the Democratic Party of Hong Kong and a vocal critic of Beijing, hailed the visa decision but said that it was insufficient.
"It still remains the case that Mr. Major has made no progress whatsoever on the two things of greatest concern to Hong Kong people and indeed the entire world community, the continuation of democratic institutions and human rights in Hong Kong."
"I am afraid that from Hong Kong's perspective, after 1997 it may be very much too late," he said.
Another legislator, Emily Lau, was more blunt. 
"The main worry of the Hong Kong people is whether we can continue with the same way of life and the same rule of law," she said. 
"On these he has failed to deliver."
