
The Republican presidential front-runner, George W. Bush, whose father was accused by candidate Bill Clinton of "coddling" dictators in Beijing, is struggling to decide how hard a line to take toward China.
The issue of China is a sticky one for the Republican candidate, who is caught between hawkish conservatives on one side of his party and pro-business interests on the other. 
The shadow of his father, who during his presidency claimed China as a special area of expertise, compounds the problem.
While Mr. Clinton accused President Bush of being soft on China in the 1992 presidential race, today it is the Clinton Administration that is under attack for its policy of "strategic partnership," which critics consider too accommodating, particularly after recent charges of nuclear espionage by Beijing.
In the current squabble that erupted between China and Taiwan after Taiwan's leader asserted greater independence, Mr. Bush's advisers accused the Clinton Administration of a "tilt toward China," all but assuring that the issue would be locked into the current campaign.
But exactly how hard to hit the issue is a matter of some debate within Mr. Bush's circle of advisers, his aides say. 
Asked on television recently whether American troops might be required if China attacked Taiwan, Mr. Bush said: "It could. 
We need to honor our commitments in the Far East."
The answer was not tough enough to satisfy Republicans who believe that the Clinton Administration is too soft on Beijing and who argue that the Administration should make unequivocal declarations to the Chinese that the United States will respond if Beijing attacks Taiwan.
The Weekly Standard, a conservative political magazine edited by William Kristol, has made this stand clear in several recent editorials. 
"The best way to avert a crisis now is for the United States to make absolutely clear that it will respond to any military action by Beijing aimed at intimidating Taiwan," said an editorial signed by Mr. Kristol and Robert Kagan, an analyst at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
This week, Mr. Bush issued a stronger statement on China. 
It appeared to stop short of The Standard's position but went beyond his television reply. 
It was critical for Beijing to understand that if it attacked Taiwan, "the United States will act in accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act and join with Taiwan in insuring Taiwan's defense."
The Taiwan Act is not an alliance between the United States and Taiwan and does not explicitly call on the United States to defend Taiwan.
Mr. Bush's foreign policy team is headed by Condoleezza Rice, who was a member of President Bush's National Security Council and is an expert on Russia. 
On Asia, Mr. Bush has listened to Paul Wolfowitz, a former Ambassador to Indonesia, and Richard L. Armitage, who was a senior official in the Pentagon during the Bush presidency.
Mr. Wolfowitz, Mr. Armitage and a third adviser, Richard Perle, were among 22 signators to a strong policy statement on Taiwan put out by two conservative research institutes, The Heritage Foundation and The Project for the New American Century. 
The statement said unequivocally that the United States should declare it would come to Taiwan's defense in the event of an attack or a blockade against Taiwan, including the islands of Matsu and Kinmen.
Mr. Bush's position on China was based on some basic precepts, Ms. Rice said. 
"China is not an enemy and not a partner," she said. 
There were some areas where cooperation was desirable -- such as China's membership in the World Trade Organization. 
There were other areas, such as strategic interests in Asia, where China was a competitor of the United States, she said.
For his part, Mr. Armitage, who has been to the campaign headquarters in Austin, Tex., several times to consult, said that Mr. Bush viewed China in the context of the United States major alliance in Asia, Japan, a country the candidate knew "a lot about."
Even though he had signed a statement calling for the United States to come to Taiwan's defense in event of an attack, Mr. Armitage suggested it was unfair to expect a presidential candidate to give a definitive answer.
"On the question of the use of force, anyone sitting in the presidency is going to have to make the decision at the time," he said. 
"It's very bad business to answer hypothetical questions on force when you may be there to do it.'
On the relationship between China and Taiwan, which is currently embraced by the Clinton Administration in the "one China policy" to which every administration has adhered since 1979, Mr. Armitage said it is essential that any change in that policy should be with the full accord of the Taiwanese.
