
Barely 24 hours after President Clinton and other Western leaders confronted President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia at a meeting in Turkey, condemning his actions in Chechnya, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas went them one better today, calling for an end to international aid to Moscow unless the Russian government stops "killing women and children."
"We cannot excuse Russian brutality," Mr. Bush said this morning in the first major foreign policy speech of his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination. 
"When the Russian government attacks civilians, it can no longer expect aid from international lending institutions."
Speaking at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in the dry hills outside Simi Valley, a suburb 40 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles, Mr. Bush walked a fine line, balancing tough talk with more moderate formulations. 
But he made it clear at the outset that he would hew to the internationalist principles of his father and fight those in his own party as well as those outside it who have sought "to build a proud tower of protectionism and isolationism."
"This," he said, "is the shortcut to chaos."
While the governor implicitly criticized those Republicans who reject trade agreements with China and turn their backs on the United Nations, he was more explicit in his criticism of President Clinton, accusing him, without citing him by name, of allowing the nation "to move from crisis to crisis like a cork in a current."
Comparing Mr. Clinton's leadership unfavorably with President Bush's, Governor Bush declared:
"Alliances are not just for crises, summoned into action when the fire bell sounds. 
They are sustained by contact and trust. 
The gulf war coalition, for example, was raised on the foundation of a president's vision and effort and integrity. 
Never again should an American president spend nine days in China and not even bother to stop in Tokyo or Seoul or Manila. 
Never again should an American president fall silent when China criticizes our security ties to Japan."
Mr. Bush delivered his 35-minute speech with considerable aplomb, turning in a well-versed, well-drilled performance that on several occasions rose to a presidential level. 
He quoted Burke and Pericles and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, and he even echoed a bit of Churchillian rhetoric when he promised a foreign policy built upon "idealism, without illusions; confidence, without conceit; realism, in the service of American ideals."
Foreign policy seldom plays a central part in American presidential campaigns. 
But it can prove decisive if a candidate gives the impression that the management of the nation's affairs overseas is beyond his reach.
That happened to Gov. George W. Romney of Michigan in 1968, when he said he had been "brainwashed" by American officials in Saigon, and some Bush backers had feared that he faced similar risks. 
He had called the Greeks "Grecians" and had failed to identify important foreign leaders when given a pop quiz by a Boston television reporter.
His confident performance today put such fears to rest for the moment. 
But Mr. Bush will face a much tougher challenge in a series of three debates with his Republican rivals, starting in New Hampshire on Dec. 
2.
They will press him, no doubt, to say more specifically than he did today what he meant when he asserted that "American internationalism should not mean action without vision, activity without priority and missions without end -- an approach that squanders American will and drains American energy."
Mr. Bush argued that "unless a president sets his own priorities, his priorities will be set by others -- by adversaries, or the crisis of the moment, live on CNN."
Few would disagree with that. 
The problem is defining priorities and criteria for action, which Mr. Bush made no real effort to do. 
A president, he said simply, should extend the peace, build a united Western Hemisphere linked by free trade, seek Middle East peace, check the spread of weapons of mass destruction and do it with "patience, wisdom and strength."
Robert Blackwill, a lecturer at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, who worked on the National Security Council in the Bush administration, said that the governor had concentrated heavily today on Russia and China because those nations, "not Haiti, not Somalia," impinged directly upon the national interests of the United States. 
In fact, Mr. Bush made no mention at all of Africa.
Mr. Blackwill is a member of a small group counseling Mr. Bush on foreign policy matters. 
The group also includes Condoleezza Rice of Stanford University; Paul Wolfowitz of Johns Hopkins University; Robert Zoellick of Harvard, the German Marshall Fund of the United States and Goldman, Sachs; and Richard Perle of the American Enterprise Institute. 
All have served in past Republican administrations, and several were with Mr. Bush today.
"Two of Eurasia's greatest powers, China and Russia, are powers in transition, and it is difficult to know their intentions when they do not know their own futures," Mr. Bush told a largely invited audience of about 400 people. 
"If they become America's friends, that friendship will steady the world. 
But if not, the peace we seek may not be found."
Consistency was one of Mr. Bush's main themes, especially on China. 
Again without naming Mr. Clinton, he said the administration had called the Chinese leadership "the butchers of Beijing" one year and embraced the Chinese leadership as a "strategic partner" only a few years later.
For his part, the governor said, he would stand up to China if it threatened democratic nations in its region, like Taiwan and South Korea. 
He promised again to help Taiwan defend itself. 
And he welcomed the idea of Chinese entry into the World Trade Organization, while warning that "it will take a strong administration to hold them to their word," given what he termed "China's poor record" in honoring international agreements.
"We must deal with China without ill will, but without illusions," Mr. Bush said in one of his many this-and-that statements. 
China "will be unthreatened, but not unchecked," he added a few moments later.
Introduced as "a person who thinks for himself" by former Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who is an unofficial member of the Bush brain trust, Mr. Bush spoke as part of a yearlong forum series sponsored by the Reagan Library. 
Nancy Reagan was in the audience, as she was when Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Bush's leading Republican rival, spoke here in September.
Mr. Bush had many reasons to choose the Reagan Library as the venue for his speech. 
California has more delegates to the Republican convention than any other state, and Mr. Reagan went directly from two terms as governor to the presidency without any previous Washington experience, just as Mr. Bush is trying to do.
In addition, Ms. Rice said, Mr. Bush wanted to contrast Mr. Reagan with Mr. Clinton, especially with regard to the Californian's "strength, leadership and choosing a few goals, a few regions, and concentrating our national resources on them."
Mr. Bush won his loudest applause when he took a tough, Reaganesque line in defense of what he called "America's interests, America's obligations and America's honor," and when he obliquely criticized Mr. Clinton.
He pledged to develop and deploy both shorter-range regional and national missile defense systems, and he ripped into the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty that the Senate recently rejected. 
The treaty, he said, "does not stop proliferation, especially by renegade regimes, by a wide margin. 
It is not verifiable. 
It is not enforceable. 
And it would stop us from ensuring the safety and reliability of our nation's deterrent, should the need arise."
On the United Nations, he was again evenhanded.
"I will never place U.S. troops under U.N. command, but the U.N. can help in peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts," Mr. Bush declared to warm applause at one point. 
"If I am elected president, America will pay its dues, but only if the U.N.'s bureaucracy is reformed and our disproportionate share of its costs is reduced."
There was even a slight bow to the French and their argument that the American formula is not a one-size-fits-all model for democracy.
"We value the elegant structures of our own democracy," the governor said, "but realize that, in other societies, the architecture will vary. 
We propose our principles but we must not impose our culture."
Mr. Bush pre-sold his speech in telephone calls to columnists and reporters in recent days, and his potential opponents, like Vice President Al Gore, had their aides calling to comment on it before it had even been delivered. 
Clearly it was a big event in the unfolding campaign.
Mr. Gore was put in a difficult position by Mr. Bush's call for an end to international aid to Chechnya. 
Mr. Gore is closely associated with the Russians, and he supported the administration when it held up aid to Indonesia when its soldiers were killing people in East Timor. 
It will be hard to argue that what the Russians are doing in Chechnya is different.
Weighing Republican criticism, the administration is reassessing whether to announce a major resumption of American aid to Russia in the next week or so, in the form of a half-billion dollars in loans by the Export-Import Bank.
 
In His Own Words
GEORGE W. BUSH
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, at the Ronald Reagan Library today in Simi Valley, Calif., explained his approach to foreign policy, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a private agency.
"Few nations have been given the advantages and opportunities of our own. 
Few have been more powerful as a country, or more successful as a cause. 
But, there are risks, even for the powerful. 
'I have many reasons to be optimistic,' said Pericles in the golden age of Athens. 
'Indeed, I am more afraid of our own blunders than of our enemies' devices.'
America's first temptation is withdrawal. 
To build a proud tower of protectionism and isolationism.
In a world that depends on America to reconcile old rivals and balance ancient ambitions, this is a shortcut to chaos. 
It is an approach that abandons our allies and our ideals. 
The vacuum left by America's retreat would invite challenges to our power, and the result in the long run would be a stagnant America in a savage world. 
America's foreign policy cannot be founded on fear, fear that American workers cannot compete, fear that America will corrupt the world or be corrupted by it.
This fear has no place in the party of Reagan or in the party of Truman. 
In times of peril our nation did not shrink from leadership. 
At this moment of opportunity I have no intention of betraying America's interests, America's obligations and America's honor.
America's second temptation is drift, for our nation to move from crisis to crisis like a cork in a current. 
. . . American policy can become random and reactive, untethered to the interests of our country. 
America must be involved in the world. 
But that does not mean our military is the answer to every difficult policy situation, a substitute for strategy. 
American internationalism should not mean action without vision, activity without priority and missions without end -- an approach that squanders American will and drains American energy.
America's foreign policy must be more than the management of crises. 
It must have a great and guiding goal to turn this time of American influence into generations of democratic peace. 
This is accomplished by concentrating on enduring national interests.
And these are my priorities. 
An American president should work with our strong democratic allies in Europe and Asia to extend the peace. 
He should promote a fully democratic Western Hemisphere bound together by free trade. 
He should defend America's interests in the Persian Gulf and advance peace in the Middle East based on a secure Israel. 
He must check the contagious spread of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. 
He must lead toward a world that trades in freedom. 
And he must pursue all these goals with focus, patience and strength."
