
UNFAZED by the uncertainties of Hong Kong under Chinese rule, the crown colony's hotels are racing to add technology to rooms, mostly to please business travelers.
At the Conrad International, an outpost of Hilton Hotels, all 513 rooms and suites now provide access to both E-mail and the Internet for a surcharge of about $10 (United States) a day. 
If a guest wants to rent a laptop computer, along with the Net connection, the charge is $51 (United States) daily. 
The hotel estimates that more than 90 percent of its guests are business travelers and 20 percent of those, usually with laptops, want access to the Net.
The Net has not yet snared the colonial-style Peninsula. 
But the dowager among Hong Kong's hotels has equipped its rooms with an amazing array of gadgets, including: fax machines in desk drawers, automatic curtain openers, high-definition laser-disk movies with players, no-hands phone systems in Jacuzzis that muffle ambient noise, and push-button bedside consoles (with heat, air-conditioning, dimmer, TV, music and message controls) that light up in the dark at the wave of a hand.
 
Europe's Liberalized Skies
It happened with a whimper instead of a bang, but the European Union officially opened its skies yesterday to unfettered competition nearly 20 years after the United States deregulated its airlines. 
Because of what Europeans quaintly call "liberalization," newer airlines like Air Europa, Debonair, Easyjet, Ryannair and Virgin Group's Virgin Express already offer low-fare service.
Theoretically, Europe's airlines should now be able to operate in each other's domestic territories -- Germany's Lufthansa, for instance, might pick up passengers in Paris and fly them to Toulouse. 
But that is unlikely to happen partly because of cozy relationships between some European governments and their flagship carriers. 
With an eye to changing all that, British Airways' chief executive, Robert Ayling, on a visit to New York last week, said, "B.A.'s privatization has led the way to breaking the link between airlines and state ownership."
 
Zagat Invades Paris
A Zagat restaurant guide to the citadel of gastronomes -- Paris -- is coming next March. 
The survey of France's finicky diners will challenge the ratings of Michelin's sometimes inscrutable inspectors. 
With a don't-shoot-the-messenger plea, Tim Zagat said, "We just do the polling."
The pocket-sized guide, in any case, should be a crutch for multinational business travelers who have had to depend on -- and decipher -- Michelin's encoded ratings.
 
Heard Around Hotels
"We're selling about $100,000 worth of cigars a year at our 5757 Bar," said Thomas Gurtner, general manager of New York's Four Seasons Hotel whose watering hole, nicknamed the Martini Bar, offers 38 versions of the cocktail. 
"We must be Dunhill's biggest single client," he added. 
"We've also had to spend $70,000 for ventilation."
On its 40th anniversary, Las Brisas, the Mexican resort with panoramic views of Acapulco Bay and splash pools in guest rooms, is out to snare American business travelers for long weekend breaks as well has honeymooners for longer visits, according to Francisco Jose Garcia, an executive with Westin Hotels and Resorts, which manages the property. 
Adding panache to the resort are the movie stars who occasionally drift in from Villa Eden, the Time Warner corporate vacation retreat just up the hill.
At Aspen's Hotel Jerome, a landmark Colorado building with antiques like an $18,000 Eastlake rolltop desk in its corridors and rooms, executive meetings are commonplace -- in fact, they make up about 40 percent of the hotel's annual business. 
"The Disney divisions come here from time to time," said the hotel's general manager, Tony DiLucia. 
It's not surprising since Walt Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, has a huge vacation home in nearby Snowmass, Colo.      
