
THE airport event of the coming year will be the opening of Hong Kong's huge Chek Lap Kok terminal in April -- a date picked long before the city's current tourist slump and chicken flu crisis. 
The airport, which occupies reclaimed land near the rugged peaks of Lantau Island, is as large as all of Kowloon, one of Hong Kong's three main districts.
Flying in and out of Chek Lap Kok will not be half the fun of making the 21-mile trip from the airport. 
The city that long ago went vertical with Asia's biggest collection of skyscrapers has now gone horizontal with a scenic superhighway, laced with a lovely suspension bridge, that provides harbor visuals easily as striking as those seen from San Francisco's bridges. 
It will be an expensive 45-minute trip by taxi or limousine (about $50) or 23 minutes by train ($10 to $12) -- after service begins in June -- rather than the 15-minute commute through the packed streets of Kowloon where the old Kai Tak Airport sits in a tight little space.
Chek Lap Kok's Y-shaped terminal -- three-quarters of a mile wide where passengers arrive and depart -- is more user-friendly than original in design. 
Some 288 check-in counters, arranged in nine rows, will speed travelers to gates, all of which will accommodate jumbo jets. 
There will be a monorail for getting around faster, special passenger kiosks to provide airport and flight information, communications booths for handling E-mail and making phone calls -- with touch-screen dialing -- and a 140-store mega-mall chockablock with some of Hong Kong's top retailers.
The airport's first line of defense against emptiness, just as with Hong Kong's hotels, will be business travelers who now constitute about 80 percent of the city's visitors. 
Typically, the Island Shangri-la Hotel was buzzing with corporate comings and goings, as one guest noted earlier this month. 
Even so, most hotels, from the Mandarin on down, are juggling room rates like there was a fire sale.
With Hong Kong its newest prized possession, China may help rescue the tourist trade. 
"We're getting the word that Beijing may open up Hong Kong to the Chinese in a few months," said Robert Hutchinson, a senior vice president at Shangri-la Hotels and Resorts.
Unless that happens -- and until the stay-at-home Japanese return -- Chek Lap Kok may look like one of the Pacific Rim's first white elephants for a brief spell.
 
East Meets West
Take New York's Four Seasons Hotel, put palms from the World Financial Center's Winter Garden in the lobby, add a lot of marble and you'll have an idea of the splendiferous look of ITT Sheraton's new Beijing International Club Hotel in the Chinese capital.
It is indisputably mainland China's most luxurious hotel, situated between the Forbidden City and major embassies. 
It gets its name from the graying, 70-year-old International Club next door where many Chinese leaders have dined and given parties for foreign leaders. 
The hotel's standard rate for a single is $315 a night, with a $263 corporate rate -- and a special winter rate of $220.
 
Generation X Jets
What truly new planes await business travelers before the new millennium?
Not much beyond stretch or longer-distance models of existing Boeing and Airbus jets.
Off on the far horizon, however, is a whole new generation of faster and bigger jets. 
Airbus Industrie of Europe says it will have its A3XX 555-passenger, double-deck super-jumbo jet ready for commercial service by 2003. 
It will fly subsonically.
And NASA's high-speed civil transport program, which includes Boeing and other aerospace contractors, expects to have a full-scale, flying model of a 300-passenger supersonic jet completed by 2010. 
The plane will fly at Mach 2.4 (2.4 times the speed of sound), or about 1,600 miles an hour; it could cut travel time to the Pacific Rim in half.
 
A Welcome Port
For frustrated travelers who find hotel business centers closed when they need them most, MBE Business Express, a new self-service, 24-hour "office" being installed by Marriott International and other major chains, should prove very handy. 
About the length of two office desks, the MBE system includes a computer and printer (with E-mail, Internet access and popular software programs), a fax machine, a photocopier and a hookup for printing documents from laptops. 
It is all activated by major credit cards with voice and text prompts on a tiny screen.
"Pricing will be consistent with our other business services," said Gordon Lambourne, a Marriott vice president.
 
Blue Sky Airline
Not to be outmaneuvered by Europe's many new low-cost airlines, British Airways expects to start its own no-frills carrier in the coming year. 
Operation Blue Sky, its working name, will operate one-class 737-300's between Stansted Airport in London and Frankfurt, Madrid, Oslo, Paris and Rome -- with mostly ticketless reservations. 
"It will be a Southwest kind of operation," said Fran Ostroff, a British Airways representative, referring to America's most successful low-cost carrier, Southwest Airlines.
 
Expanding Shuttle
US Airways said yesterday that it had completed its purchase of the US Airways Shuttle and would expand the service -- by diverting some existing flights to the shuttle -- to include nonstop service between Boston and National Airport in Washington in the first quarter of 1998. 
The shuttle now operates 15 round-trip flights daily between Washington and La Guardia Airport in New York and up to 17 flights daily between Logan International Airport in Boston and La Guardia.
US Airways bought the shuttle from a consortium of bank lenders that took over the former Trump Shuttle in 1992.
