
The Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that China has recently delivered important components for missile systems to Iran and Pakistan. 
Senior Administration officials said today that the shipments could violate an international missile accord and require the United States to impose punitive economic sanctions against China.
The report comes when diplomatic relations with China are deeply strained because of disputes over human rights, trade and the recent unofficial visit of Taiwan's President to the United States.
In the last year, China has delivered dozens, perhaps hundreds of missile guidance systems and computerized machine tools to Iran, the C.I.A. concluded in a report circulating among policy makers. 
The components could give Teheran the ability to improve the accuracy of North Korean Scud missiles already in its arsenal and enable it to build such missiles on its own, the report states.
The report also says that in the last three months, China has delivered to Pakistan parts that could be used in M-11 ballistic missiles.
In August 1993, the United States banned certain high-technology sales to China after American intelligence concluded that China had sent M-11 missile components to Pakistan in violation of an international missile accord.
"We have serious questions about China's missile-related exports to Pakistan and Iran, and we are in a position where we have to consider the question of sanctions," said John D. Holum, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. 
"There are substantial indications of continued missile-related transactions to both countries. 
We need clarification from the Chinese of what is under way. 
But as of now, that has not been possible."
Relations between the United States and China are at their lowest point since 1989, when the Chinese cracked down on the democracy movement and attacked protesters at Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
The private visit to the United States by President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan earlier this month touched off a campaign of diplomaic retaliation, including the recall of China's Ambassador in Washington, the cancellation of several high-level meetings between American and Chinese officials and China's refusal to approve the appointment of a former Senator, James Sasser of Tennessee, as the new Ambassador to Beijing.
An editorial Sunday in the official Communist Party's People's Daily accused the United States of plunging Chinese-American relations "into a danger zone" by allowing the visit by the President of Taiwan, an island China regards as a renegade province. 
The editorial concluded by asking, "Where does the U.S. 
Government want Sino-U.S. relations to go?
We are waiting to see."
So is Washington.
The Administration is so determined to try to salvage its strategy of embracing rather than isolating Beijing that last weekend it offered to send Peter Tarnoff, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, to Beijing to take stock of the relationship. 
But a senior State Department official said today that the Chinese did not respond.
Since China has not shipped complete missiles or missile systems to either Iran or Pakistan, the report has generated a debate in the Administration over whether China has actually violated the Missile Technology Control Regime and should be punished with sanctions required under American law.
Administration officials who are trying to repair the damaged relationship with China contend there is no conclusive proof that the equipment is being used to improve Iran's missile capability in violation of the accord.
But other Administration officials primarily concerned about the spread of missile technology -- especially to a country like Iran, which the Administration has branded "an outlaw state" -- are eager to train the spotlight on the technology transfer and, if possible, punish the Chinese. 
They argue that the equipment will allow Iran to produce missiles that exceed the payload limits and range of the missile accord, which China has promised to uphold.
Some details of the report were in the current issue of Defense News. 
In apparent response, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Chen Yian, insisted on Tuesday that China "is strictly honoring its commitment" to the accord.
The Administration has asked the Chinese for an official explanation through diplomatic channels, but has not received a response, senior State Department officials said today.
American officials were poised to discuss the issue formally in talks in Beijing this week. 
But China canceled the talks as part of its protest of President Clinton's decision to allow Mr. Lee's visit.
The dramatic and persistent reaction of the Chinese since the visit puts the Chinese in a bind: they must respond strongly to prevent further American ties with Tawian, but not so strongly as to endanger their own interests.
Administration officials say they are heartened by the fact that China has not canceled the visit of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown to Beijing in August, a sign, they say, of the importance of economic ties.
In addition, Chinese leaders, including President Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Li Peng, allowed J. Stapleton Roy, the outgoing American Ambassador to Beijing, to pay them farewell calls before he left his post in Beijing last weekend.
No matter that the Chinese officials railed against the visit by Mr. Lee as violating decades-old understandings between Washington and Beijing; the fact that they received Mr. Roy at all was viewed by the Administration as a positive sign that at least the Chinese are willing to talk.
But the visit of Mr. Lee to Cornell University, his alma mater, in Ithaca, N.Y., has enabled Taiwan to make additional diplomatic inroads.
Senator Frank Murkowski, the Alaska Republican, has invited Mr. Lee to visit Alaska this November, and other Taiwanese officials hope to follow him to the United States. 
The United States Congress, in voting overwhelmingly to allow Mr. Lee to visit in the first place, is willing to oblige.
Taiwan has mounted an aggressive and successful lobbying campaign in Washington, in which a research group linked with the Government is paying a Washington firm $4.5 million to improve its image. 
Among its arguments is that Taiwan has moved from a one-party, authoritarian state into a democracy, in contrast with China, which continues to repress its citizens.
