
When James Sasser, the American Ambassador to Beijing and a former Democratic Senator from Tennessee, went home to talk to the Economic Club of Memphis on Friday, local business executives wanted to know about China's unfair trade practices, its human rights problems and politics after Deng Xiaoping.
But reporters brought up something else: the so-called China connection to the campaign finance scandal.
Wherever the Ambassador spoke on his tour of various cities to tout 1997 as "a very important year" in relations with China, he found himself playing down accusations that either the Chinese Government or big campaign contributors with close ties to Beijing had influenced, or tried to influence, the Clinton Administration's China policy or the 1996 Presidential election campaign.
"I would be the most surprised person in the United States of America if we find there is any participation by the Chinese Government in campaign contributions," Mr. Sasser said in an interview in Memphis.
But domestic politics have a way of seeping into even the best-built foreign policies.
And although Mr. Sasser and other Administration officials deny that the scandal-charged atmosphere in Washington has in any way affected policy toward China, concerns are emerging inside and outside the Administration that the United States and China may now have less room to maneuver at a crucial time in their relationship.
Vice President Al Gore is to travel to China with his family this month, in the Administration's highest-level visit to that country so far. 
If all goes well, President Jiang Zemin will come to the United States this fall on an official state visit complete with a 21-gun salute and a formal White House dinner. 
That could be followed by President Clinton's first trip to Beijing next year.
But already, officials at the White House and the State Department are worried that Mr. Gore's visit could be overshadowed by questions about his involvement in campaign fund-raising or about whether fund-raising activities somehow compromised American policy toward China.
Officials who until a few weeks ago were billing Mr. Gore's trip as a major step toward finding a new way to talk to China are now playing down expectations of any substantive progress during the visit.
In fact, Mr. Gore is said to be concerned about the potential political repercussions in the United States of the toasts of friendship that he and his Chinese hosts will make and the official -- and unofficial -- photographs that will be taken, Administration officials familiar with China said.
The officials recall with dismay the ill-fated visit of Secretary of State Warren Christopher to Beijing in March 1994. 
That visit, initially planned as the culmination of six months of intensive high-level engagement with the Chinese, was poisoned by China's rounding up of political prisoners and by Chinese officials' public censure of Mr. Christopher as he sharply criticized their human rights policies and refused an invitation to an official banquet.
Although the atmosphere between Washington and Beijing has improved since then, it is impossible to predict what new reports about fund-raising may surface before or during Mr. Gore's trip.
Complicating policy toward China, the post of Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs is vacant. 
Winston Lord, who held the job for the last four years, made clear early last fall that he did not want to stay on. 
Next week, he is moving back to New York, where he intends to consult, study art and music and work on his tennis game.
The nomination of Stanley Roth, who handled Asia policy at the National Security Council and the Pentagon during Mr. Clinton's first term, is stymied at the White House. 
His confirmation hearings are several weeks, perhaps months, away.
In addition, Mr. Roth's name is on a few of the White House documents related to campaign finance practices that were released by the White House as part of the nomination of Anthony Lake, the former national security adviser, as Director of Central Intelligence. 
Mr. Roth's confirmation could be delayed even longer if Republican lawmakers try to link him to questionable fund-raising practices.
"The State Department is stretched thin in the East Asia division because of the absence of a successor to Win Lord," Mr. Sasser said. 
"It is imperative to get someone in place as soon as possible."
Although no evidence has come to light indicating that Chinese money affected Mr. Clinton's fundamental policy toward China, in the current supercharged political atmosphere, any accusations linking campaign contributions to Beijing could cause the Administration to be more cautious in making positive gestures toward China.
"The allegations about Asian fund-raising in general and connections with China in particular inevitably create an atmosphere in which people will interpret leadership on China policy as a payoff for Chinese contributions," said Kenneth Lieberthal, a China expert at the University of Michigan. 
"I think that would be a wrong interpretation, but politically that has to be a concern for the White House."
The accusations could also complicate lobbying by the Administration on behalf of American companies doing business in China.
"Clinton is going to have a hard time legitimately making demands on behalf of American companies to the Chinese Government, because of the perception that the normal boundaries between policy-making and fund-raising were not maintained," said Fareed Zakaria, managing editor of Foreign Affairs, who has written extensively about China.
But during his speaking tour, Mr. Sasser did his best to separate policy toward China and domestic politics.
He told a luncheon given by the National Committee on United States-China Relations in New York that he did not know much about the scandal but that America's policy of engagement would not "be deterred by any news story."
He told the Asia Society in Washington that China "was the worst lobbyist" in Washington and needed to do more, not less, to get its point of view across on Capitol Hill.
Still, even if the fund-raising scandal was not reflected in businessmen's questions to Mr. Sasser at the Economic Club luncheon in Memphis, much of the informal talk there was indeed about who was sleeping in the Lincoln bedroom and the political fallout for Mr. Gore, who like former Senator Sasser, is a product of Tennessee politics.
"There'll be a press conference in the front bedroom -- I mean dining room," announced Bruce Taylor, the head of a big construction company and one of the luncheon organizers.
For some businessmen, the fund-raising scandal is only of passing concern. 
"Since '91 we've become so accustomed to hearing things about Clinton and Gore that you've got to really come up with something new to grab our attention," said Calvin Anderson, an executive with Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Memphis, who worked for Mr. Sasser when he was in the Senate.
But other executives disagreed.
"The best thing Gore had going for him was that he was Mr. Clean," said Rudi Scheidt, who was involved in cotton exports to China when he was chairman of the Hohenberg Brothers Cotton Company. 
"So what does this all do to Mr. Clean?"
