
Canada is pursuing fast-growing markets in Asia and the Pacific to reduce its dependence on the economy of its neighbor, the United States, though not without some public misgivings at home.
Earlier this month, the largest Canadian trade delegation to visit China came away with $6.5 billion of deals with the Chinese. 
Team Canada, as the Canadian news media nicknamed the delegation in sports parlance, won Beijing's attention with its political influence.
It was led by Prime Minister Jean Chretien and included 9 of Canada's 10 provincial premiers. 
Only Jacques Parizeau of Quebec stayed away.
The Canadians signed more than 50 commercial agreements, ranging from hockey tournaments to nuclear reactors, with the Chinese during the six-day visit. 
The deals could create thousands of jobs for Canadian workers in an economy with 10 percent unemployment.
Other more modest agreements were signed in Indonesia, when Mr. Chretien joined the leaders of 17 other nations at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting this month. 
He also visited Vietnam and announced, along with a $36 million aid package, that Canada would extend preferential trade status to Hanoi.
"Our Government is conscious of the need to have more eggs out there and not just have them in one basket," said Jim Moore, vice president for policy at the Canadian Exporters Association. 
"It's not so much a de-emphasis of the United States as the primary market for most Canadian companies as it is a need to remember that other parts of the world -- Asia Pacific and Latin America -- are expanding at an enormous rate."
The mission to China best illustrated Canada's drive for trade with other countries on the Pacific Rim. 
But China's poor record on human rights has also prompted the kind of criticism from Canadian human rights advocates that has become familiar in the United States.
"I'm disturbed when I see the public debate has become one of rights versus trade," Mr. Chretien said. 
"We must have both,"
Mr. Chretien has insisted that China would change through what he called "increased mutual understanding and contact."
Other criticism by Canadians has focused on the biggest component of the trade agreement with China. 
A memorandum of understanding would let Beijing buy two 685-megawatt Candu-6 nuclear reactors from Canada. 
About two-thirds of the $2.5 billion cost would be financed by Canadian taxpayers, through the Government's export credit agency.
The reactors are manufactured by Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., a state-owned company that employs 4,200 workers. 
The work force has been threatened with cutbacks, because of Ottawa's search for budget savings.
Three Candu reactors were sold to South Korea in 1990. 
The sale of two to China would take some pressure off Atomic Energy, which lost $101 million last year and depends heavily on Government subsidies.
Some critics in Canada warn of the risks in selling sophisticated reactors to a country like China that refuses to abide by copyright laws and seems willing to pirate technology. 
Other critics complain that Canada has never before sold its nuclear technology to a state with nuclear weapons, and that China has refused to respect the unofficial moratorium on nuclear testing adopted by other nuclear powers.
"When you look closely at it, this deal is outrageous," said Dr. Gordon Edwards, president of the Canadian Coalition for Nuclear Responsibility, which represents 300 environmental, professional, labor and other organizations.
Candu reactors have embarrassed Canada in the past. 
India used Candu technology in the 1970's to help build its first bomb. 
Romania bought a Candu reactor in 1981, and was found later to be using forced labor to construct it.
Robert Nixon, chairman of Atomic Energy, said, "We are confident that all the necessary safeguards are built into this deal."
Canada's heavy dependence on trade with the United States is a big factor in the push for Asian markets. 
The United States takes 80 percent of Canada's exports, a level that many Canadians feel inhibits their country's economic independence.
"The reality is that our future is linked to our ability to be globally competitive," said Tim Page, senior vice president of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce.
