
"I thought she was dead," said the old Flying Tiger veteran, devoted five-decades-strong to Mrs. Chiang Kai-shek, the intriguing, articulate dowager from the World War II era who is still hovering about the politics of China and America.
"But she is alive -- a great lady, a hell of a politician and a rousing speaker," exulted Myron D. Levy, 77, who was an enlisted man in one of the war's Flying Tiger units of American fighter planes that darted about like musketeers in defense of the Chinese, fiercely inspired by the doughty Mrs. Chiang.
She survives in fact at the age of 98 -- or thereabouts -- and is returning from the deeper shadows of history to preside at a reception on Wednesday at the Capitol, a place she took by storm 52 years ago when she addressed the House and Senate separately with poignant pleas for help for China in the war against Japan.
That was before her husband, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, lost the Chinese civil war to the Communists, retreated to the island of Taiwan and was renounced by the Truman Administration as a corrupt martinet.
In this was the origin of the passionate American political dispute about the "two China" policy and eventual recognition of the Communist Government in Beijing. 
It was a staple of partisan American politics that lately, like Mrs. Chiang, has shown signs of revisiting the scene to intrigue a new generation of politicians.
Newt Gingrich, the House Speaker, recently endorsed the idea of recognizing Taiwan, but soon retreated as friends reminded him of the larger realpolitik importance of the People's Republic of China.
Senator Bob Dole, majority leader and Republican candidate for President, has done no such controversial thing. 
But still he is co-sponsoring the reception for Mrs. Chiang at the invitation of Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois, a history buff who originated the event as a worthy piece in this year's commemorative war tableaux.
So old a survivor is Mrs. Chiang and so sharp and singular was her persona on the world stage that the simple reception has a Norma Desmond aura of expectation about it, a celebrity visit from a silent era. 
Large poster photos of the younger, world-traveling Mrs. Chiang -- known popularly then as Madame Chiang -- will embellish her return.
"We're trying to low-key the political side of this, so far with some success," said Senator Simon, who politely informed the White House of the invitation in May without asking for approval. 
"She is the only major figure left from World War II, and this is a touch of history plus a gesture of friendship to the Chinese people."
Senator Dole's office carefully echoed this, saying no large policy initiatives should be ferreted out of the ceremony, in which the two Senators and Mrs. Chiang will say a few words.
Mrs. Chiang, the daughter of a Chinese stowaway to America, has a fine command of English that she does not hesitate to put to blunt and splendid effect before politicians. 
Long suspect in her devotion to democracy, she once summarized American politics as an affair of "clodhopping boorishness and uncivilized geste."
Smart, stylish and above all resolved, Mrs. Chiang used a Wellesley College education brilliantly to become a principal in the war, serving as her husband's adviser, confidante, ambassador and English translator. 
After his death in 1975, she fed the fervor of the Nationalist Party, which was defeated on the mainland but vowed to rise up one day from Taiwan.
"It was an up-and-down thing, and I'm not trying to rewrite history," said Senator Simon of Generalissimo Chiang's rule, marked by terror and corruption. 
"I'm simply recognizing here was some woman who played a very prominent role in the victory of World War II."
The Senator, the son of American missionaries who served in China, met the Chiangs in 1959 when he was a freelance journalist visiting Taiwan.
"Partially to their credit," he said, "the country of Taiwan has moved in the direction that pleases us: multiparty system, a free press, freely held elections."
He noted that he had long been a two-China man -- "a position that has never been very acceptable to either China."
Mrs. Chiang, who left Taiwan after her husband died and has been living on Long Island, is now frail and hard of hearing but reportedly still articulate and opinionated.
"I can ask the American people for nothing more," she declared bitterly 45 years ago when a second mission of appeal to the United States for help against the Communists ended in failure and she receded into history. 
"It is either in your hearts to love us, or your hearts have been turned from us."
As Mrs. Chiang comes forth once more for Senator Simon's gentle curtain call, Mr. Levy and several other Flying Tigers will be at the reception to escort and toast her.
