
Sitting under stirring photographs of the young Chairman Mao, Chen Jinfei relaxed recently in the plush 35th-floor offices of his billion-dollar corporation and reflected on the love-hate relationship between China's Communist Government and private businessmen like himself, who have helped push the country's economy forward.
"Private entrepreneurs run counter to the ultimate aim of the party, which is to eliminate the exploitation of man by man," he said, adding with a grin: "But I think there's a tension here between ideology and reality in our changing society. 
And I don't expect I'll be eliminated any time soon."
On Monday, China's Parliament will tip its hat to the new entrepreneurs, amending the Constitution to declare private business "an important component of the socialist market economy."
Parliament will also amend the Constitution to incorporate the rule of law.
To Western ears the official elevation of the private sector sounds like a declaration of the obvious. 
But to China's fast-growing business class, the change brings a new sense of legitimacy and protection in a country where business owners are still likely to face significant political, economic and social discrimination.
"Only now will we have any political and personal status," said Mr. Chen, chairman of the Beijing Tong Chan Investment Group, who has lobbied for the change.
At a practical level, business executives say the change can help end a vast array of discriminatory practices that make it hard for them to buy land, for example, or get loans. 
They hope too that it will at least indirectly safeguard their property rights -- a looming fear in a country that nationalized all business more than 40 years ago.
"I do think the official recognition will give us better opportunities and more space to develop," said Zhang Lifan, whose company designs computer networks. 
"As a businessman and as an individual, I appreciate the amendment."
In fact, Mr. Zhang, son of a famous Shanghai businessman who was demonized by Mao, is a living testament to how much things have changed. 
His father, Zhang Naiqi, served as a Government minister in the early years of the People's Republic but was later dismissed by Mao and lived in poverty until his death 20 years later.
In 1968, at the outset of the Cultural Revolution, the family home was ransacked and later confiscated by Red Guards. 
The father was tortured. 
"I had a very unhappy childhood, discriminated against by teachers and students," Zhang Lifan now recalls, at his office's polished conference table in an elegant turn-of-the-century building.
Of course, business executives have made vast inroads in the last 10 years. 
They have even started moving into the fringes of official politics.
Mr. Chen, 36, is a member of China's People's Political Consultative Congress, an advisory body, as well as a representative to Beijing's main governing council. 
But in the whole country there are still only 64 private businessmen at such high levels of government, Mr. Chen said.
A 1988 change in the Constitution upgraded the status of businessmen somewhat. 
The 1954 Constitution said capitalists must be "used, restricted and taught," which was changed to "guided, supervised and managed."
But business executives are forever kept out of country's most exclusive political club, the Communist Party, and lack the contacts that membership confers. 
Party members who go into business are supposed to renounce membership, and "private entrepreneurs are fully aware that they should not even apply," said Mr. Chen, whose company is involved in real estate, building materials and restaurants, among other things.
While much admired by today's college students, those in private business are still looked down on and despised by many Chinese. 
Said Mr. Zhang: "Westerners say, 'God helps those who help themselves,' and work hard to get rich. 
But many Chinese still have a more revolutionary idea and want to kill rich people."
But China's business owners today care less about status than the impediments that a society laced with Communist ideology throws their way.
Executives say they have a hard time getting loans from state-owned banks, while public enterprises are generously financed. 
Private companies are banned from many sectors, including real estate and telecommunications, although entrepreneurs often gain access by going into partnership with state companies.
The executives add that in practice, factory managers and local governments often balk at buying goods or services from the private sector for fear that they will be criticized for not supporting the state. 
And until last month, private businesses were forbidden to export their products, required instead to sell them to Government trading companies for export. 
China now allows 64 companies to export on their own.
"We have to work a lot harder than the state-owned enterprises to survive," said Mr. Zhang.
The new constitutional amendment does not specifically address any of these practices, nor does it specifically protect private property -- a change that many entrepreneurs hoped for. 
Still, many say that it lays a good foundation for such change and that they now feel more secure doing their capitalist work in a Communist country.
"A number of businessmen have acquired status as a resident of a foreign country, just in case there's a rustle here," said Mr. Chen, whose company has offices in Paris and New York. 
"I haven't. 
I think I can have a good relationship with the Government and can handle things here."
But all this talk seems rarefied and theoretical to people like Zhou Dashan, a more average Chinese businessman, who owns a small shop selling lamb, snacks and sundries in an alley in west Beijing.
Mr. Zhou, a wrinkled man with a blue Mao cap and an fake Izod windbreaker, had been in the trade since 1981, when he took early retirement from a factory job he had had for 30 years.
He says he is glad for the change in the Constitution, of course. 
"The change is very good," he said. 
"Why, when I first started we didn't dare speak out about anything, since we were told to 'cut the capitalist tail.'
"
But like many small business owners, he has more immediate concerns: taxes, too much competition on a street now lined with indistinguishable stalls and a local crime wave that has forced him to sleep on his store's chopping board to guard against thieves.
And he worries that the new Constitution will not change the behavior of some neighborhood officials, who disparage local shopkeepers and insist on taking food for free .
"Of course we support this amendment," he said. 
"But however big the leaders' hands, they can't reach every corner."      
