
The middle-aged workers outside the aging Beijing No. 2 textile factory said today that they already knew their days of employment were numbered -- that they knew it even before China signed a landmark agreement this week to open its doors wider to global competition.
Their biggest worry, they said, is not the impact of China's probable admission to the World Trade Organization. 
They agree that it is essential for China's future, and they know that it should eventually expand the country's exports of textiles, like the cotton cloth their factory makes.
What worries them now, said the two workers, who stopped for a discreet conversation, is how well the government will support them after they get the inevitable notice from their factory, which sheds more workers every month. 
Will they get a livable allowance?
What if they need expensive surgery?
Will they have any help finding new jobs in a fast-changing economy?
"I hope they won't just throw us out into the society," said one of the workers, Mr. Wu. Now in his late 40's, he said he doubted that he could ever find another job, because his health had been damaged by 28 years of loud noise and cotton dust in the plant.
Mr. Wu and a fellow worker, Mr. Tang, in his early 50's, spoke candidly about their fears -- and their surprisingly bitter feelings toward their factory managers -- on condition that their full names be concealed.
Workers like these two toiled for a pittance for decades, with the lifetime promise of a Communist state's "iron rice bowl."
Now, caught between two economic eras, they feel betrayed.
Mr. Tang pulled his last pay slip from his pocket and pounded on a table, his voice quivering. 
"Look at this!" he said. 
"Eighty dollars a month, after 35 years of work!"
"We haven't had a pay raise in seven years, but during that time the wallets of the managers have grown fatter and fatter," Mr. Tang said. 
"In this country the workers have the lowest status."
Such fears and angers, shared by millions across the country, add up to one of China's greatest challenges. 
And it will be even greater if China fulfills the market-opening commitments it made on Monday to the United States in return for American endorsement of its application to join the World Trade Organization.
That challenge is the creation of a better safety net for the tens of millions of workers who are being displaced in this wrenching transition.
Even more daunting than the problem of urban workers, and receiving far less official attention, is the task of creating new jobs and lives for millions of inefficient farmers who are expected to lose out to global trade and may join the country's vast floating population of migrants who compete for bottom-rung jobs in the cities.
"China's social security system is far from ready for the structural change in employment that would be brought about by W.T.O. accession," concluded a recent report by the China International Capital Corporation, an investment bank in Beijing that is a joint venture of the Chinese government and Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.
The country has only begun to create Western-style unemployment, welfare, pension and health insurance systems -- all vital to smoothing the transition from the old government-run economy to a modern market one.
"It's inevitable that older state enterprises and economic sectors here are going to lose out," said Hu Angang, an economist at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. 
"I think it's crucial that government aid should not go to the losing enterprises to prop them up.
"Instead, the aid should go directly to the laid-off workers. 
That's the key to a successful transition."
The government has been acutely aware of the problem in the last two years as laid-off workers and retirees in dozens of cities have held protests when promised subsistence allowances were not paid.
In the past, state enterprises had lifelong obligations to their workers, including living allowances and medical care for those laid off. 
But in the 1990's many ailing or moribund enterprises have simply had no money to give out.
To stave off spreading unrest, last year the government mandated the creation of thousands of "re-employment centers" in every city and required local governments to share the costs of living stipends with laid-off workers' former companies.
Workers enrolled at the centers are supposed to get training and job referrals, and in the meantime are supposed to receive monthly subsistence payments of about $20 to $35, depending on the location.
But the coverage is spotty, and many failing companies still pay little or nothing to their former employees, leaving them to fend for themselves. 
And under current policy, the re-employment centers are supposed to be phased out at the end of 2001.
The No. 2 textile mill on the east side of Beijing, where Mr. Wu and Mr. Tang work, employed about 7,000 workers in the early 1990's. 
Since then it has laid off 3,000, with more sent packing every month. 
The nearby No. 3 textile factory, which employed 6,000, shut down entirely in June.
Workers from those plants have no re-employment center, the men said, and have had to search for new jobs on their own. 
They are receiving monthly stipends of $28. 
A few former co-workers have found jobs mopping floors at new shopping centers, the men said, while some sell items in street markets.
For laid-off workers and for those who, like Mr. Wu and Mr. Tang, still have jobs because of their seniority, one of the greatest worries is health care.
Even when they use the company clinic and hospital, workers are expected to pay for many services and drugs, to be reimbursed later for most of the cost. 
But because their company is so short of money, the two men said, workers are kept waiting a year before they are repaid.
Class divisions in the company's medical system are another source of bitterness. 
"Workers have to go to one clinic while the managers go to another one, on the third floor of the hospital," Mr. Tang said. 
"The workers can't even get herbal medicines for a common cold, but the managers get whatever they need.
"The managers get a free health checkup every two years, but the workers don't get any checkups."
The two men have heard that the textile industry should boom some time after China enters the World Trade Organization, since the United States would be required over five years to end the quotas that limit American imports from China.
But they know that this brighter future may be beyond their own grasp.
"Only when a textile factory can get better machinery, and better-educated and more skilled workers, can it compete," Mr. Wu said. 
"So the immediate effect of converging with the world economy is that even more workers will be laid off."
Still, and perhaps remarkably, both men seemed to offer sincere and unqualified support for Chinese membership in the trade group.
"Without more global competition, China will be hopeless," said Mr. Tang, who knows at first hand about bad management and shabby equipment. 
"China can get rich only by competing with capitalist societies.
"We know that this factory will no longer exist in the next few years. 
We all hope it will be transformed into a new factory in a capitalist system."
