
One hundred days after China raised its red flag here, ending 156 years of British colonial rule, Hong Kong is feeling a new and uncertain mood.
"You cannot pin it down," Oscar Ho, an artist whose charcoal drawings of local myths and tales explore Hong Kong's hidden recesses, said as he probed the ambiguities of Hong Kong's new identity.
"It's gradually happening," he said. 
"People are getting more and more conservative. 
The first couple of months were O.K., but it's beginning to worry me now."
Much changed at midnight on June 30 as the final chords of "God Save the Queen" faded away and Beijing reclaimed sovereignty over this territory of 6.4 million people. 
Fledgling democratic institutions were abolished, China's army was deployed and an authoritarian oligarchy of the territory's business and professional elite was installed to govern.
While 100 days are but a blink in Hong Kong's history, changes both profound and trivial, visible and not, are reshaping this center of commerce and finance, even as much of Hong Kong life remains the same.
Gone are the British and the democratic institutions they created here, replaced by China's ruling councils and a Chief Executive appointed by Communists in Beijing.
Gone are the kilted soldiers of the Black Watch, the bagpipes and the Union Jack, supplanted by the People's Liberation Army and the Chinese flag. 
Gone are stamps with the Queen's portrait, English cooking at government functions and the sense that everything and anything was possible and permitted.
The Chinese Army is here, but in virtual seclusion, living in the beige concrete pile still called the Prince of Wales Barracks. 
Queen's Road Central, still named that, continues to course with the well-dressed professionals in the banks, finance houses, development concerns and the many companies that have made this one of Asia's pre-eminent centers of business and investment.
Political demonstrations, illegal in the rest of China, occur several times a week here.
Tangible traces of British colonialism are steadily seeping away. 
The bright red cast-iron mailboxes emblazoned with the royal seal, some from the reign of Edward VII, have been replaced by austere green boxes. 
Tens of millions of coins with Queen Elizabeth's face, still legal tender, have vanished into the coffers of coin collectors. 
And Government House, where London's representative lived, is dark and abandoned.
But the nature of Hong Kong's transformation, or indeed whether it has changed at all, is a matter of perspective. 
For many people, nothing has really changed, while for others this place has begun a transition to becoming just another Chinese city.
For Tung Chee-hwa, 60, the shipping magnate selected by Beijing to run Hong Kong, "it's business as usual in Hong Kong," a mantra he invokes repeatedly, here and during an official visit to Washington last month.
Today, continuing the custom of British colonial governors, he presented his first state-of-the-territory address to Hong Kong.
"Hong Kong's reunification with China," Mr. Tung told 60 Beijing-appointed legislators on this 100th day of Chinese rule, "requires us to appreciate and accept one practical and profound truth: Hong Kong's prosperity and stabilityI are closely linked with those of the mainland."
And then, over the course of 125 minutes, Mr. Tung elaborated his agenda for governing Hong Kong, detailing a series of policies from building more housing to creating high-tech industrial parks, from new railroads to increasing welfare payments to the needy elderly by $1.65 a day.
Reflecting the pre-eminence of big business in his administration, much of his address was devoted to how he intends to enhance the business climate and Hong Kong's waning regional competitiveness.
Only in a line at the end of his speech did Mr. Tung set May 24 as the date for elections to the legislature. 
The election rules insure the dominance of business leaders, professionals and pro-China candidates.
Mr. Tung has been fond of telling foreign audiences that the territory has remained unaltered by the resumption of Chinese rule.
"There has been no change in the life style to which we are accustomed," Mr. Tung told the United States Chamber of Commerce during his Washington visit. 
"And our economy continues to expand. 
It is deeply in China's interest that Hong Kong should continue to work well under the 'one country, two systems' concept," a reference to Beijing's formula for Hong Kong's semi-autonomy as a Chinese "special administrative region."
But Hong Kong's way of life is changing. 
Those changes are often neither drastic nor Draconian, but they are altering this territory in ways that are now and will increasingly be less international and more Chinese.
Unlike his garrulous and outgoing predecessor, Chris Patten, Mr. Tung avoids local reporters, releases virtually no information about his weekly activities and in public rarely departs from stodgily written speeches.
No change has been more immediate than the abolition of democratic institutions.
On a frantically busy corner in the central business district the other day, Emily Lau, overwhelmingly elected to Hong Kong's legislature in 1995 but ousted by China on July 1, pleaded with the lunch-time rush of passers-by through a loudspeaker.
"When the Chinese Government took over Hong Kong on July 1, all of us in the pro-democracy movement were thrown out of the legislative council," she said. 
"I want to assure you we will continue to fight for democracy, human rights and the rule of law."
Although she and 28 other proponents of universal suffrage lost their seats on July 1, these former lawmakers continue to speak out, to appear at public demonstrations against Mr. Tung's government and to raise money for severely limited legislative elections next year.
"I don't think the Hong Kong people have much confidence in these elections," said Ms. Lau, who will be required to give up her British citizenship if she wants to run for the legislature. 
"They know the rules are rigged. 
They know the government is not accountable. 
But we have to stop feeling helpless."
Only those members of the territory's business elite who will be voted into the legislature by their companies are permitted to retain foreign passports.
One of those who now sit in Hong Kong's appointed provisional legislative council, as it is known, is David Chu, a wealthy developer who gave up his United States passport in a public embrace China's rule of Hong Kong.
"What has changed," he said. 
"One word. 
Nothing. There is absolutely nothing going on."
Yet even Mr. Chu, after some prodding, admitted that at least politically, the territory had regressed under Beijing's hand.
"The political changes are a step back," he said. 
"But nobody is saying it is a permanent step back. 
It's a temporary setback for democracy."
When for the first time Hong Kong officially celebrated China's national day on Oct. 
1, marking the day 48 years ago when Mao mounted the Gate of Heavenly Peace in Beijing and declared, "The Chinese people have stood up," there was less a sense here of patriotic acclaim than of deep paradox.
Nearly half of Hong Kong's people fled China for political or economic reasons since the Communist takeover on the mainland in 1949, and like all Hong Kongers they are now struggling to find a place in their new Chinese nation.
In Fanling, a town in Hong Kong's New Territory, Polly Lee and Terence Cheng strolled down the street, glancing in closed store windows.
"We don't feel any different," said Mr. Cheng, who said the couple were textile workers in their 20's, "but that might change."
This undercurrent of uncertainty over how Hong Kongers see themselves was reflected in an opinion poll released last week by the University of Hong Kong.
Slightly more than 60 percent of those surveyed by the university said they were not proud of having become citizens of China, and only 17.5 percent actually regarded themselves as Chinese citizens. 
Nearly 40 percent defined themselves as "Hong Kong citizens."
"We are a city of Chinese people, but we've never been a Chinese city," said Margaret Ng, a lawyer and former legislator here.
But moves, deliberate and not, are afoot to make this a Chinese city.
