
A Government-controlled newspaper said today that the governor of China's central bank had been dismissed, and a well-connected Chinese said the announcement was being circulated among senior officials in Beijing.
Li Guixian, the governor of the People's Bank of China, is being replaced as part of a revamping of the financial sector, according to Wen Wei Po, a Beijing-backed newspaper in Hong Kong. 
Several Chinese familiar with the case said that they too had learned of Mr. Li's removal but that it was unclear what the move meant for China's economic policies.
Mr. Li, a 55-year-old career Communist cadre who has headed the central bank since 1988, was apparently removed for two reasons. 
First, he was blamed for allowing a $175 million financial scandal in which more than 100,000 bondholders lost much of their capital.
 
 
Move Toward Curbing Growth
And Mr. Li was regarded as being ineffective in curbing monetary growth at a time when the Chinese economy was overheating. 
His abrupt departure is likely to be seen as a sign that Beijing has decided it wants to curb the money supply, limit the rampant speculation in real estate and reduce credit without creating cash shortages in the countryside.
Zhu Rongji, the Deputy Prime Minister who has been in charge of running the economy, will take over temporarily the additional responsibilities of the bank governor. 
Another bank governor is expected to be named later.
The change shows that Mr. Zhu's stock is rising steadily, and it also suggests trouble for Prime Minister Li Peng, who had been an ally of Mr. Li, who is no relation. 
Prime Minister Li is recovering from an apparent heart attack he suffered in April. 
In his absence, Mr. Zhu has assumed day-to-day control over the Government.
 
 
More Open-Minded
Mr. Zhu is widely regarded as more open-minded about political and economic change than Mr. Li, a hard-liner who played a central role in the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown.
In the last few days, Mr. Zhu has summoned provincial governors to the capital to warn them to act quickly to reduce inflation and chaos in the economy. 
Banks have also been told to curtail new loans, and auditors have been inspecting financial institutions to make sure that they do not exceed their quotas for lending.
From January to April, banks were somewhat successful in keeping credit expansion below the level of a year earlier. 
But there has been explosive growth in the amount of funds raised outside the banking system through the issuing of stocks and bonds and other means.
One result is that the banks themselves are hard pressed for cash and have had to issue "white slips" to farmers instead of cash for their crops.
