
The Chinese government has thrown the art market in this capitalist outpost into an uproar by asking Sotheby's and Christie's to withdraw four relics -- which Beijing says were stolen 140 years ago -- at next week's auctions of Chinese antiquities here.
An official at the State Cultural Relics Bureau said that the objects, a vase and three sculptures, were taken from a Qing dynasty palace when it was ransacked by British and French troops. 
The official, Wang Limei, said that the bureau was asking Sotheby's and Christie's not to sell them in Hong Kong because "it is insulting and deeply painful to the Chinese people to have these things sold before their eyes."
Hong Kong, the former British colony that is home to some of the world's richest Chinese, has long been a fertile market for dealers in rare Chinese antiques. 
But Beijing has steadily tightened its grip on Hong Kong since it reverted to China in 1997. 
Now it is making its presence felt in the art market, declaring that the city should no longer be a clearinghouse for treasures stolen from imperial China.
Sotheby's and Christie's said on Saturday morning that they would proceed with the sale of the relics as planned. 
The Christie's auction is scheduled to begin Sunday in the ballroom of an upscale hotel here. 
Sotheby's will open bidding on its collection on Tuesday at an equally deluxe hotel nearby.
"It's full-speed ahead for us," said Carlton Rochell, the managing director of the China and Southeast Asia division at Sotheby's. 
"We're doing everything we can to satisfy their concerns about the objects in question."
Victoria Cheung, a spokeswoman for Christie's, said the sale of the items was "part of our routine calendar of auctions."
She declined to comment on Christie's negotiations with the Chinese government.
It is not clear that Beijing would have the authority to prevent Sotheby's and Christie's from holding the sales even if it tried. 
Hong Kong is a separate legal jursidiction from mainland China, and mainland laws that protect China's national treasures do not apply here.
Chinese government officials said they had not demanded that the relics be returned because, 140 years after the looting of the palace, it would be difficult to prove that they were taken from the country illegally.
In late March, United States Customs officials seized a 10th-century marble sculpture that was to have been auctioned at Christie's gallery in New York City. 
In that case the Chinese government said it had proof that the sculpture, a painted relief panel, had been stolen by raiders who had broken into the Five Dynasties tomb of Wang Chuzhi in Hebei Province in northeastern China.
Neither Sotheby's nor Christie's disputes that the four relics were taken from the old summer palace, known as Yuanmingyuan. 
Indeed, Christie's is promoting its auction as "The Imperial Sale: Yuanmingyuan," and the company's Web site promises that the sale will feature "some of the most sumptuous artworks made for the Manchu emperors of the 18th century."
Beijing objects to the sale of two bronze heads -- an ox and a monkey -- that were part of a set of 12 in a zodiac fountain in the palace garden. 
Christie's estimates the value of the ox head at $500,000 to $580,000. 
It did not value the monkey head or disclose the owners of either piece.
Sotheby's is auctioning a bronze tiger's head that it says was part of a water clock commissioned by the emperor and designed by a French astronomer for the grounds of the Old Summer Palace. 
The catalog does not estimate the value of the sculpture or disclose its owner.
The second of its disputed relics, a hexagonal vase, is featured on the cover of the catalog. 
Sotheby's speculates that the vase "may have been brought directly from the Old Summer Palace, Beijing, by Lord Loch of Drylaw, after it was burned down in 1860."
By playing up the Old Summer Palace, Sotheby's and Christie's have resurrected one of the most sensitive chapters in Chinese history. 
The palace, an 870-acre estate in Beijing, was sacked and burned by British and French troops during the second Opium War.
Though there are only a few ruins left, the Chinese government has kept the episode alive in history books and propaganda as an example of the country's humiliation at the hands of foreigners.
Mr. Rochell said he was mindful of the emotions stirred by artifacts from the Old Summer Palace. 
But he noted that the Sotheby's auctions here often result in relics' being transferred from Western owners to Chinese owners, whether from Hong Kong, Taiwan or even mainland China.
"I don't want to exaggerate this point," Mr. Rochell said. 
"But in a sense, these auctions have been repatriating a great deal of objects back to China."
