
With his possessions bundled in plastic and hung from his shoulders, and his trousers rolled up to beat the heat, 30-year-old Ren Jun drifted into Beijing this month, part of a migrant tide of 50 million peasants that is threatening to swamp China's urban landscape.
To the Communist Party leadership, they are the engine of China, an inexhaustible supply of cheap labor, a floating population helping to build the country. 
They are one reason that 5,000 factories can be simultaneously under construction in China's coastal provinces.
But they also are becoming a huge and at times unstable and exploited force rampant on the fringes of China's overcrowded and polluted urban centers, where crime, corruption and unemployment threaten stabilityII.
The migrants are easy to spot. 
Most large cities along China's coast have a million or two living in shanty towns, dormitories or public spaces. 
At Beijing's main railway station, a thousand migrants an hour pass through the green metal gates. 
And vast numbers of laborers like Mr. Ren appear each morning here at an impromptu labor market, hoping local coal-mine supervisors will pick them to work.
 
'A Positive Development'
"So far, I think it has been quite a positive development," said Fan Gang, a leading economist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. 
"It has helped to transfer wealth from rich to poor areas of the country."
Richard Baum, a political science professor at the University of California at Los Angeles, called the mobile population "a shock absorber" that can flow from one sector of the fast-changing economy to another "to cushion the transformation of the Chinese economy."
At the same time, today's migration could be the harbinger of an even greater one to come, Chinese and Western specialists say. 
With 130 million surplus workers in China's farm belt and a surge in population growth that will push that number to 200 million by 2000, China's migrants are an X factor in China's future.
"In five years, this could become a very big problem," Professor Fan said.
 
Estimate of 70 Million
In March, Agriculture Minister Liu Jiang estimated that 50 million peasants had left their farms in 1993 to seek employment in the cities, more than double the 24 million who set off for the cities in 1992.
Some estimates put the "floating population" at 70 million to 100 million, said Dorothy Solinger, a China scholar at the University of California at Irvine. 
She also argued that the migrant problem "may not be as bleak as it is made out to sound."
"First, they are not all going to the big cities," she said. 
Many migrants simply move off farms into township enterprises nearby, or even far away, but not necessarily to large cities.
Second, she argued, where migrants do cluster, crime is the largest potential worry, not political rebellion. 
She pointed out that the Mayor of Zhuhai, the special economic zone adjoining Macao, recently said 75 percent of the crime in his city could be attributed to migrants.
But much is simply unknown, she said. 
The growth of the migrant phenomenon came from nowhere in a country that enforced rigid residency rules just a decade ago, making it impossible for peasants or city dwellers to stray from their work units.
What seems undisputed is that Pearl River delta in Guangdong Province has the largest concentration of migrants, an estimated 10 million. 
At least 500,000 are child laborers, Chinese surveys have shown; many work in sweatshop conditions.
 
Dangers of a Downturn
In Jiangxi Province, the outflow of farmers leaped from 200,000 in 1991 to more than 3 million last year. 
Shanghai's 13 million residents are now supporting 2.5 million rural workers attracted from all over the Yangtze valley to construction work on the city's vast redevelopment.
As long as China's economic growth gallops along at more than 10 percent a year, this floating population is likely to remain relatively well employed, prosperous and stable. 
But an economic downturn or recession could easily leave the migrants stranded and aggrieved.
"This is the labor of an exploited class," said a longtime Western diplomat here. 
"There are no wage laws to protect them, and they can be fired on a whim."
Professor Baum added: "It is a double-edged sword to be sure. 
They may be an efficient buffer helping to transform the economy, but they are also a large pool of marginal people subject to the vagaries and insecurity of having no rice bowl they can count on. 
They are dying in grotesque industrial accidents, they are locked in the dormitories at night, and they create a pocket of potential human misery wherever they cluster."
 
Building Subways and Hotels
Farmers from Sichuan Province are building Beijing's new subway, just as peasants from Zhejiang Province are building new freeways, hotels, office buildings and ministries. 
Many leave their villages because $1.25 a day on a sweltering construction site is more than they can earn working the land.
Others are "environmental refugees" from northern and western China where the land has just given out from degraded soil, dried up water resources or the relentless advance of the Central Asian deserts.
Many go home with money in their pockets, but many also go home nurturing grievances.
On a recent afternoon, six unkempt men lying on bedrolls in Beijing's main railway station explained why they were returning to Jiangsu Province after less than a month at work here. 
Their spokesman was a 24-year-old farmer named Liu with a face lined by weather and worry.
"We just don't want to work here any more," he said. 
"We left our construction team yesterday without notifying the boss. 
It serves him right."
The construction boss had come to Mr. Liu's hometown and promised to pay the villagers $1.72 a day to lay bricks and pour concrete. 
He said he would also pay for their train tickets. 
But when they got to the site, near Beijing's international airport, the boss cut their wages to 57 cents a day and told them they would have to pay for their own train tickets.
 
The Uses of Money
Their tempers simmered for a month before they decided to head back to the farm, where their wives were looking after the rice crop.
Speaking in a tone that reflected their intimidation in the big city, Mr. Liu said: "We dare not walk in Beijing alone. 
We are new here. 
Some people might find faults with us, or fine us."
Remittances from peasants who do find work are dramatically redistributing the new wealth.
Professor Fan said that in one county in Sichuan Province, migrants remitted $138 million last year, more than the total economic output of the county, which was $115 million. 
A recent study of China's rural economy said migrant farmers from Anhui Province sent home $862 million, which exceeded the provincial government's annual revenue by $230 million.
What is most remarkable, however, is the sheer mass of migration.
During Lunar New Year celebrations, when all 1.2 billion Chinese are drawn home to their families, train stations became encampments for hundreds of thousands of travelers a day, Woodstock-sized crowds of peasants waiting for trains in dozens of rail hubs.
 
52 Trampled to Death
At the New Year in February, China's overburdened rail system pressed special freight trains into service, each one bulging with human cargo packed so tightly that some passengers became hysterical with claustrophobia. 
In one accident, 52 people were trampled to death when 10,000 migrants were herded onto a freight train in Hunan Province.
Mr. Ren arrived recently in Beijing hoping to land a job in the local coal mines. 
He made his way to the labor market, becoming one face in a sea of laborers for hire.
Alarmed at the rapid growth of Beijing, the municipal authorities have posted signs saying the market has been closed. 
This has not stopped the peasants from coming, nor has it stopped gangs of criminals from prowling the market, looking for women and children to abduct and sell into China's booming trade in prostitutes and wives for sale.
 
From One City to Next
Policemen on foot patrols often scatter the workers like so many chickens.
One laborer who kept well away from the police was Wang Xinmin, 24, who has migrated from one city to another since he left Henan Province at 17. 
Too much work on not enough land put him on the road, he said.
He has worked in the far south, at a garment factory in the special economic zone of Shenzhen, adjacent to Hong Kong, but it did not last.
"The local people there bullied us because we were from the countryside," he said. 
And the factory boss, who had promised high wages, delivered only half of that on payday.
"The working conditions were really unsafe and chaotic," he said, "and though we were supposed to work eight hours a day, actually we had to work much longer."
Having lost his most recent job, as a busboy, Mr. Wang said he would try for two more weeks to land another job in Beijing before heading home.
 
Farming 'Not Worth It'
Mr. Wang sat cross-legged under a pine tree near the labor market, and when he finished telling his story, he listened to one from Mr. Ren, who comes from a line of farmers in the hardscrabble hills of Hebei, 120 miles northwest of Beijing.
"People like me don't want to work on the land anymore," Mr. Ren said. 
"It's backbreaking work. 
I've tried it. 
The land is not fertile, and it is far from any water. 
It's just not worth it."
If he stayed home and worked the land, Mr. Ren said, he might earn $345 a year if rain were plentiful. 
But working in a Beijing coal mines, he might take home nearly $700.
In either case, it is not enough to get a wife these days. 
"I would like to have a wife," he said. 
"But the dowry demands of girls are very high," higher even than the wages of a migrant coal miner.
