
China's troops streamed into this new Chinese territory today, in a joyful procession that revealed how deeply people here yearn for law and order after the gangsterism that stained the last years of Portuguese colonial rule.
At noon, 12 hours after the ceremony in which China gained sovereignty over Macao, a convoy of armored personnel carriers, buses and trucks rumbled across the border from Zhuhai, on the Chinese mainland. 
Less than an hour later, the 500 troops secured their objective: a makeshift barracks in a vacant apartment building in the center of Macao.
Tens of thousands of people lined the route, cheering and waving Chinese flags, in a largely unscripted expression of hospitality. 
It was a contrast to the handover of Hong Kong two years ago, when the arrival of the Chinese Army was met with a mixture of curiosity and dread.
"I am thrilled because the soldiers give me confidence," said Lau Kit Leng, 34, a homemaker. 
"Security has been such a big problem in Macao. 
The troops give me a reason to hope."
The Chinese Army seems destined to play a very different role in Macao than in Hong Kong. 
In well-policed Hong Kong, the troops have kept a very low profile. 
They arrived in predawn darkness on July 1, 1997, and headed to their barracks, where they have essentially remained.
In Macao, where the colonial administration could not stop a gang war for control of the territory's lucrative casinos, officials said the army would play a powerful symbolic role in restoring law and order. 
On the streets today, several people said that if the local police were not up to the job, they would be happy to see the army go after the gangsters.
Edmund Ho, the new chief executive of Macao, insisted that the troops would not be used for police work. 
But he said they would give people a sense of safety. 
And he added that having a garrison nearby would help him reform the Macao police force, which has been plagued by corruption.
The deployment of troops was a bone of contention between China and Portugal in an otherwise smooth handover. 
Portugal withdrew its soldiers shortly after its revolution in 1974, and Portuguese officials said the joint declaration governing the return of the colony did not provide for stationing troops there.
But early this year, China's deputy prime minister, Qian Qichen, said the government planned to send an advance guard to the colony even before the handover.
In March, President Jorge Sampaio of Portugal briefly threatened to boycott the handover ceremony if the Chinese did not explain why they were not abiding by the agreement.
In an interview here on Sunday, Mr. Sampaio seemed eager to wash his hands of the issue. 
"China is China," he said. 
"China has sovereign rights. 
Macao is going to be a special region of China."
      
