
China has been on an American shopping spree in recent months, ordering more than $1 billion of airplanes, cars, telecommunications and oil equipment, fertilizer and more.
Driving the deals has been a June 4 deadline by which President Clinton must decide whether to extend China's most-favored-nation status, which offers low tariffs and other trade privileges comparable to those of other United States trading partners. 
If China is denied the low tariffs it now enjoys, those deals would collapse, and the Chinese are determined to show the value of their market to the United States.
During his election campaign, President Clinton said he would not approve the extension without receiving Chinese assurances on human rights policies and arms sales. 
And in Washington in recent days the debate has focused on these issues.
But many American companies are vigorously lobbying the White House and Congress for an extension of China's trading privileges, pointing out that that billions of dollars in exports are at stake, as well as thousands of jobs.
Many business leaders say that using trade privileges to address human rights and arms proliferation will do little to persuade the Chinese to make changes. 
And some executives argue that selling to China can help the United States realize its policy goals.
"It has long been recognized that the pen is mightier than the sword," said Randall L. Tobias, vice chairman of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. 
"The modern version of that is: the fax machine is mightier than the rifle. 
It is impossible for a society that has more open telecommunications to continue to be repressive."
 
 
Estimate of 150,000 Jobs
Trade experts estimated that exports to China created about 150,000 jobs in the United States last year.
These are among the most recent negotiations between China and America:
*An $800 million agreement to buy 21 jetliners from Boeing, the largest foreign airplane order this year. 
China has agreed to buy or lease 215 airplanes worth a total of $9 billion in the next several years. 
Aerospace goods are the largest American export to China, accounting for $2.1 billion in sales last year.
*Orders for 4,600 vehicles each from General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler, worth a total of $160 million.
*The China National Petroleum Corporation ordered $200 million of oil drilling and exploration equipment from companies in Louisiana, Texas and Washington, and hired the Halliburton Company of Dallas to help with exploration and production.
*The Chinese Space and Aeronautics Administration is negotiating with Hughes Aerospace, a division of General Motors, for satellites that could cost up to $800 million.
*China's vice minister of trade is currently in the United States, shopping for wheat and phosphate fertilizers, while the president of China's National Cereals Corporation is on a buying mission, discussing grain deals with American companies and the Agriculture Department.
Clinton Administration trade officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, say they expect Mr. Clinton to set some conditions on renewal, which they hope the Chinese will accept. 
Congress would then have three months to override Mr. Clinton's decision.
But many American executives are nervous.
 
 
'People Will Lose Jobs'
"President Clinton visited Seattle and promised that he was going to work hard to help keep aerospace jobs in America," said Lawrence W. Clarkson, vice president for planning and international development at Boeing. 
"Well, if he does not renew China's status or places unacceptable conditions on it, he will be doing the exact opposite of what he promised. 
We will lose orders and people will lose jobs."
A.T.& T. says it hopes to make billions of dollars through a joint agreement with the Chinese Government to provide the country with modern telecommunications. 
Company executives estimate that they can supply about half the 15 million telephone lines that China plans to install each year for the next several years. 
"We are talking about a business in China that is as big if not bigger than that in the United States," Mr. Tobias said.
"American companies are working the China trade issue more aggressively than ever before because the commercial stakes are so much higher this year," said Richard A. Brecher, director of business advisory services for the United States-China Business Council, a private association representing about 200 American businesses in China. 
"The pressure from the Chinese is not overt, but it's generally understood that all these big business deals will die overnight if their favorable status is revoked. 
Everything that we are selling, they can buy from someone else."
Also lobbying on behalf of China is Christopher Patten, Britain's Governor of Hong Kong, who met on Monday with President Clinton and other officials in Washington to press the case for continuing China's trade privileges.
 
Fastest-Growing Economy
China has the world's fastest-growing economy, at 12 percent a year. 
While spending $7.47 billion in the United States last year, China exported more than three times as much -- $25.68 billion -- to the United States, mainly in consumer items like toys, clothing and footwear.
Orders from China last year, which were up 19 percent from 1991, were mainly for wheat, aircraft, fertilizer, cotton, wood, electric machinery, telephone and scientific equipment and chemicals.
Not every American company with Chinese connections takes issue with Mr. Clinton's views. 
Indeed, Levi Strauss & Company, the San Francisco-based apparel maker, announced Monday that it was ending most of its business in China, citing "the pervasive violation of human rights."
 
 
'I Have No Choice'
But Levi Strauss is not a major player in China, buying less than 2 percent of its goods there. 
And whether other companies will follow Levi Strauss's lead is far from certain. 
Indeed, many other apparel companies, particularly those whose garments are made of silk or cashmere, simply cannot move their production out of China.
"I have no choice," said Gene Kuhl, president of Silk Club Inc., a New York company that contracts with Chinese factories for about 80 percent of the washable silk garments it makes. 
"At least 99 percent of the world's silk comes out of China. 
I'd have to become the Cotton Club to do what Levi's has done."
Another opponent of China is is the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which says that the Chinese export goods made with forced labor in its prisons. 
It also contends that the China imprisons union organizers and protest movement leaders.
"The factories and prisons are located right next to each other in many cases," said Burni Bond, director of research for the labor organization's international affairs division. 
"It's a philosophy of re-education through work, and it's simply not right."
The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 forbids the importation of goods made with prison labor.
But William B. Turner, chairman of IMC Fertilizer Group of Northbrook, Ill., said that ending China's favorable trade status might force his company to cut its staff by 20 percent, or 600 to 700 workers.
"With its concentration on agriculture, China is an essential market for us, and we can't afford to lose it," Mr. Turner said. 
"Having traveled there for many years, I have come to realize that it's better to work within their system rather than applying pressure from the outside."
