
China said today that its security forces are holding Wei Jingsheng, the country's best-known dissident, under arrest because he is "suspected of having committed new crimes" while on parole after 14 1/2 years in prison.
The statement by the official New China News Agency followed several days of uncertainty over Mr. Wei's whereabouts and represents a serious attempt to silence him.
"The Beijing Public Security Department has decided to investigate suspected new criminal offences by Wei Jingsheng," the brief dispatch said.
"Wei is being interrogated and placed under surveillance by the Beijing Public Security Department in accordance with the law because he violated the law on many occasions and is suspected of having committed new crimes when he was deprived of his political rights and on parole," the statement added. 
It was attributed to Public Security officials.
 
U.S. Sought Clarifications
After Mr. Wei's arrest on Friday, the United States Embassy in Beijing and other Western Governments sought urgent clarifications about his status from China's foreign ministry. 
It now appears that a brief statement issued on Saturday, suggesting that Mr. Wei had left police custody, was incorrect.
He was arrested on Friday by seven carloads of security agents as he attempted to reenter the capital.
Though unstated in today's official dispatch, the alleged criminal activity almost certainly relates to Mr. Wei's outspoken criticism of the Chinese leadership and his campaign for democracy and human rights, which has been waged since last fall through essays and interviews with foreign journalists.
Mr. Wei's campaign has drawn international attention and figured prominently during the winter in relations between the Clinton Administration and Beijing.
 
Met With Top U.S. 
Aide
The State Department's top human rights official, John Shattuck, met with Mr. Wei on Feb. 
27 and carried a message from him back to President Clinton urging the President to remain firm in demanding progress on human rights from Beijing, including steps toward the release of thousands of political prisoners.
Chinese officials were incensed with Mr. Shattuck's initiative. 
They accused him of interferring in China's internal affairs and of disregarding Chinese law relating to parole restrictions on Mr. Wei.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher defended Mr. Shattuck's actions, but recriminations over the meeting were responsible for some of the harsh and bruising exchanges on human rights during Mr. Christopher's visit to Beijing last month.
China's judicial authorities have taken the position that under the terms of Mr. Wei's parole, which expired last week, he was not allowed to meet with foreigners, especially journalists and diplomats, and he was not allowed to publish abroad.
 
Complicates Trade Issue
Though Mr. Wei's fate is not directly tied to President Clinton's decision linking China's future status as an American trading partner with its human rights record, the 43-year-old dissident is the most powerful symbol of the human rights campaign in China.
His detention will only inflame the atmosphere surrounding China's attempt to uncouple the renewal of its most-favored-nation trading status from concern about human rights abuses.
Western diplomats this week said they could find no justification in Chinese law for the restrictions that are being imposed on Mr. Wei.
"They seem to be setting a new standard on the denial of political rights, and it's a little disturbing," one diplomat said.
 
Trouble From the Top
Mr. Wei received eight warnings from Public Security officials between last November and early March. 
In a recent interview, he said he believed Premier Li Peng and President Jiang Zemin had taken exception to his published remarks in recent months and directed that he be given stern warnings.
Last November Mr. Wei was said to have particularly angered President Jiang with an essay published on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times. 
The essay warned Mr. Clinton not to ease the pressure on China's Communist leadership for human rights reform.
In the essay, he compared the leadership to an "old wolf" who would never change it ways. 
He was later summoned by Public Security agents and told that the essay was a violation of his parole.
But again in February, Mr. Wei sent another letter to The Times calling on the International Olympic Committee to sanction China for jailing a young dissident, Qin Yongmin, who had opposed China's bid to host the 2000 Summer Games on the grounds that, because China was a poor country, the money could be best spent on alleviating poverty.
 
Violation of Olympic Spirit
Mr. Wei argued that it was a violation of the Olympic spirit if no protest were raised about China's jailing of a young man for the nonviolent expression of his opinion.
Public Security officials have also taken exception to Mr. Wei's plans to write a memoir about his years in prison. 
Mr. Wei has retained a New York publishing executive, Robert L. Bernstein, to represent him in negotiations with publishers.
Such a memoir of life inside China's prison system -- where Mr. Wei's health was nearly ruined by long period of solitary confinement, denial of bathing privileges for up to nine months and the loss of his teeth from poor nutrition -- would be another powerful indictment of China's human rights record.
