
The last time a top Chinese leader came to Japan, he lectured at every stop over the nation's past war crimes, demanding an apology. 
The visit quickly degenerated into a fuming, finger-pointing session that damaged relations between the two countries, Asia's most powerful.
So there was a palpable sense of relief here this weekend when Prime Minister Zhu Rongji of China soft-pedaled the bitter question of Japan's conquest of his country in the 1930's as he made the rounds of official banquets and meetings with business groups and ordinary Japanese. 
He focused instead on economic and security issues whose resolution both countries say could bring them closer together.
In a statement on his arrival on Thursday, Mr. Zhu said that cooperation between China and Japan was vital for the "peace, stabilityI and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region," adding that he sought to "promote mutual understanding and trust" between them.
There had been a nervous drumroll of speculation here for weeks about how Mr. Zhu would handle the subject of Japan's brutal colonial occupation. 
Many officials openly expressed hope that after the last bitter experience -- President Jiang Zemin's visit two years ago is still vividly recalled here -- the perennial sore point would not come up.
Since Mr. Jiang's visit, a senior Japanese diplomat said, there had been a growing perception in Tokyo that China was using the war issue as a diplomatic weapon to cow Japan. 
"They want us to do something to put this matter definitively behind us," the diplomat said. 
"But we cannot put the issue to rest as long as it is being wielded against us."
In the end, though, if Mr. Zhu let his hosts down by discussing the past, he did it so delicately as to all but remove the sting.
In a long meeting with Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori, Mr. Zhu told him that China did not hold the Japanese people responsible for the war. 
"Japanese people were also victims of Japanese militarism," he said.
Later, at a town hall type meeting with about 100 carefully chosen Japanese citizens, a relaxed and confident looking Mr. Zhu said China still felt that Japan had never properly apologized for its war atrocities. 
But instead of scolding the audience, he said it was "Japan's problem" to decide how -- or indeed whether -- to atone for its past. 
"But I hope you will consider it," he said.
The Chinese prime minister further disarmed his audience by saying that he had already faced questions at home for not raising the wartime issue with his hosts, or for not being sufficiently forthright about it. 
"Am I weak?" he asked.
After the meeting, many Japanese participants said they had been deeply impressed.
"I imagined that he was really stern before I met him," said Kyosuke Kutrita, 27, an economics major at Hitotsubashi University in Tokyo. 
"But talking with him, that image has gone away. 
He is so friendly and flexible, and he answered questions directly."
If it is true that China feels genuine pain over Japan's wartime brutality, it is also true that the question has become a major feature of the diplomatic code language used during friction between two countries.
One sure motive for China's friendlier face during the visit is the country's continuing need for economic aid and investment from Japan. 
Tokyo has provided about $24 billion in aid to China over the last two decades, according to the Japanese Government. 
Japan, however, has grown increasingly uneasy over the rising power of China's armed forces, which consume a large and growing part of the state budget as China continues to seek aid from richer countries.
Japan's anxiety about China's military ambitions has only been heightened in recent months by repeated incursions by Chinese surveillance ships into Japanese waters, and by the reluctance of China to engage in negotiations to delineate the territorial waters between the two countries clearly.
"If China becomes a major military power, the meaning of Japan's development assistance to China will surely come into question," the Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest daily newspaper, said in an editorial about Mr. Zhu's visit.
Japanese legislators, meanwhile, have cited the incursions and the specter of an increasingly menacing neighbor while threatening to block a pending $158 million aid package.
Mr. Zhu sought to calm those concerns on his visit, saying that his country's ships had no hostile intent and agreeing to set up a "hot line" between the two governments and a system of prior notification of ship movements into sensitive areas.
Japanese diplomats say China's military assertiveness is not the only threat to economic aid. 
China has been unusually stingy, they say, in publicizing the details of Japan's aid to the Chinese people, raising suspicions that public opinion was being manipulated to sustain long-held Chinese suspicions toward Japan. 
On that score, too, Mr. Zhu promised to do better.
