
Earlier this year, without providing the health care system with a reason, China's Ministry of Public Health ordered thousands of state-run medical institutions to stop using a certain brand of a common blood product called serum albumin, which is produced by a military-run factory, and to destroy all remaining stocks.
Now, four months after Chinese journalists in Hong Kong and the United States first published reports that the serum was contaminated with the virus that causes AIDS, the Foreign Ministry acknowledged on Thursday that tests of some samples of the serum have indicated the presence of the AIDS virus.
Though Chinese officials have yet to describe the scale of the public health crisis that has arisen from the contamination, there have been no reports of specific cases of the virus being transferred to patients through the serum albumin, which is administered intravenously. 
In China it is used to boost immunity to diseases and in the treatment of liver and kidney ailments.
This case marks the first time China has acknowledged a medical crisis relating to contamination by H.I.V. and the possibility of official negligence in the handling of blood products.
The announcement also reveals the secretive and protective instincts of Chinese military leaders and Communist Party officials, who up to now have covered up this discovery with little indication of any public regard for the potential consequences to unsuspecting health consumers.
The case also confirms what professional health workers have understood for some time: that China's supply of blood and blood products is in large part unscreened for the presence of the virus that causes AIDS, and that therefore, incidents of contamination occur without any notice to the public and with little or no accountability. 
Much of China's supply of blood and blood products is obtained by paying donors.
Some of the serum, which is produced under the Wolongsong label, may have entered the Hong Kong market, and an attempt to recall the products may also have led to profiteering by unscrupulous medical distributors who might continue to sell contaminated supplies because of a general shortage of the product in South China.
Since the ban was issued in April, there has been no public notice in China's state-controlled press and no known warning to foreign embassies representing the tens of thousands of expatriates and foreign tourists in China.
The Ministry of Public Health reports directly to Prime Minister Li Peng. 
This week, a senior health official, Shen Jie, the chief of staff of the department of disease control at the ministry, responded to a query by saying, "Concerning the reports about contaminated serum albumin, since it is related to medicine control, you had better talk to our medicine administrative department, but as far as I know, I have never heard about such a serious case."
At the Department of Medicine Administration and Control, a Mr. Liu said: "No, no, it has never happened. 
Some people outside China and some foreign journalists just made their reports on the basis of rumors."
When contacted a second time, Mr. Liu said: "Sorry, I cannot clarify the information. 
I would say that you had better not report this. 
Since the common people lack the basic knowledge, reporting it without the benefit of long-term experiments will cause chaos in society."
On Tuesday, at the regular news briefing by Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang, he was asked to clarify the persistent reports that the military factory in the central Chinese city of Wuhan was the source of blood products tainted with the AIDS virus.
"I have also heard of this report," he said, "but I have not gotten any confirmation on this issue. 
I promise I will check with other departments and give you the answer later."
The Foreign Ministry on Thursday said it had received the confirmation, but provided no further details other than that the product was banned and an order had been issued to destroy stocks of serum albumin that carry the Wolongsong name.
In recent years, as the AIDS epidemic has spread to every province of China, the health authorities have said they are endeavoring to impose testing and quality control measures on the national blood banks and blood product suppliers, but the enforcement of such standards in China remains problematic.
In this case, the fact that the serum manufacturer was a military hospital under the control of the powerful Guangzhou Military Region may have further complicated the task of investigating the contamination. 
The Chinese military, which engages in broad array of commercial enterprises, is not normally accountable to civilian agencies like the Ministry of Public Health.
China's health authorities said this month that there were 4,305 people confirmed with H.I.V. in China, and they acknowledged that the actual number of cases could be as high as 100,000.
The first reports about the contamination appeared in a New York-based Chinese-language newspaper, The World Journal, in June 1996. 
Another report appeared in China Focus, a newsletter produced by Liu Binyan, the investigative journalist once praised by the Communist Party for his trenchant dispatches on injustice in China. 
Mr. Liu, who infuriated hard-liners like Prime Minister Li, was expelled from the party in 1987 and now continues his investigative work from Princeton, N.J.
These reports say the discovery of the tainted blood products was made by accident by an unidentified Chinese businessman in Dongguan, near Guangzhou. 
The businessman purchased two vials of the serum albumin, and then decided to have them tested at a local hospital, which discovered the presence of the AIDS virus. 
The test was said to have been verified by the National AIDS Detection Center in Beijing.
The discovery led to an investigation by the Public Health Ministry and the Central Military Commission.
Wolongsong blood products are produced by a blood bank that was attached to Military Hospital No. 161 in Wuhan, which is under the control of the General Logistics Department of the Guangzhou Military Region.
But the blood bank is no longer on the site. 
A spokesman at the hospital said this week, "The blood bank has been moved to some other place."
In Guangdong, a spokesman for the Medicine Administrative Bureau of the province said he had heard that there was a document circulated banning the use of the Wolongsong blood products. 
"We just did everything according to the order, but this is the first time that I heard it was contaminated with the AIDS virus."      
Correction
