
"China, My Sorrow" was shown as part of the 1990 New Directors/New Films series. 
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 19, 1990. 
The film -- in Cantonese, Mandarin, and Shanghai dialect with English subtitles -- opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
In a re-education camp during the Chinese Cultural Revolution, a guard asks a prisoner to identify the melody he's playing on a makeshift wind instrument. 
The hapless man blurts out "Mozart," then quickly saves himself by adding, "It's a song called 'Mozart Dreams of Mao Zedong.'
" Though "China, My Sorrow" is not always so pointed or witty, it is a deft and oddly lighthearted tribute to the traditions and spirit of freedom that survived the Cultural Revolution.
The hero is a 13-year-old with wire-rimmed glasses, fondly nicknamed Four Eyes. 
After he is accused of playing "obscene records" -- they are pop, not Mozart, and not obscene by any standards other than Mao's -- he is forced to stand on a public scaffold wearing a large paper dunce cap on which his name and his crime are written. 
He announces to the crowd: "Reactionary father dead. 
Mother, enemy of the people, in jail," then is sent to the camp set in extravagantly beautiful green mountains.
On the surface, "China, My Sorrow" sounds polemical and strangely detached from time and place. 
Set more than 25 years ago, it was made before the repression of anti-Government protesters in 1989. 
(The Chinese-born director, Dai Sijie, shot the film in the Pyrenees.)
But the story is polemical only in the mildest sense. 
And as it creates a distinctive victim and an unlikely setting, it is informed by hope, not anger. 
The film assumes enormous and easy sympathy for Four Eyes, the most innocent of cultural "enemies," a boy with a bit of peach fuzz on his upper lip and an increasingly ragged blue cap and jacket.
As the boy notices, he is in the least oppressive sort of camp, with no Red Guards or barbed wire. 
The film does not argue against the Cultural Revolution; it offers a quiet testimony to irrepressible traditions and individuality.
For though Four Eyes wisely wears a resigned expression on his face, he has the soul of a rebel. 
He and a friend sneak out to the woods to perform an All Souls' Day ritual for Four Eyes's father, using a cigarette as a substitute for incense. 
He is befriended by an old Taoist monk, who will show the boy, in dramatic and ambiguous terms, that traditions literally involve life or death.
Though the film does not have much intellectual rigor, it succeeds as a symbolic portrayal of a youthful, uncorrupted individual spirit.
