
Disregarding the advice of United Nations officials and diplomats, including the United States chief delegate, Madeleine K. Albright, the Chinese Government is holding fast to its decision to move a huge forum on women's issues to a remote tourist area 30 miles from Beijing, a spokeswoman for a Chinese organization said today.
The forum is scheduled to begin on Aug. 
30 and run nearly parallel with the official United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, which begins on Sept. 
4. The forum is expected to draw about 40,000 people from around the world representing a broad spectrum of organizations, some of them militant.
Organizations from countries as diverse as Bangladesh and Brazil are urging that the forum's organizers ask Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to cancel or postpone the official conference if the unofficial gathering cannot take place in Beijing as originally planned.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali is sending an Under Secretary General, Ismat Kittani, to Beijing to discuss the problem. 
China had lobbied hard for this conference as part of an effort to improve its international image after the repression of demonstrations in Tiananmen Square six years ago.
The confrontation over the site of the nongovernmental forum comes at a tense time in Beijing, with the leadership jostling for position as the death of the paramount leader, Deng Xioaping, nears. 
The Chinese Government has detained at least a dozen dissidents in recent weeks.
"We have no plans to change the venue from Huairou," the unidentified Chinese spokeswoman said in Beijing, referring to an underdeveloped tourist area near the Great Wall. 
A long letter to that effect was sent on Monday to Khunying Supatra Masdit, the Thai politician who is chairwoman of the forum, by the All-China Women's Federation, but no message was received here at the forum's headquarters.
Diplomats here say it has been clear to the Chinese since they were awarded the United Nations conference in late 1991 that the nongovernmental forum has become part of the package and that there is a great deal of interaction between the government delegations and the nongovernmental groups. 
But some part of the Chinese leadership has apparently begun to panic at the prospect, or at least have second thoughts.
Groups from the conservative right-to-life movement to advocates for abortion, lesbian rights and the legalization of prostitution are among those planning to go, along with hundreds of grass-roots women's organizations from developing and industrial countries with strong economic and social platforms, some touching on human rights.
Until March, both the forum and the official conference were planning to meet in the same general area of Beijing. 
Then the Chinese suddenly informed the forum that the gymnasium at its assigned site had structural problems.
The Huairou resort area does not have an assembly hall large enough for the forum's meetings. 
Organizers who recently visited the site said that it also did not have adequate telephones or fax lines and that accommodation was scattered all over town. 
It took the visitors 50 minutes to reach Huairou from the conference site -- with a police escort.
In the letter to Ms. Supatra, the forum's chairwoman, the Chinese said they would open a special express lane along the road from Beijing to Huairou, and would make available in the resort area (in addition to 10,000 beds) 71 meeting rooms, 31 tents and "1,000 parasols with tables and chairs for informal consultations."
