
Nearly 35 years after a border war that left China occupying a sprawling region of Himalayan uplands claimed by India, the two countries agreed in principle today on mutual troop withdrawals from disputed areas along their 2,500-mile frontier and pledged that "neither side shall use its military capability against the other."
The pact was a centerpiece of the visit to New Delhi by President Jiang Zemin of China, the first Chinese head of state to visit independent India. 
He arrived here on Thursday for a four-day stay that has been billed by both countries as a fresh opportunity to rebuild a relationship that has wavered between bitter and wary for three decades.
Apart from the pledge that they would not go to war, which has appeared in past agreements between the two countries, details were deferred for another round of negotiations, and no deadline was set for a final accord.
The border agreement, signed after Mr. Jiang met for talks with India's Prime Minister, H. D. Deve Gowda, was accompanied by other measures intended to give fresh momentum to the relationship. 
They included a pact that looks ahead to the first direct maritime links between the two countries in modern times and an accord on joint measures to combat narcotics trafficking. 
In a concession valued by India because of Indian nationals living in Hong Kong, Beijing also agreed to allow New Delhi to maintain its consulate-general in Hong Kong after Britain hands the territory back to China next July.
Mr. Jiang and Mr. Deve Gowda hailed the agreements, especially the pact on troop withdrawals, as a breakthrough that would set the tone for closer ties in the next century between the world's two most populous nations. 
The developments seemed to especially please Mr. Jiang, for whom the visit capped a week of diplomatic accomplishments. 
On Sunday, during a meeting of Asian and Pacific leaders in Manila, Mr. Jiang met with President Clinton and agreed to exchange state visits during the next two years, a major break for China in its bid to lessen the ostracism that followed the massacre of demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
In banquet speeches on Thursday night, Mr. Jiang, who is general secretary of China's Communist Party as well as head of state, competed with India's President, Shankar Dayal Sharma, in offering visions of the India-China relationship that had overtones of the era of Jawaharlal Nehru and Zhou Enlai, in the heady days before the 1962 war exploded their vows of Asian solidarity.
Mr. Jiang spoke of India and China as "major powers in the world" that had "a common responsibility to the whole of human society to develop ourselves as quickly as possible."
Mr. Sharma, whose position is largely titular, spoke of India and China as "the two great nations of broad-mindedness and wisdom" that had pioneered human civilization. 
"We will surely bring a cooperative and constructive partnership into the 21st century," Mr. Sharma said.
But critics in India said the Government, following a long pattern in dealings with Beijing, had allowed China to resort to diplomatic evasions on the border dispute and on other issues affecting India's security, including allegations that China has supplied Pakistan with missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
By failing to challenge China more bluntly, some critics said, India underlined its weak position, which flows from the growing disparity in economic and military power between the two Asian giants.
While China has one of the world's fastest-growing economies and armed forces equipped with a large and increasingly sophisticated nuclear arsenal, India has an economy that remains mired in socialist-era inefficiencies, growing at perhaps half the rate of China's, and a large but unwieldy military establishment that has a covert nuclear weapons program but so far no acknowledged operational nuclear capability.
In briefings on the talks, spokesmen said Mr. Deve Gowda had skirted the issue of Chinese assistance to Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, telling Mr. Jiang only that India was concerned about the flow of "advanced weapons" into the sub-continent. 
Spokesmen for India said it was left to India's Foreign Minister, I. K. Gujral, to raise the nuclear issue directly in a meeting today with his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen. 
Mr. Qian repeated China's denials that Beijing has aided Pakistan's nuclear weapons program.
India's concerns have been roused by United States intelligence reports that China has supplied Pakistan with as many as 40 M-11 missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads. 
Similar reports last year said China had supplied equipment to assist Pakistan in producing fissionable material for its nuclear weapons program. 
A Chinese spokesman said today that when Mr. Gujral raised the issue, Mr. Qian replied that China "did not, does not and will not transfer any nuclear technology to any regime or country."
Indian critics said that by soft-pedaling Chinese nuclear technology transfers in the New Delhi talks, the Indian Government was sending signals to China that it could not stomach a confrontation. 
In the same way, the critics said, India had in effect kow-towed to China by agreeing to a new border pact that created the impression of growing harmony without making progress toward the return of land in the Aksai Chin region, claimed by India as part of its mountain state of Jammu and Kashmir, or even nailing down details of the promised troop withdrawals.
Brahma Chellaney, an analyst at the Center for Policy Research, a private think-tank in New Delhi, said India's reluctance to press China on security reflected a "fear" of China.
"There is a mounting fear that stems from the growing asymmetry between India and China, between our relative economic and military strengths," Mr. Chellaney said. 
"That is something that Indian policy makers don't like to think about very much because it gives them nightmares."
