
China warned today that it planned to retaliate heavily if the United States imposes $2 billion of trade sanctions on China for failing to reduce the piracy of computer software, music and movies.
A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, Cui Tiankai, said China would respond immediately with a list of its own sanctions, amounting to even more than the American penalty, if Washington proceeds with its threat to impose 100 percent tariffs on a long list of Chinese-made goods.
Mr. Cui rejected American complaints and instead accused the United States of being the guilty partner in violating an agreement on intellectual property rights that the two nations signed last year. 
But he did not offer details of possible Chinese countermeasures.
"The U.S. side has failed to carry out its obligations, but it criticizes China, which has made great achievements and fully implemented its obligations," Mr. Cui said. 
"This is unfair."
The White House has set May 15 as the day it will publish a list of $3 billion worth of Chinese imports that could be tagged with tariffs of 100 percent when the sanctions take effect one month later unless China takes drastic action to show a new willingness to crack down on its piracy. 
The total is expected to be reduced to about $2 billion after various industries voice objections.
In the past, threats by Chinese and American officials to impose sanctions on each other have generally been a prelude to an agreement that comes moments before a deadline. 
In February 1995, Mickey Kantor, who was then the trade representative, announced trade sanctions, only to see them avoided after weeks of round-the-clock negotiatons yielded a landmark agreement on intellectual property rights shortly before midnight on Feb. 
26, 12 hours after the deadline had passed.
But this year's talks are being carried out during a Presidential campaign in the United States, and in the middle of a succession struggle in China. 
So while trade officials on each side stress the long-term importance of intellectual-property rights, their negotiations are entwined in diplomatic relations that have been badly strained and complicated by the way that get-tough-with-the-foreigner politics play well in each nation.
The intellectual property battlefield is also dwarfed by the politics surrounding the larger issue of China's most-favored-nation trading status. 
President Clinton has said he intends to renew China's favorable trade status, and if that leaves him vulnerable to charges of being soft on China, intellectual property rights are a place where he can look tough.
Washington is sending Lee M. Sands, assistant trade representative, to Beijing to meet with his Chinese counterparts beginning on Monday, two days before the May 15 announcement, ostensibly in a last-ditch effort to avoid a trade dispute.
Yet Mr. Sands' bargaining position changed sharply this week with word in Washington that American officials had discovered evidence of 13 previously undetected Chinese factories producing pirated American compuer software, music and movies, in addition to 31 existing companies suspected of pirating compact disks at some time.
Coming just days before a final round of negotiations, the disclosure seemed like a ploy to strengthen the American bargaining position, since Mr. Sands' office is continually collecting information about pirates and could hardly have learned about the new factories all of a sudden. 
United States officials in China say no one monitoring violators has actually seen or verified the existence of any newly discovered factory.      
