
Off a meandering dirt road that cuts through soft hills laden with tropical foliage, a pair of young women tended to thousands of newly hatched ducklings in a rundown shack one recent afternoon, enveloped by a gentle chorus of chirping.
Behind this innocent-looking setting lay a workshop where copyright pirates hid a crude but lucrative operation that illegally copied millions of compact disks until an anonymous caller told the local authorities, who came and shut it down in February.
The duckling hatchery is still in business, but two compact disk production lines were confiscated and three men who ran them were taken into custody by officials who said later that they had rarely seen such a well-disguised operation.
The caller was given $36,000, an enormous sum in a rural area of southern China where duck tenders make $25 a month.
After years of dragging their feet, and ignoring demands from the United States and elsewhere, China's copyright police are finally pursuing and arresting pirates, even well-hidden ones. 
The authorities are also being creative, trying to pierce the shell of local secrecy by offering informants bricks of cash.
Since a concerted effort began in December here in Guangdong Province, the acknowledged center of copyright piracy in China, the authorities say they have arrested more than 100 offenders and shut down 28 underground factories, where each disk-making machine could copy 10,000 disks a day.
Dozens more factories are believed to exist, but many have suspended production, apparently in the hope that the current campaign will subside after a few months. 
After all, the history of Communist China is a catalogue of political campaigns, most of which last just a few months or a year before they are overtaken by new ones.
Fighting copyright piracy in China, one of the world's biggest violators of intellectual property rights, often looks like an unwinnable task. 
Yet industry experts say Beijing seems serious about the current crackdown, in part because it is beginning to recognize the dangers that piracy poses to China's own legitimate music and movie industries.
The stimulus for the current crackdown, officials here and in Beijing say, is a domestic crusade for "spiritual civilization" that President Jiang Zemin is trying to make his political signature as he consolidates his power as the successor of Deng Xiaoping, the political patriarch who died in February.
Mr. Jiang is expending a fair amount of political capital on the drive, because it has been opposed by many local officials, army officers and members of the secret police who have profited from the trade.
To overcome such opposition, which stymied previous attempts to enforce laws against piracy, Mr. Jiang is framing his campaign as one aimed at pornography, something China's leaders strongly object to. 
Even though dirty movies account for only about one-tenth of the pirated videos in China, the current crackdown is called "Sweep Away Pornography; Combat Illegal Copying."
While devised as a purely domestic campaign, Beijing is also using the crackdown to comply with parts of an agreement signed with the United States in February 1995. 
Current efforts are winning guarded approval from industry experts who monitor intellectual property abuses.
"Since December they've been doing really well," said Cheng Ching-ming, the representative in China of the International Federation of Phonographic Industries, a London-based organization representing more than 100 music companies. 
"The question is whether they will keep up the pressure, which they need to do for a few years to succeed."
In perhaps the strongest sign yet of greater confidence in Chinese enforcement, Warner Brothers recently signed an agreement with a Shenzhen-based company that was suspended in 1995 for copyright violations to start legally producing video compact disks of 100 movies owned by Warner.
Similarly, many other compact disk factories that pirated music in the past are now getting more legitimate music business than they can handle, a sign that the crackdown is having an effect, said William A. Brent, a consultant specializing in China's entertainment industry.
Until this year, the Guangdong authorities acknowledged the existence of only 19 compact disk factories in their province, because they only counted the legally registered outfits, many of which were investigated and found guilty of piracy.
With most legitimate factories behaving legally, local officials now admit that there are several dozen underground factories that were churning out large quantities of illegally copied disks until recently, and continuing on a smaller scale now.
"There's so much money to be made, people will continue to take risks," said Chen Jiakui, who heads Guangdong Province's office on copyright violations. 
"It's not something that can be stopped in a day, but we're making a difference."
United States trade officials say they deserve at least some credit for Beijing's new resolve. 
But the fact that the Chinese authorities began a serious crackdown only in recent months, after years of pressure from Washington, suggests that China's domestic politics are the greater influence.
The decision seems to have been made by Communist Party leaders at a Central Committee meeting last September. 
Even so, Mr. Chen said, the Guangdong authorities held meetings for three months before they announced a plan of action on Dec. 
11.
On that day, officials here publicized new efforts to ferret out underground pirates, who have begun to hide their compact disk copiers in increasingly obscure places. 
One method is to offer the $36,000 reward to any caller whose information leads to the closing of an illegal operation. 
"We recognize now that we can't find all these offenders without help from ordinary people," Mr. Chen said.
More than 20 of the 28 illegally operating factories that were shut down since last year, he said, were identified through information from anonymous callers.
Even so, Mr. Chen conceded that winning the fight against piracy would involve far more than arresting the factory managers, and that backers -- often Hong Kong and Taiwan businessmen involved in organized crime -- are harder to catch.
"If you put the workers in jail, that doesn't solve it," Mr. Chen said. 
"The real problem is the big bosses."
The nexus of organized crime, the Chinese secret police and movie piracy came to light in late 1995 in an incident involving the International Federation of Phonographic Industries.
Mr. Cheng, the group's representative, pushed the Guangdong authorities to prosecute a local company, which he had learned was run by a senior official in the Guangdong State Security Bureau and was copying a high volume of pornographic movies supplied by shady Hong Kong businessmen. 
In late 1995, secret police agents came to Mr. Cheng's office and demanded that he retract his allegations.
After Mr. Cheng persisted, the police agents jailed him for a week, saying he had "threatened China's security."
They never formally charged him, apparently a violation of China's legal procedures.
Mr. Cheng, who is a legal resident of Hong Kong, was released after Beijing officials intervened, but the secret police warned him that his life was in danger and instructed him to close his office in Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong. 
He did so for several months, although his Shanghai office remained open.
Mr. Chen, the provincial official, insisted that all cases would be handled "in accordance with the law."
But when asked about Mr. Cheng's experience, he chose his words carefully. 
"If an organization steps outside its legal boundaries," he said, "then other government agencies will object."
Asked which boundaries the organization had crossed, Mr. Chen said: "These cases are very complicated. 
It's best not to go into them too deeply."
      
