
Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in Beijing on Friday night to deliver a tough message to Chinese leaders on the country's human rights performance.
The atmosphere was decidedly chilly, with each side keeping the other at arm's length and backing away from routine diplomatic niceties. 
China showed its disdain for American human rights concerns by continuing to round up dissidents.
Mr. Christopher, the highest-ranking official sent to China since President Clinton took office, plans to drive home the point that unless Beijing makes rapid and substantial progress in easing repression, its preferential trade status will not be renewed in June.
 
Circumstances Allow No Pomp
Senior Vice Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei greeted Mr. Christopher at the airport with a perfunctory handshake, avoiding the pomp that might have surrounded his first trip to Beijing as Secretary of State.
China's leaders deeply resent Administration demands regarding China's human rights record, and Mr. Christopher can only have antagonized them further in recent days by saying they were "moving in the wrong direction" by detaining dissidents.
It is Mr. Christopher who will submit a recommendation to Mr. Clinton on whether China has satisfied the terms the President set last year for an extension of its trade privileges.
 
No Sights or Socializing
Mr. Christopher abandoned his plans to make a statement at the airport after Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, argued against it, aides said. 
And the Chinese in turn offered no public words of welcome there. 
Nor do they plan to hold a banquet in Mr. Christopher's honor. 
Such meals are part of the protocol of such visits, and their absence, along with the lack of remarks at the airport, underlines the skittishness about this meeting.
Mr. Christopher has also canceled a sightseeing tour that has been a tradition for visiting Secretaries of State. 
Michael McCurry, a State Department spokesman, explained Mr. Christopher's decision: "He wants to set a tone focused on the purpose of his meetings here."
With the diplomatic climate poisoned by the recent arrests of dissidents, the visit, planned as the capstone of a new strategy of dealing positively with the Chinese, looks far less promising. 
Mr. Lord told reporters en route to Beijing from Tokyo that the Chinese might do nothing more than listen and ask questions.
"This is an ongoing process, and therefore you can't have a scorecard at every stop," said Mr. Lord, a former Ambassador to China, adding: "We would hope to have results from this trip. 
But as the pattern is with the Chinese, there may be results in the wake of the trip but not while you're there."
Two dissidents were detained on Friday in Shanghai, and one was released later. 
Yang Zhou, who was detained for nearly 24 hours last week, spent Friday night in detention before being freed this morning. 
Wang Fuchen, a leader of the China Study Group on Human Rights, remains in custody.
 
Dissidents Leaving the Capital
Other dissidents left Beijing, apparently to avoid police harassment during the visit. 
Zhuo Duo, one of the last demonstrators to leave Tiananmen Square before troops crushed the 1989 democracy movement, told The Associated Press on Friday that he was leaving along with Min Qi and Wang Dan, a former student leader who was detained twice in the last week.
On Thursday, Mr. Wang announced in an open letter to Parliament that he would begin a "legal and open" campaign to investigate human rights abuses.
Wei Jingsheng, the country's most prominent dissident, also said that he was dropping out of sight.
Mr. Wei, who left Beijing last weekend after agents detained him for 30 hours, called other dissidents on Thursday and told them to expect "a great event" during Mr. Christopher's visit.
That message increased speculation that plans were under way for a meeting with Mr. Christopher. But the Secretary said on Thursday that he had no plans to meet dissidents during his three-day visit, a stance that a senior aide said had not changed. 
He is, however, scheduled to meet with a group of Chinese lawyers on Sunday.
A number of friends of dissidents have probed the American Embassy in Beijing on the question, but no one has made a formal request, a senior State Department official said.
Frank Wisner, Undersecretary of Defense for Policy, who accompanied Mr. Christopher with plans to discuss greatly expanded military cooperation with the Chinese, will scale back his talks, a senior Administration official said. 
Instead, he will limit his agenda to human rights issues and conversion of defense industries.
And Chinese leaders have not let the world forget a diplomatic success this week in Geneva where the United Nations Commission on Human Rights shelved a resolution the United States was pushing to censure Beijing for its human rights record.
On Thursday, President Jiang Zemin declared that it was "unpopular" to criticize China on human rights. 
"We should justly and forcefully refute such attacks," Mr. Jiang said.
Mr. Christopher and his aides toned down their remarks on Friday in an apparent effort to avoid embarrassing China further just before their arrival.
 
'Overall Significant Progress'
"I will reiterate that overall significant progress on human rights remains necessary if I am to recommend the renewal of most-favored-nation trade status for China," Mr. Christopher told a business group before leaving Tokyo. 
"What we seek in China should not be regarded as extraordinary. 
What we seek is no more than the recognition of the most basic universally recognized human rights."
With most-favored-nation trade status, China benefits from lower tariffs on its exports to the United States.
Mr. Christopher did not make himself available to reporters on Friday for questions. 
Airport security in Beijing was extremely tight, and Chinese police prevented the journalists traveling on his plane from approaching him.
An American Embassy official warned the traveling press that it was routine for the Chinese to go through the papers and computer disks left in hotel rooms and to eject reporters who asked questions at photo opportunities.
When asked whether the American Embassy was condoning attempts to prevent reporters from addressing Mr. Christopher, the official, who insisted on anonymity, replied: "This is China. 
It is their building, their property, their security."
The big fear within Mr. Christopher's inner circle is that the continuing arrests mean that the Chinese have hardened their views and are gambling that President Clinton cannot afford to withdraw the trade privileges.
But Mr. Christopher's entourage remains hopeful that Beijing might meet at least some requirements Mr. Clinton set.
