
China's overheating economy suffered a new blow today with the release of official statistics showing that its trade deficit had doubled in just two months.
Soaring imports, driven by frenzied consumer and state spending, pushed the trade gap for the first six months to $3.54 billion, meaning it more than doubled in May and June, according to customs figures released by the Xinhua news agency. 
The deficit had reached $1.7 billion by the end of April.
China's imports surged to $40.69 billion in the first six months, up 23.4 percent from the comparable period in 1992. 
Exports grew a scant 4.4 percent, to $37.15 billion.
 
 
Economic About-Face
The growing deficit reflects a remarkable about-face for the Chinese economy after more than a decade of export-fueled growth and strict controls on imports and foreign exchange.
Economic planners are worried that an import-buying spree, including unbridled imports by Government entities, is spiraling out of control, pleasing trading partners but threatening China's annual economic growth of 13 percent -- among the world's highest.
Beijing is reported to be putting into effect a 16-point austerity program -- including curbs on specific imports -- with the difficult aim of taming double-digit inflation without damping growth.
The man China's Communist Party picked to save the economy from overheating also began his campaign today to restore order to the financial sector. 
Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, who was made governor of the central bank on Friday, stressed to a national conference that China must "rectify financial order and strengthen financial discipline."
Mr. Zhu, making his debut as financial troubleshooter, urged the country on television to "grasp the chance to reform the financial sector and restore it to normal order."
 
 
Problems in 1989
In 1989, overheated growth, fast and loose credit and surging exports set off rampant inflation and provoked nationwide political unrest.
Tanks and troops were used to crush the protests while a strict austerity plan -- including a virtual freeze on imports -- tried to bring the economy to heel.
The new austerity program, disclosed by a Beijing-controlled newspaper in Hong Kong but unreported inside China, virtually forbids car imports, a category that the new trade figures showed had surged in the first half. 
Other booming imports included steel, refined oil, textile machines, aircraft and television parts, customs officials said.
Mr. Zhu's appointment as chief of the central bank had an immediate and pronounced effect on China's currency, which last month had plunged more than 25 percent at the semiofficial exchange centers. 
Today, the yuan climbed sharply in the Shanghai center to end at 9.5570 to the dollar, against an opening of 10.3440. 
And in Shenzhen, the yuan jumped even further, to close at 8.500 to the dollar, from 9.7000.
