
In the first official foray into electronic commerce for the world's fastest-growing economy, the Government of China has set up an Internet site intended to help its companies market goods to American corporations.
The site, www.meetchina.com, which was announced today, is operated for China by U.S. 
Business Network Inc., a San Francisco-based company. 
According to Ken Leonard, the company's chief executive, the site will be a clearinghouse of sorts for businesses in mainland China that wish to connect with American customers via the Internet.
The Chinese Government will help U.S. 
Business Network solicit companies that will pay $1,500 to $3,000 to participate in the site, and receive help developing American contacts, with 20 percent of the proceeds going to the Government. 
Participating Chinese companies will be able to post information about themselves and their products or services, along with contact information that includes E-mail addresses.
Until recently, Mr. Leonard said, Chinese companies were not allowed to make direct contact with foreign companies, but instead were required to first seek export licenses from the Government. 
In recent months, the China has been more liberal in issuing such licenses, particularly for smaller companies, and dealing directly with Western businesses. 
It is smaller companies that China is trying to promote through the new site, he said.
"From China's perspective, it fits perfectly," said Patrick Meehan, research director for the Gartner Group, a technology consulting firm. 
"It's kind of open, but not all the way. 
It's part of the 'great fire wall of China' strategy, where they have a way to funnel information in and out of the country."
According to Michael Borrus, co-director of the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy, the site's launch is more notable for its political implications than as a breakthrough on E-commerce. 
Observing that the Government has been trying to privatize China's state-owned industries, Mr. Borrus said, "This will facilitate that process by pushing them to reform via contact with the West."
"It also falls into the classic Chinese model of dabbling in something long enough to see the various impacts before you commit to it completely," Mr. Borrus said.
Mr. Leonard, who lobbied the Chinese Government for a year before receiving its go-ahead, said the site would focus first on Chinese businesses that are involved in the information technology industry. 
He added that the site was being marketed on the Internet -- through banner advertisements on Yahoo, for example.      
