
The arrest here of a Pennsylvania-based Chinese researcher as he collected documents from the Maoist era has caused an uproar among Western scholars, who say it imperils academic research and exchanges with China.
Today, 101 China scholars, including many leading experts from American, Australian and British universities who favor broader ties with China, released a letter to President Jiang Zemin calling for the immediate release of the researcher, Yongyi Song.
The letter warns that Mr. Song's arrest -- on vague charges of providing confidential information to foreigners -- could undermine support for the academic exchanges that China has fostered over the last two decades as it sought to modernize and end its former isolation. 
Each year, thousands of Chinese students and professors study abroad while smaller numbers of Western experts visit China to study its history, politics and society.
"Continued prosecution of this case will make it impossible for foreign scholars or Chinese scholars associated with foreign universities to conduct research in open sources in China with the confidence that they will be safe from criminal prosecution," says the letter, which was faxed to the Chinese Embassy in Washington today.
One of the signers, Michel Oksenberg, a political scientist at Stanford University and a former White House adviser on China policy, said in an interview that by arresting an academic researcher who was apparently seeking materials already in the public domain, China may have violated basic principles on which scholarly exchanges are based.
"As a sponsor and adviser of students who wish to do research in China," Mr. Oksenberg said, "I have some responsibility to insure that their research will not place them, or those in China who assist them, at risk."
Mr. Song, 50, is a scholar and librarian at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa., and an authority on the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, when China was in turmoil and largely closed to outsiders. 
Mr. Song has written a book and numerous articles in Chinese, but is best known for his exhaustive bibliographic work on that chaotic decade.
Last summer -- as he often had before -- he visited China to collect materials from the period, such as newspapers of the radical young Red Guards, old books and mimeographed records that lurk in second-hand book stores, street markets and private collections.
Many Western and Chinese scholars, including Chinese graduate students at American universities, routinely engage in the same kind of historical treasure hunt here.
But on Aug. 
7, Mr. Song -- a Chinese who was on the verge of becoming an American citizen -- was detained by security forces in Beijing.
After months of interrogations, on Dec. 
24 he was charged with "the purchase and illegal provision of intelligence to foreigners."
The charge is less severe than that for divulging "state secrets," but depending on how the courts define the gravity of his offense, Mr. Song could receive anything from a light sentence to more than 10 years in prison. 
No trial date has been announced.
The Chinese authorities have not revealed which of his activities resulted in the arrest. 
Mr. Song's wife, Helen Yao, a jewelry designer who was detained along with her husband and held for over two months, said in a recent interview that when security officers asked him about particular government documents he had acquired, he argued that each had formerly been published.
Roderick MacFarquhar, a Harvard professor and author of a multi-volume history of the origins of the Cultural Revolution, said that the prosecution of Mr. Song would create two classes of China scholars abroad: "Westerners who can come and go with relative freedom, and current or former Chinese citizens who will have to tread very carefully for fear of being arrested or at least having their relatives harassed."
Perhaps most affected will be Chinese scholars who live and work in China, who fear that their already limited ability to pursue historical evidence may shrink even further. 
One historian in Beijing said that he and his colleagues also fear that collaborative research with foreigners may become more dangerous.
The international group of scholars, organized by David Strand, a historian of China at Dickinson, also sent a copy of today's letter to President Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright in the hope that the administration will step up efforts on his behalf.
A spokesman for the American Embassy in Beijing said today that senior Embassy officials have "brought up the matter of Yongyi Song several times" with the Chinese government.
A subject of endless fascination for historians, the Cultural Revolution remains among China's most politically sensitive topics, and accounts published here are carefully censored in an effort to protect the legitimacy of the Communist Party.
Under Mao's banner of continuing revolution, millions of people were persecuted, imprisoned or killed, schooling came to a halt and the economy was nearly destroyed.
After Mao's death in 1976, his successors declared the Cultural Revolution to have been a disastrous mistake and said that Mao had erred under the baleful influence of a small group of leaders, including the "Gang of Four."
But Mao's achievements greatly outweighed his missteps, the official line declared, and his memory as the heroic father of the People's Republic has been carefully nurtured ever since.
Many key documents from the Cultural Revolution remain in closed archives, including Beijing directives that might implicate Mao or other leaders such as the late, revered Prime Minister Zhou Enlai in vicious purges or other misdeeds.
But during the early years of the Cultural Revolution in particular, fanatical young Maoists often published leaders' speeches and other documents. 
Such materials have been avidly collected by scholars and libraries, largely without trouble until now.
In recent weeks, as word spread about the criminal charges against Mr. Song, members of Congress and the State Department have expressed concern and China scholars have been up in arms.
"Because of its unpredictability and the absence of clearly stated rules," said Thomas P. Bernstein, an expert on Chinese politics at Columbia University, the case "is dangerous from the point of view of anyone doing research on contemporary China."
Mr. Strand, Mr. Song's colleague at Dickinson, said today, "This case strikes at every aspect of the work we do, both practical and ethical."
"Every day I think of Song in his jail cell," he said.
