
As Pakistani leaders struggled to decide whether to conduct a nuclear test in response to India's recent tests, a high-level delegation from Pakistan slipped quietly into Beijing early Monday. 
Today, just as quietly, it left.
The Chinese officials played down the meeting, calling it a "routine consultation between our two foreign ministries."
But diplomats in Islamabad had said the Pakistani Foreign Minister, Shamshad Ahmed, who led the group, was hoping to get a guarantee of nuclear protection should India attack. 
Such a declaration, some Western diplomats had hoped, would help persuade Pakistan not to carry out a nuclear test of its own.
What Foreign Minister Ahmed brought back to Pakistan was far less: On returning to Islamabad, he announced that China would not impose economic sanctions should Pakistan conduct a nuclear test. 
But China has made no public promises of nuclear protection.
Indeed, Chinese Government experts said that although China is sympathetic to its longtime ally, it is very unlikely to make Pakistan such an offer and will probably quietly oppose any Pakistani test.
Although Chinese officials have not joined Western nations in publicly urging Pakistan to refrain from testing, they have condemned India's tests and pointedly restated their opposition to nuclear testing.
"China will not encourage Pakistan to conduct its own nuclear test, and China is not a country that provides nuclear umbrellas to other countries," said a senior researcher at a Chinese Government research institute, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The Pakistanis' pilgrimage to China underscores a new and delicate role for China, experts said. 
The Indian tests have tested its ability to juggle the needs of longtime friends like Pakistan alongside the demands of important nations like the United States and India, with which China has been trying to improve ties.
"China's challenge is to reassure Pakistan that they'll stand by it without inflaming relations with India or the U.S.," said Robert S. Ross, a China expert at Boston College.
China has been Pakistan's main supplier of military technology, particularly for missiles. 
This sharing has been a chronic irritant in Beijing's relations with the United States, as well as India. 
At the same time, however, the Chinese clearly place great value on their developing relationship with India.
"China has now readjusted its policies in south Asia so that it now places equal importance on relations with India and Pakistan," said Shang Hui Peng, a professor at Beijing University. 
"I think that's very important for regional security."
Some Chinese experts said that although the relationship between China and India had remained somewhat strained, they were surprised to hear India's leaders say a threat from China had necessitated nuclear testing and that India had instead used the pretext of a threat from China as an excuse to test.
"Since the world has come out for disarmament, it's no longer acceptable to say we're testing because we're a great power and want to be part of the nuclear club," said a former Chinese official. 
"Much better to say there's this big nuclear power on our border so we have to."
But he said China's "strong reaction" to the tests had also been "quite cautious" in the hope that ties with India could be preserved.
      
