
The Chinese Communist Party announced today that it had set Sept. 
12 for its next Congress, a grand event held every five years, when 2,000 delegates assemble at the red-carpeted Great Hall of the People and formally approve a slate of leaders and a sweeping plan for political and economic policy.
The Congress's drama will not be in the voting, which is almost always unanimous. 
Rather, it will lie in the presentation of personnel and policy decisions that have already been battled out in back rooms as part of the jockeying for power among senior leaders.
Although Chinese society is becoming more open each day, the country's leaders still negotiate policy decisions in the secrecy of walled Government compounds, and their aides follow a nearly unbreakable code of silence.
In theory, the main issue of this year's Congress is what to do with aging state-owned enterprises, which are hemorrhaging money while companies run without state interference continue to boom.
A plan to shift to a shareholding system, seemingly dismantling the last bastion of the old socialist economy, has been hailed in the official news outlets in recent weeks. 
But party watchers say that is just a formal recognition of a process already under way. 
"Personnel is the only real issue this year," said a veteran party member who follows politics closely. 
"There will be a lot of talk about state enterprises and reform going ahead, but there isn't any disagreement about that."
In truth, no one knows for certain where the Communist Party is headed. 
The real question surrounding the Party Congress is who will take it there.
This year, for the first time in a generation, the Congress will be held without Deng Xiaoping, who led China for nearly 20 years before his death in February at 92. 
No leader of Deng's stature or political charisma has emerged to take his place, and the new leadership is precariously balanced among three younger men, each near 70.
Jiang Zemin, Deng's handpicked successor, is expected to retain his positions as General Secretary of the party and President of China.
The principal excitement this year surrounds the fate of his two main rivals, Li Peng, the Prime Minister, and Qiao Shi, the Speaker of the National People's Congress, China's nominal legislature.
They are expected to shift from their current positions, and rumors have swirled though Beijing in the last year about whether new posts will be created -- like deputy party chairman or executive vice president -- for one or both men.
This week, the hottest speculation is that Mr. Li, who is constitutionally barred from a third consecutive term as Prime Minister, will take the helm of the legislature, while Mr. Qiao's fate remains unknown.
In sharp contrast to Deng's battles with his Maoist competitors, Mr. Jiang and his two rivals have no discernable ideological differences. 
All support Deng's call of "building socialism with Chinese characteristics," which essentially means retaining the Communist Party's tight control of the political system while adopting economic policies ever more geared to the marketplace.
Perhaps the most striking development in China since Mr. Jiang became President in the wake of the political crisis that led to the June 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy protests at Tiananmen Square is the way profound economic and social change have proceeded for eight years without any significant alteration of the political system.
Mr. Jiang, at first dismissed by observers as a faceless transitional figure with neither charisma nor brains, has successfully deflected all challenges to his authority.
And 1997 promises to be his best year yet. 
He has survived the death of Deng, presided over a smooth transition in Hong Kong and is likely to cement his position at the Party Congress and top it off with a summit meeting with President Clinton in late October. 
"All my friends agree: Jiang has been very lucky," a seasoned party member said. 
"The timing has been perfect."
At the same time, Mr. Jiang is not strong enough to edge his main rivals from the 19-member Politburo, where key decisions are made. 
For though Mr. Li and Mr. Qiao may lose their current positions in the Government, no one expects them to relinquish their more critical spots at the top of the party hierarchy.
As if to show the strength of their positions, the official news organizations today showed Mr. Li smiling broadly as he returned to Beijing last night from a trip to Southeast Asia. 
Mr. Qiao, meanwhile, met with King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia.
The post of Prime Minister is widely expected to go to China's chief economic planner, Zhu Rongji, who is credited with bringing the inflation rate from 24 percent in 1994 to less than 2 percent last month with an austerity program that few expected to succeed.
Yet, even as head of Government, Mr. Zhu would rank behind the trio of leaders who wield more influence in the Communist Party. 
And in any case, the next Prime Minister will not be confirmed until the legislature meets in March.
How the future Prime Minister handles reform of state enterprises, balancing Government savings against the vast unemployment that seems inevitable, will be critical.
"The speed and manner of reforming state-owned enterprises will have implications not only for China's economic growth but for its political and social stabilityI," said Huang Yasheng, an associate professor at Harvard Business School.
      
