
Charges are mounting here that bad policies and official neglect have worsened this summer's disastrous flooding in China, and the Government has made the unusual admission that its land-use mistakes are partly to blame and announced sweeping policy changes.
Officials have clearly been shocked by the vast scale of damage in southern and northeastern China, where severe flooding persists. 
This year's rains have been torrential, but not as great as in some years when the extent of flooding and the damages were less.
In the last few weeks, the official press has carried increasingly sharp articles and editorials on the harmful effects of clear-cutting timber along the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, for example, and the human invasion of vital wetlands along the river's course.
In private, some experts are making more pointed charges that, despite repeated warnings, the upkeep of important dikes along China's flood-prone rivers has been badly neglected.
At a Government news conference today, Zhao Qizheng, chief of the State Council Information Office, said the Government had decided to shut down logging activities in the upper catchments of the Yangtze River. 
The deforestation has led to more rapid runoff of rain waters and increased silting of river and lake beds. 
He said all cleared areas would be replanted in a long-term strategy of ecological restoration.
He also said that large areas of lakes and wetlands in the Yangtze flood plain, which have been drained to make farmland, would be restored to their natural condition.
These areas formerly absorbed huge volumes of water during flood periods. 
Now, instead of easing the problem, these lands claimed from the water are being desperately protected by soldiers stacking sandbags to make crude dikes. 
They are exhorted by the official slogan "Fight to the Death."
"We have asked a lot of nature, and now we are returning what we have acquired," Mr. Zhao said.
How effectively these new policies can be carried out remains a big question, because the livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of poor people will be affected, including loggers upstream and farmers in the middle and lower reaches of the river.
While critics of the Government are saying they welcome the new attention to ecology, they make more specific charges of official lapses. 
Many water experts are also calling for fundamental changes in the approach to flood control, reflecting a debate over strategy that has continued in China for thousands of years.
Lu Qinkan, a retired Government hydrologist and flood prevention expert, said that in 1980 an important report by the Ministry of Water Resources laid out plans for reinforcing and raising the main dikes along the Yangtze. 
But by 1987, only $48 million of the $1.2 billion that was called for had been spent on the project.
"Eighteen years have passed," Mr. Lu said in an interview, "but the main dikes are in a state of disrepair, leading to breaches this year."
The neglect of downstream dikes, Mr. Lu and other critics say, reflects a bias toward building dams and reservoirs to battle floods despite their inherently limited capacity.
Though the topic is too politically sensitive for the official news media to explore, this year's floods have revived private debate about the giant Three Gorges Dam under construction along the upper reaches of the Yangtze.
On television and in newspaper interviews, officials involved in the project have tried to capitalize on the crisis, contending that the dam will greatly reduce -- if not eliminate -- flooding like this year's.
Mr. Lu, who was involved in feasibility studies for the Three Gorges Dam but who refused to sign the recommendation to proceed, said its effect could only be small. 
In 1954, he said, in the last great flood comparable to this year's, water flowing into the dam site totaled about 300 billion cubic meters. 
But the flood-retention capacity of the dam is only 22 billion cubic meters, he said. 
And another 359 billion cubic meters of water flowed into the river below the dam site.
Along with improving dikes, critics of the dam-centered approach to flood control say, more must be done to protect natural waterways that can soak up water and to set aside basins downstream where overflows can be diverted. 
But China's intense population pressures and poverty make this ever more difficult.
Hubei Province -- on the middle reaches of the Yangtze, where this year's damage is worst -- was once known as the province of 1,000 lakes, many of them linked to the Yangtze system, said Zhou Kuiyi, vice director of the Government's Research Center on Flood Disasters. 
But because of draining projects and siltation, many of the lakes have simply disappeared, he said.
The huge Dongting Lake in Hubei is the most important single lake for retaining excess waters along the Yangtze. 
According to a new report by the State Environmental Protection Agency, the lake borders, again because of drainage for farms and the inflow of silt, have shrunk drastically. 
Its capacity has fallen from 29.3 billion cubic meters in 1949 to 17.8 billion cubic meters today.
Decades ago, a large basin near the Yangtze in Hubei was designated as the major emergency water diversion area: when floods grew too high, dikes there would be intentionally breached, relieving pressures elsewhere. 
The waters were so diverted in the great floods of 1954, when 170,000 people lived there and had to be evacuated.
But today, 550,000 people live in that diversion zone, said Mr. Zhou of the disaster research center. 
This makes it nearly impossible to open the floodgates. 
Instead, the Government has poured hundreds of thousands of troops onto dikes throughout the region, and they are working around the clock to fend off breaches.
At today's news conference, officials said it had not been possible to finish updating the number of flood-related deaths. 
Mr. Zhao, the information chief, said a total would be announced by the end of the week. 
The last figure, on Aug. 
6, was 2,100 deaths.
Yang Yongliang, a senior Communist Party official from Hubei Province, said at the news conference that, through the valiant efforts of 2.3 million flood-fighters, "we have identified and removed 4,492 dangerous situations," where dikes were threatened.
Gen. Ma Shukuan, of the General Political Department of the Central Military Commission, said that the soldiers, in their greatest concentration since 1949, "have displayed a revolutionary spirit of fearing no hardship nor death."
Film clips of soldiers in chest-high water fortifying the dikes appear nightly on the news. 
The People's Liberation Army is clearly using the flood battle to build morale and to improve its public image, battered by military involvement in smuggling and by its role in smashing the Tiananmen Square student demonstrations in 1989.
      
