
For 442 years, Portuguese officials have ruled this spit of land on the southeast coast of China. 
Today, Macao got its first Chinese leader. 
A committee appointed by Beijing chose a local banker, Edmund Ho, to administer the colony after it reverts to Chinese rule in December.
Mr. Ho's ascension had been widely anticipated here. 
He is the de facto leader of Macao's Chinese business community and has close, longstanding ties to the Chinese Government.
There was a palpable lack of suspense as the 199 committee members -- a lone Portuguese among them -- filed to the front of a wood-paneled auditorium and deposited their ballots in a box. 
After 30 minutes of counting, Mr. Ho was declared the winner with 82 percent of the vote.
The meticulously choreographed ceremony recalled one in Hong Kong more than two years ago in which a shipping magnate, Tung Chee-hwa, was selected as the chief executive of the former British colony.
But unlike Hong Kong, where demonstrators burned tires to protest Mr. Tung's selection, people here had few reservations. 
Most regard Mr. Ho, the 44-year-old scion of a prominent Chinese family and a longtime member of the legislature, as the obvious choice for chief executive.
"There were no real alternatives," said Ricardo Pinto, the editor of Ponto Final, a Portuguese-language newspaper here. 
"If you look around the local political scene, there is no one with the same stature."
Macao is in a deep recession, which has been aggravated by a violent gang war for control of its lucrative gambling trade. 
Many people here believe the departing Portuguese have given up trying to control the violence, and most are more relieved than alarmed about returning to China.
"I fully understand that the people of Macao are concerned about law and order," Mr. Ho said at a news conference after his selection. 
But he said it was too early to offer details on how he would tackle the problem.
Mr. Ho pledged to defend "one country, two systems" -- the arrangement under which Macao, like Hong Kong, is supposed to function as a semi-autonomous region in China with its own legal system.
"With the support of our motherland, the people of Macao shall enjoy a high degree of autonomy and become self-governing," said Mr. Ho, who switched seamlessly between Cantonese, Mandarin, and English.
Despite Mr. Ho's skills, people worry that Macao will be swamped by China. 
Its civil service is not as well developed as that of Hong Kong. 
Chinese officials have expressed anger at Macao's crime rate. 
And China has already sent troops to the colony, ignoring the objections of Portuguese officials, who said their agreement with China does not provide for a military garrison.
Gazing down from a dais during the ballot counting were two aging men who will arguably wield more power over Macao than Mr. Ho: Qian Qichen, the Deputy Prime Minister of China who is overseeing the handover, and Stanley Ho, a Hong Kong tycoon who owns the colony's nine casinos. 
(He is not related to the chief executive).
On the issue of troops, Edmund Ho served notice that he did not plan to provoke officials in Beijing.
"I believe the stationing of troops is in total accordance with the sovereignty of the Chinese Government," Mr. Ho said. 
"My position is in 100 percent agreement with the central Government."
Ng Kuok Cheong, one of Macao's few pro-democracy politicians, said Mr. Ho's response was typical of his outlook. 
Mr. Ng, who said he had lost two jobs because of his political views, predicted that under Mr. Ho, debate about China would be even more sharply curtailed than it is now.
Despite his allegiance to Beijing, Mr. Ho is also popular with the Portuguese, who regard him as tactful and reliable. 
Macao's Governor, Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira, warmly welcomed his selection.
While Mr. Ho is respected, his father, Ho Yin, is venerated. 
The elder Mr. Ho, who died in 1983, dominated Macao society for decades, playing middleman between the Chinese and Portuguese. 
When anti-colonialist protests exploded during the Cultural Revolution in the 1960's, Mr. Ho calmed both sides.
"For a long time, Edmund has been living under the shadow and patronage of his father," said Fok Kai Cheong, a professor at the University of Macao. 
"It's time for him to prove himself."
Mr. Fok said it was in China's interest to insure that Mr. Ho succeeds. 
Macao's handover is the second act in what Chinese officials hope will be a three-act drama, culminating with the return of Taiwan. 
"This is considered another step in the ultimate reunification of China," he said.
