
Chu Shijian is still a hero in this ramshackle town, even though he stands accused of diverting more than $145 million from state coffers, one of the most spectacular cases of corruption in China since the Communist Party came to power nearly 50 years ago.
A short and impetuous man, often seen on a factory floor with his sleeves rolled up and a Red Pagoda cigarette dangling from his lower lip, Mr. Chu cut a distinctive figure at the tobacco company he led for 17 years. 
Mr. Chu, who turned Red Pagoda into the most popular brand in all of China, now languishes in jail here in Yunnan Province.
Many residents credit Mr. Chu with single-handedly bringing prosperity and pride to Yuxi, creating thousands of jobs, and building the town's only skyscraper. 
In Beijing, the authorities portray Mr. Chu as a criminal degenerate who skimmed the difference between the low official price and a much higher sales price on billions of cigarettes each year, yielding a huge off-the-books income that he channeled into dozens of hidden bank accounts.
In between these two extremes lies a more nuanced picture of Mr. Chu as a talented manager working in a system so economically irrational that it encourages inaccurate financial reporting as well as outright embezzlement. 
Low state-mandated prices, mixed with high market demand, invariably invite trouble.
Mr. Chu and the story of Red Pagoda embody a central paradox of China today: virtually any multimillion-dollar company, striving to become modern in a system that remains stubbornly old-fashioned, is wide open to so much corruption that success almost inevitably leads to financial shenanigans that can spoil any chance of efficiency or genuine profitability.
The authorities like to portray corruption in China as the fault of a few immoral individuals, or as a minor obstacle to reform, rather than as a symptom of deeper trouble. 
Yet corruption is virtually built into a system where prices are controlled but finances are not.
As executives and officials here acknowledge when pressed, there barely exists a large company in China today that does not have hidden accounting, secret decision making, tiny salaries and lavish perks for managers, all of them invitations to greater financial impropriety. 
Corruption is now so endemic in China's businesses that no one can accurately see where it begins and ends.
"There is no way to measure corruption in China's state-owned enterprises," said Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a China scholar at the University of Michigan. 
"But the fundamental structure of Chinese enterprises provides management with ample opportunities to engage in significant self-dealing."
The hand-in-hand collusion of business and government is at the root of structural problems that underlie the Asian financial crisis in many of China's neighbors. 
Though China has so far avoided a currency or stock market dive, it suffers from cronyism as much as, if not more than, Indonesia, Thailand or South Korea.
Hundreds of company executives were disciplined for corruption last year, though it is widely believed that many thousands more have gone unpunished. 
Without a working legal system, wrongdoing is typically investigated by "discipline inspection teams" that are heavily political, leaving the well-connected free to flout the law.
What seems most remarkable about Mr. Chu's case is that it was ever exposed. 
With no independent media, and no incentive for government officials to admit how bad corruption has become, it is the rare case where the head of a company loses his or her political connections so completely that the case is made public. 
Yet that is what happened to Mr. Chu, who is now 70.
"Chu thought he was untouchable, after all he had done," said a Chinese businessman who works with Red Pagoda, known in Chinese as the Hongta Group. 
"His connections were not as strong as he thought."
In January, the authorities announced that they had expelled Mr. Chu from the Communist Party for "serious economic crimes," a virtual guarantee that he would eventually be charged, tried in court and found guilty.
An official report on his wrongdoing, recently printed in People's Daily, was almost like a catalogue of how to run a family empire, with Mr. Chu's wife and daughter running a huge bribe-taking scheme.
When Mr. Chu was named general manager of Red Pagoda in 1979, it was a small factory, earning less than $1 million a year by making a hodge-podge of local brands of cigarettes. 
Like most state-run companies, Red Pagoda was required to hand over all its profits to the Government, while its managers and employees alike earned under $25 a month.
Mr. Chu recognized that as China's booming economic growth gave ordinary people the buying power to afford cigarettes, promoting the factory's flagship Red Pagoda brand all over the nation was the way to maximize income.
It worked. 
Red Pagoda became so popular that the official price of $1 a pack was outstripped by the market price that eventually grew to $1.50 to $2. 
Still operating in a system that required the company only to report income from the official, artificially low price, Mr. Chu found that he could set aside millions of dollars earned at the higher, market price.
Mr. Chu spent some of Red Pagoda's unreported income on new machinery, insisting that his company have the most up-to-date operations to spur production. 
He also built new apartment buildings for his employees and modern offices for his staff, since waiting for officials to do so might mean waiting forever.
Yet there was a dark side, too. 
By 1995, when the company rolled more than 100 billion cigarettes, the Red Pagoda brand was so sought-after that distributors were willing to pay bribes to Mr. Chu and his family just to gain access to his product, even at inflated prices.
Since his official salary remained less than $250 a month, the temptation for graft proved irresistible. 
The same is true, Chinese business leaders agree, at many large Chinese companies.
"The investigation showed that Chu Shijian abused his power to approve the illegal purchase and speculative profiteering of cigarettes from 1991 to 1995," the official report said. 
"His family members and other relatives received large bribes."
Mr. Chu personally pocketed at least $1.7 million in bribes, the report said, while his daughter took more than $5 million and his wife took more than $1 million. 
But even that is a fraction of the more than $145 million that Mr. Chu diverted from the Government, hiding it in various company bank accounts.
In 1996, Red Pagoda reported an income of $2.3 billion, though it is anyone's guess how much more was coming in unofficially.
"Only a fool reports his company's income accurately," said another Chinese businessman in Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province. 
Most companies, the executive said, operate multiple sets of company accounts, often making it impossible to decipher true revenues or profits.
One of the glaringly unanswered questions in the official report is how Mr. Chu operated his scheme for years without detection by local tax collectors, auditors and tobacco officials. 
It would have been impossible to divert such a towering amount of cash, Chinese executives who did business with Red Pagoda say, without systematically bribing local officials.
For years Mr. Chu was protected politically. 
His biggest backer was always Pu Chaozhu, a boyhood friend who rose in the provincial hierarchy to become Communist Party chief of Yunnan Province in 1985. 
Mr. Pu remained there 11 years, before he was forced to retire in 1996, the same year that Mr. Chu came under investigation.
Businessmen in Yunnan also say that Deng Zhifang, the youngest son of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader who died last year, was one of the many "princelings" -- the offspring of China's leaders -- who were associates of Mr. Chu. Neither Mr. Pu nor Mr. Deng has been charged with wrongdoing.
"For every corrupt act, it takes a manager to engage in it and an official to tolerate it," said Yasheng Huang, a China scholar at Harvard Business School. 
"Unlike owners of private firms, public officials do not gain economically from efficient uses of the state-owned assets. 
At best, they do not actively punish managers who abuse state-owned assets. 
At worst, they use their power to benefit themselves."
When Mr. Chu's empire began to crumble, it did so quickly. 
In 1996, his wife and daughter were arrested. 
Mr. Chu's daughter, Chu Yingqun, died in prison, apparently from suicide.
The report also fails to accurately document another side of Mr. Chu's illegal activity. 
Because of onerous taxes on domestic sale of cigarettes, businessmen say, Red Pagoda exported millions of dollars worth of cigarettes each year, only to smuggle them back into China, where they could be sold without paying tax.
Mr. Chu's son headed Red Pagoda's overseas operations in Singapore, the Asian center for cigarette trading, an industry long dominated by organized crime. 
In 1993, Tommy Chui, a distributor for British American Tobacco agreed to testify for the prosecution in a smuggling case, only to have his corpse turn up floating in Singapore harbor, padlocked in an industrial laundry bag with his mouth taped shut.
Mr. Chu's son remains at large, and is believed to be in Singapore.
According to the authorities, the elder Mr. Chu tried to escape overseas after he realized that the investigation into Red Pagoda's activities could not be stymied by "hundreds of thousands of dollars" in bribes he attempted to give investigators. 
He was stopped at a border checkpoint, trying to enter Vietnam in December 1996, and has been held in custody since.
In Yuxi, however, Mr. Chu remains a hero, even after the publicizing of his purported wrongdoing.
"After all he did for this company, he should be forgiven," said a financial officer at Red Pagoda, whose 5,500 employees are now led by Zi Guorui. 
"He's an old man."
The executive, standing outside Red Pagoda's headquarters in Yuxi, gestured at the gleaming skyscraper behind him.
"Look at this building," the executive said. 
"No one else could have done what Chu Shijian did for us."
The Chinese businessman in Kunming offered a slightly different view.
"He did what every other company head in China does," the businessman said. 
"He just messed up his connections."
