
A loose-knit group of veteran democracy advocates has started a campaign to promote independent labor unions among China's workers, who face vast layoffs as the Government strives to close money-losing enterprises.
The advocates, some in China and some in exile, hope to use Beijing's recent signing of a United Nations covenant insuring the right of workers to organize as a wedge against a Government that has suppressed all efforts to form unions outside its grip.
In a letter sent this week to foreign news organizations, the campaigners say workers now have a clear right to set up new unions to fight for their interests in this period of drastic downsizing, mergers and sales of state-owned industries. 
Currently, unions not sponsored by the Communist Party are illegal, and the Government has given no sign that it will relent, United Nations covenant or not.
The proposals in the letter go to the heart of China's most explosive political challenge: how to cope with the legions of victims as it unleashes market forces to streamline the bloated, often bankrupt Communist economy.
In recent months, there have been numerous reports of small-scale worker protests around the country over such concerns as nonpayment of wages or pensions, fear of job losses after corporate takeovers, and conflicts over dismissals and severance pay.
The dislocation of millions of industrial workers is occurring even as the growing private and semiprivate sectors bring new prosperity to millions of other Chinese -- a visible gap that only adds to the tensions.
"Workers in state-owned enterprises, especially, should immediately form their own unions to monitor their leaders and prevent leaders from engaging in bribery or stealing public properties," said the letter, signed by four leaders of the 1979 "Democracy Wall" movement, each of whom has served time in prison. 
"Only by depending on ourselves can we fight those who punish workers arbitrarily or fire workers without reason."
In a telephone interview from Cambridge, Mass., Wang Xizhe, one of the signers, said: "China's workers don't understand that China has agreed to this international agreement. 
We're going to use every method we can to educate them about it."
Mr. Wang, 49, who spent 15 years in prison for earlier pro-democracy activities, fled China last year under threat of arrest after he signed a letter calling for impeachment of President Jiang Zemin.
The agreement in question is the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1966, which China's United Nations representative, Qin Huasun, signed in New York on Oct. 
26, just before President Jiang visited the United States. 
The covenant is one of two that Washington had urged China to sign to improve its human rights record.
The covenant guarantees "the right of everyone to form trade unions and join the trade union of his choice."
But the agreement adds that the right is subject to restrictions "prescribed by law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public order or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."
China could easily cite these loopholes.
Because of tight Government control of the press, few people here may learn directly about the pro-union letter, which is dated Dec. 
20. But Mr. Wang said many people around China were spreading the message through the Internet and private channels. 
He said the group also hoped that foreign radio news broadcasters, who are widely listened to here, would take note.
Mr. Wang added that the signers were only trying to raise awareness, not organize unions, something he said workers must do themselves.
The distinction may be a crucial one for the two signers inside China, Qin Yongmin in Wuhan and Xu Wenli in Beijing, who have served long prison terms in the past. 
Reached by telephone today, both declined to expand on the letter. 
The fourth signer, Lu Siqing, lives in Hong Kong.
"Organizing a labor union is no longer an internal affair of China," Mr. Wang asserted. 
"It is an internationally protected right," a suggestion that the glare of global oversight might deter Government crackdowns.
In a nod to the Government's problems, the letter expresses firm support for economic restructuring and blames earlier Maoist policies for causing the current muddle. 
It says workers need to accept inevitable hardships to create a sounded economy and should resort to protests and strikes only as a last resort.
Official statistics put urban unemployment at less than 4 percent, but tens of millions more workers are effectively unemployed, sent home to receive perhaps $20 or $25 a month. 
Some bankrupt industries have failed to meet even those obligations.
Western experts say the effective rate of unemployment in many large cities ranges above 20 percent, although many former workers retain heavily subsidized housing.
The Government is struggling to build new unemployment insurance, welfare and pension programs to replace the old "iron rice bowl," the guarantee of lifelong security for state employees.
But as it tries to create a less costly safety net, the Government has also taken to hectoring workers to lower their expectations. 
An article last week in People's Daily, the official Communist Party paper, said laid-off workers needed to learn from the example of migrant peasants, who have flooded into cities often to perform menial jobs like collecting garbage, selling food in the street and washing windows.
"These new job explorers in the cities, these former farmers, have actually brought new concepts to urban workers who got used to eating from one big pot under the old system," the article said. 
"So some experts say that urban workers should learn from their rural counterparts in looking for jobs."
      
