
With Taiwan's presidential election only 10 days away, China has uncorked its vitriol on the Democratic Progressive Party candidate, Chen Shui-bian, calling him a separatist and a silver-tongued liar. 
To hear Mr. Chen tell it, Beijing is doing him a favor.
"We have a precedent here," he said in an interview during a campaign swing that took him from Taipei to this southern port city. 
"The person China hates, Taiwan voters love."
When Beijing fired missiles into the ocean near Taiwan before the 1996 election, hoping to scare people away from President Lee Teng-hui, they responded by re-electing him in a landslide. 
Mr. Chen, who is viewed as less acceptable to Beijing than either of his two main rivals, said China's latest barrage of threats would play to his advantage as well by raising the hackles of voters.
But Chen Shui-bian is not Lee Teng-hui, and this is not 1996.
Interviews with party officials, political analysts and voters this week suggest that Mr. Chen's identification with the cause of Taiwanese independence could hurt him, particularly among the one-quarter of the electorate that is still undecided.
Mr. Chen is running neck-and-neck with Vice President Lien Chan and James Soong, an independent. 
Mr. Chen's campaign manager figures the election will hinge on 200,000 to 300,000 voters, who may not make up their minds until they step into the polling booth.
In the meantime, these people are being subjected to a daily drumbeat from Beijing. 
On Monday, the Chinese Army accused a "prominent figure" -- read Chen Shui-bian -- of pushing for independence and said it had put its troops on alert to crush such a move.
"Under no circumstances should we be fooled by his sweet talk," said the army's newspaper, Liberation Army Daily, in a front-page editorial. 
"One minute he is brazenly howling 'Long live Taiwan independence,' while the next he is using beautiful and pleasant words to lie that he wants 'good will, reconciliation, vigorous cooperation and everlasting peace' with the mainland."
Today in Beijing, President Jiang Zemin told a group of foreign journalists, "If you seek Taiwan independence, it will be a case of brother fighting brother."
One of those who is listening is Chen Yen-yang, 22, a political science student at National Taiwan University. 
Mr. Chen, who will cast his first vote in this election, said he always assumed he would support Chen Shui-bian. 
But he starts compulsory military service next year. 
That has changed his mind, and he now plans to vote for Vice President Lien of the governing Nationalist Party.
"Everybody around me, my family and friends, is talking about the possibility of war between Taiwan and China," Mr. Chen said. 
"I can't ignore that."
His classmate, Chen Yu-wen, said, "I think Chen Shui-bian underestimates China's willingness to take military action against Taiwan."
She said she planned to vote for Mr. Lien because the Nationalist Party "understands China."
"They know how to deal with them," she said.
Mr. Chen's rivals have seized the chance to portray him as a threat to peace. 
The Nationalists are running a newspaper advertisement that shows a man in army fatigues, his face hidden by a black gas mask, staring into a wall of flames. 
The figure represents Taiwan in the aftermath of a Chen victory.
Mr. Chen counters these charges by noting he is the only candidate with a son who would be drafted into the military if Taiwan were invaded by China. 
"As a father, I understand the fear of parents who don't want to put their children into danger," he said.
In his zeal to appear moderate, Mr. Chen rivals even the hypercautious Mr. Lien. If elected, he has pledged not to declare independence, not to hold a referendum on the issue, and not to put the phrase "special state-to-state" relations into Taiwan's Constitution. 
Those words, which President Lee uttered last July, infuriated China and set off a war of words across the Strait of Taiwan.
The problem for Mr. Chen is the platform of the Democratic Progressive Party, which calls for "the establishment of a sovereign and independent Republic of Taiwan."
Mr. Chen insisted today that such a move would come only after a plebiscite, the timing of which would be up to the people.
Some political analysts dismissed Mr. Chen's more conciliatory tone as a political ploy rather than a shift in his bedrock beliefs. 
And they said the fervor of 1996 -- in which Taiwanese people rose up to defend their first native-born president -- was missing from this election.
"People in this country are no longer fanatical," said Wang Jin-pyng, a Nationalist Party stalwart who is the president of Taiwan's legislature. 
"They believe that maintenance of stabilityI is the best policy. 
If the threats from China reduce Chen's support by 3 percent, he will lose the election."
Kaohsiung is one of Mr. Chen's strongholds, and tonight thousands of his supporters turned out here for an earsplitting, and defiant, rally.
Lee Chia-shin, 27, who has a mix of mainland Chinese and native Taiwanese roots, said she did not worry about China's hostility. 
"I think Chen Shui-bian will be flexible enough to deal with it," she said.
Cheng Wen-shiung, a 47-year-old tailor, also said the threats from China would not intimidate him.
"We Taiwanese have the courage to repel any invader," he said. 
But he added, "Of course, some people won't vote for Chen because of China."
