
In the last year, city officials have evacuated almost 200 people from dungeonlike cellars in Chinatown. 
In poorly lighted hovels, they found adults and children living stacked like cordwood in makeshift bunks, sharing hot plates and dodging rats.
The televised pictures of some of the evacuations -- in which Chinese immigrants, squinting from the television lights, emerge from darkness clutching their possessions in plastic bags -- have provided striking images of sordid living conditions in an underground immigrant existence.
But city housing officials now suspect that some of the emergencies were a hoax, and that the horrific living conditions were bogus. 
They say that the immigrants may not have actually been living where they were found. 
Rather, the officials say, the immigrants may have paid people to settle them in the rooms and basements long enough for an alarm to be pulled or a small fire to be set.
Once they were evacuated by the Fire Department from what looked to be their illegal, unsafe homes, the immigrants, many from the Fujian Province on the southern coast of China, jumped to the top of the city's long waiting list for public housing, the officials said.
Harold M. Shultz, a deputy commissioner for the Department of Housing and Preservation Development, said yesterday that suspicions were aroused by a noticeable increase in the number of emergency evacuations from Chinatown, and by the savvy way the immigrants reacted when the authorities arrived.
"We have seen people vacated from buildings who appeared to have expected the vacate to occur," Mr. Shultz said. 
"Many of these people requested specific placement at hotels and specific placement at Housing Authority projects. 
This was extremely unusual. 
It was occurring on a regular basis."
An investigation is under way by the inspector general of the Housing Authority, Mr. Shultz said. 
He added that not all those applying for emergency housing were under suspicion.
People in Chinatown, including housing advocates, landlords and real estate agents, said they too thought that a swindle has taken place. 
For example, Debbie Leung, a longtime housing advocate in Chinatown who has served as a translator during some evacuations, said this week that a few of those she interviewed revealed the ruse.
"They don't live there," Ms. Leung said. 
"They were just paying for the space."
Mr. Shultz said that officials thought the pattern of hoaxes had ended in June, when the Housing Authority began to bar illegal immigrants from public housing. 
But he said their concerns were resurrected by two later incidents: the evacuation of more than two dozen people from 47 Market Street in July, and the evacuation two weeks ago of eight families and 23 single adults from a basement at 58 Henry Street.
Over the years, Chinatown has been the destination for many illegal immigrants from China, often smuggled into the country by ruthless gangs charging exorbitant fees. 
Those immigrants often live in illegal, squalid conditions until they earn enough to rent an apartment. 
Substandard housing is a chronic problem.
But city officials have been puzzled over the last year by the increasing number of illegal dwellings that came to their attention through emergencies. 
Evacuations were occurring monthly. 
Since 1994, for example, five buildings have been vacated on Eldridge Street alone, earning the street the nickname of Smuggler's Row.
The evacuation of 15 Eldridge Street early this year provides an example of what such an emergency can mean to the tenants involved. 
On Jan. 
30, firefighters responded to a report of smoke coming from the building's basement. 
There, they found 13 people living in a 7- by-20-foot cubicle that was zoned for commercial use. 
Bunk beds had been constructed, and some people were gathered around a propane stove.
The owner, Federico Cheaz, was issued a violation order for harboring conditions that were "eminently perilous to life in case of fire."
The 13 people were referred to the housing department, which temporarily placed them in $16-a-night hotel rooms, with the cost passed on to the landlord.
During the next few days, caseworkers and translators asked those evacuated if they wanted public housing. 
The answer was almost always yes. 
So far, 5 of the 13 have received public housing, and 5 others have been certified and are at the top of a waiting list, Carl Pelleck, a Housing Authority spokesman, said. 
From the nine evacuations in Chinatown this year, he said, 36 people or families have been placed in public housing, and 113 have been certified and are on a waiting list. 
The applications of another 35 families are pending, and one family was rejected.
Mr. Pelleck said that the Housing Authority has a yearslong waiting list for subsidized public housing units. 
As a result, he said, the agency has developed a priority list in which the homeless -- including those who become homeless as a result of an emergency -- are at the top.
"Homeless people are the top priority on public housing at this time," Mr. Pelleck said.
The authority had 50 homeless families waiting for housing at the end of last week.
Ms. Leung, who works for It's Time Inc., a tenant advocacy group, was interpreter for some of the about 30 people who were evacuated from 51 Canal Street in June. 
She said that several people told her that they actually lived elsewhere, but that they were hoping to secure public housing.
"They heard there's no waiting list if you come through the shelter," Ms. Leung said. 
"One, two, three. 
It happens, too."
Ms. Leung said she was outraged by the practice. 
She and other advocates also expressed concern that the sporadic incidents may stigmatize other Chinese immigrants who try to apply for housing. 
Most, they say, have no recourse but to live in squalor, abused by landlords and harassed by smugglers who will resort to violence to collect debts.
"I know some people paid a few hundred, maybe a thousand, to be in the basement for a period," Rose Wong, another housing advocate in Chinatown, said Monday. 
"But that's not a lot of people. 
They have to know the connections."
The apparent hoax has spurred other questions that so far have no answer. 
City officials do not understand yet who has benefited from the fraud, whether it is landlords, other tenants or professional smugglers.
"Someone here might be preying on individuals who need a place to live, and may be putting them in dangerous situations for their own financial gain," Mr. Shultz, the housing official, said. 
"We do not have any clues as to what level of organization there might have been. 
But in a number of instances, it appeared to have been organized."
Some in Chinatown said that people learned of the elaborate swindles only after they had taken place. 
Dean Lui, a real estate agent representing the owners of 58 Henry Street, said yesterday that a man approached an owner this spring asking to rent the basement to store dry goods. 
The two businessmen agreed on a monthly rental of $700.
But the rent was never paid, in part because the landlords could not find the man who signed the lease. 
It was not until a small fire at the building this month, Mr. Lui said, that the owners learned that three dozen people were living in the basement.
Mr. Lui said he knew that such scams were being perpetrated in Chinatown, but maintained that the landlords had no prior knowledge of what was going on in the basement -- even though one of them, David Chow, lives in the building.
There is yet another layer of nuance and meaning to the evacuations. 
It underscores the escalating tension between the Cantonese, who have traditionally ruled Chinatown, and the newer Fujianese immigrants.
The Cantonese, who see the growing Fujianese presence as a threat to their authority, blame the Fujianese leaders for abetting the immigrants who are seeking to jump to the head of the long line for public housing.
"The scam is very sophisticated," said one Cantonese community leader who insisted on anonymity. 
"You have to know the laws to get through the loopholes. 
The average Fujianese is not this sophisticated. 
Who is teaching them about this?
If they need public housing, they should wait in line like everybody else."
But Fujianese community leaders deny any involvement. 
They say these incidents show the desperation of immigrants who are under pressure to make enough money so that they can provide for their families in China and pay smuggling fees that can be as high as $30,000.
"No Fujianese organization would jeopardize the lives of their members this way," said K.T. 
Yang, president of the United Fujian American Association. 
"This problem reflects the failure of the American Government to provide for those living in this country.
"Most of our villagers consider America heaven," Mr. Yang said. 
"And they're now forced to live in hell."
      
