
In one of China's most politically sensitive corruption cases, the former chief of military intelligence has reportedly been sentenced to 15 years in prison for embezzlement and bribery.
And in a separate case of official graft, several top officials of a major northeastern city have resigned under a cloud.
The former intelligence chief, Maj. Gen. Ji Shengde, had been mentioned in the United States last year as a figure in the Democratic fund-raising scandals, but there is no indication that his conviction by a military court here was related to those charges.
General Ji's case is particularly alarming to the leadership because, while holding a vital national security post, he was also apparently allied with the country's most wanted fugitive, a onetime smuggling kingpin in the southeast who fled to Canada.
And it is embarrassing because General Ji is one of the "princelings," the son of a revolutionary hero and former foreign minister, who like many other leaders' offspring used his connections to help gain power and money.
Some officials have reportedly complained that General Ji received too lenient a sentence; other officials have received death penalties for stealing less than the many millions he is said to have amassed illegally.
A report on General Ji's sentence appeared Thursday in the Hong Kong newspaper Sing Tao. 
Two Chinese officials who spoke on condition of anonymity confirmed that General Ji was given a 15-year sentence by a military court last month.
The cabinet's information office said it had no information about General Ji's arrest or trial.
The secrecy surrounding his case reflects the growing quandary facing Communist Party leaders: To regain fading public faith, they are making a show of decisive action against corruption. 
But the scandals have become distressingly widespread, and it appears that some suspect higher officials have been left alone, while other cases are never reported in the official media.
Adding to the sense of alarm, word leaked out this week that several senior officials in Shenyang, in the northeast, had been forced to resign and were under investigation for their dealings with a criminal syndicate. 
This evening, the official New China News Agency confirmed that Mayor Mu Suixin, who had been praised for his efforts to bring new industry to the ailing city, had also resigned, though it made no mention of the corruption investigation that local residents say is under way.
General Ji, the former intelligence head, was convicted of accepting huge bribes from Lai Changxing, the reputed mastermind of the $6 billion smuggling operation in Xiamen, a southeastern port, that has brought down scores of senior officials. 
What help General Ji may have provided in return has not been disclosed.
Mr. Lai is in custody in Vancouver, where he has applied for asylum while China demands his extradition.
General Ji also reportedly used his position to embezzle millions of dollars from military-run corporations, using the money to invest in the stock market and real estate.
In a Congressional hearing in May 1999, General Ji was accused of funneling money to the United States for political donations. 
Johnny Chung, a former Democratic Party fund-raiser who pleaded guilty to related bank and tax frauds, testified that he met General Ji in 1996 in an abalone restaurant in Hong Kong, where the general said of President Clinton, "We hope to see him re-elected," and promised to send $300,000 for the Democratic Party and the presidential campaign.
Mr. Chung said he received the money but gave only a small fraction to the party.
The Chinese government has vehemently denied making political donations. 
The extent of General Ji's official authorization to send the money, and his possible motives, have never been clarified.
During the month after that Congressional hearing, General Ji was quietly reassigned from his powerful intelligence job to a lower position at a military research center. 
Officials denied then that this was linked to the American allegations.
Now it appears that General Ji was already under suspicion of corruption at the time. 
The investigation reportedly intensified after his father, Ji Pengfei, died in February.
According to the Hong Kong newspaper, General Ji's mother pleaded with officials to spare her son from the death penalty, and in court his attorney argued for leniency on the basis of his public service.
