
China greeted its new prospects as a permanent American trade partner with official applause today, but there is growing trepidation as the country now shifts its focus to its future membership in the World Trade Organization.
Many Chinese worry that the country is ill-prepared to face the global competition that membership will bring. 
The global group's rules will force Chinese industries to become stronger in the long run, but many people are expected to lose their jobs along the way.
"It's a kind of double-edged sword," said Shen Dingli, an expert on China-United States relations. 
And people here are worried about the edge most likely to cut them.
The new trade status became a fait accompli when the Senate overwhelmingly passed a trade bill on Tuesday to end what China considered a humiliating annual debate about whether it deserved to be treated as a normal trade partner or warranted punishment for its shortcomings along with countries like Libya, Iraq and North Korea. 
The House already had approved the bill, and President Clinton is set to sign the law, which he considers a crowning achievement.
The new relationship will give both countries "a chance to start anew," a Foreign Ministry spokesman said in Beijing. 
But it is easy to find people here who worry about what that new beginning will bring. 
On Nanjing Road, Shanghai's busiest shopping street, two parking lot guards discussed the bleak prospects for Shanghai's auto industry, one of the town's biggest employers. 
"I think they'll die," one said.
And the manager of a cramped grocery store downtown shrugged with resignation when asked about the likely impact on his business.
"Already, medium-size shops like us can barely compete with the foreign megamarkets," said the gray-haired manager, who gave his name as Qiu. 
His prices are higher, the store's aisles narrower and its selection poorer than any of the sprawling Carrefours or Metros scattered around the city.
"We have high tariffs to protect us now, but after we join the W.T.O. there'll be no such protection," he said.
The trade bill has no direct bearing on China's membership in the 138-member regulatory group, which the country is likely to join later this year. 
But it clears the way for American companies to take part in the open markets that China promises to deliver as part of the trade group. 
Many of the markets to be opened are ones in which American companies are world leaders, so they pose the greatest challenge to Chinese companies.
Granting China permanent normal trade relations eliminates one of the main risks for American companies investing here. 
American-owned factories in China previously operated under the threat that they could be blocked from sending products home if the United States ever withdrew China's normal trading status. 
And Americans selling to the Chinese market worried during each year's debate that they could suffer an anti-American backlash.
That cloud has now disappeared.
With the bill approved and China's membership in the regulatory group on its way, China has become a more reliable low-cost production base for American companies, which have already invested more than $24 billion here. 
More investment dollars are now on their way to get a piece of the expanding market.
"Frankly speaking, this is a better deal for the U.S. than it is for China," said Lloyd Meeds, a former congressman and lobbyist from Washington State, one of the states that will benefit the most from expanding trade with China. 
Mr. Meeds is in Shanghai on a private visit.
But people like Lu Zhiqiang, deputy director of the central government's top research group, worry that China's local governments, industrial regulators and state-owned enterprises are not ready for what lies ahead, and he predicts that a wave of bankruptcies will sweep through the economy. 
"Solid and down-to-earth preparatory work is scarce," he was quoted as saying in the state-run China Daily this week.
China's 900 million peasants are among the least prepared. 
After China joins the world organization, duties for agricultural products will fall sharply from as high as 85 percent to 18 percent in some cases and import quotas will disappear, forcing China's farmers to compete with importers selling cheaper yet higher-quality American corn, soybeans, pork and chicken. 
American meat has already begun arriving in China under a related trade deal.
Other areas of the economy that have long been sheltered by government protection, telecommunications and banking, for example, will undergo wrenching change if China follows through on its promises to the World Trade Organization.
"The better-prepared businesses are those in sectors where there is already competition, such as manufacturing," said Zhang Xiaoji, an economist and member of Mr. Lu's research group. 
"The sectors that are still more or less monopolized by the government are less prepared."
The pain will not be reserved for Chinese companies alone. 
Western companies that have invested heavily in China often did so under the weight of costly obstacles, like lobbying, and they may now face competition from newcomers whose cost of entry to the market will presumably be lower, since barriers will be done away with under the world body.
And Western companies, like banks and insurers, will have to compete for China's limited number of white collar workers.
Foreigners also stand to lose the tax advantages that China has long offered as an enticement to investment. 
With protectionist barriers set to fall, many Chinese are calling for a unified tax system, so that local industries are not disadvantaged.
Nobody expects Beijing to deliver its economy to slaughter. 
Instead, its engagement in the W.T.O. beyond the tariff reductions or other well-defined areas is likely to be spotty and slow. 
For one thing, the organization's rules are often vague. 
And despite China's scramble to create a body of laws compatible with those rules, the interpretation of the laws will be left up to government agencies or local authorities that often have their own interests at stake.
What Beijing commands is not necessarily what local authorities obey. 
Companies that find themselves up against an infraction will direct complaints to the United States trade representative's office, which will undoubtedly be inundated with such claims.
"I think implementing the W.T.O. reforms is going to be a very gradual, drawn-out process," said Jon Eichelberger, a Beijing-based lawyer for the American firm Perkins Coie. 
He says that new laws and regulations take years to be adopted. 
And China usually leaves much up to the discretion of the agencies that carry them out. 
"I suspect that's going to continue," he said.
Still, parts of China's economy are preparing for membership. 
Through a spate of acquisitions, companies like Tsingtao Brewery are trying to build the critical mass necessary to compete with the world's multinationals.
And some sectors are relaxing restrictions ahead of schedule in hopes of helping domestic industries gain a better footing before new competitors arrive.
For example, the government has begun lifting restrictions on what models automakers can produce, and it has allowed companies some freedom in setting prices, even though the world organization will not demand those changes for another two years. 
The automakers' prospects are among the dimmest of China's key industries.
The result has been a spate of new models from the foreign auto companies whose joint ventures dominate the market. 
It has also allowed companies such as General Motors, Ford and Volkswagen to plan Chinese production of smaller, cheaper cars that can compete with imports once China joins the W.T.O. and protectionist tariffs fall from almost 100 percent now, to 25 percent within five years.
China is also opening its drug market to foreign retailers early, hoping to build a domestic industry that can compete. 
At least five foreign companies have teamed up with Chinese pharmaceutical companies to set up drugstore chains, among them Wal-Mart, which plans to set up pharmacies in the southern city of Shenzhen and Shanghai, China's commercial capital.
And foreign investors are being offered a majority stake in a proposed $2.4 billion, 2,500-mile natural gas pipeline from China's far western Xinjiang Autonomous Region to the east coast, the sort of strategic project that Beijing would never have allowed foreigners into before.
Foreign companies will soon also be allowed to bid for mineral prospecting rights.
Even the process of bidding has become more transparent. 
Projects up for bid must now be advertised in designated state newspapers, including the English-language China Daily. 
The government has set up a Web site to help: www.chinabidding .com.cn.
China will remove restrictions on distribution services for most products within three years after joining the world body. 
But it is already allowing logistics companies that help move imports in and out of a free trade zone in Shanghai to open branches in most Chinese cities.
China has already agreed to lift joint venture restrictions on large department stores and for virtually all chain stores. 
And it recently said it would allow foreign firms to own up to 65 percent in retail stores.
In many cases, W.T.O. membership will simply legalize what already exists.
Foreign headhunters will be officially allowed into China, though many of the big executive search firms are already operating here. 
And much of the foreign investment in Internet companies, now officially banned, will suddenly be legal.
But it raises legal questions, too.
Upon China's accession, foreign companies will be allowed to own up to 30 percent in companies providing value-added telecommunications services, including Internet content providers. 
But many such firms are already more than 30 percent foreign owned, and Beijing has given conflicting signals about whether those companies will be declared illegal.
Nor is it clear how e-commerce companies will be defined. 
Many of them provide additional services, and will argue that they should not be subject to ownership restrictions.
In some cases, foreign companies have begun jockeying for position to take early advantage of China's W.T.O. entry. 
Several Western firms are hooking up with Chinese fund management firms to offer advice, which is all they are now allowed to do. 
But after China joins, foreign companies will be allowed to own up to a third of fund managers and up to 49 percent after three years.
Foreign banks will be able to serve individual Chinese anywhere in the country after five years.
      
