
Signaling what would be a major policy shift on human rights, China said today that it would give "positive consideration" to allowing the Red Cross to visit more than 3,000 political prisoners.
Speaking with United States journalists, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen also said China viewed a meeting next week between President Clinton and the Chinese Communist Party Secretary, Jiang Zemin, as not for "picture taking," but as a discussion of "a broader and longer-term perspective" on bilateral relations.
The talks are to be held in Seattle during a meeting of national leaders from both sides of the Pacific.
 
'Left Over From the Cold War'
Mr. Qian indicated that Mr. Jiang would take a hard line against Washington's policy of linking trade preferences to China's human-rights record, a policy that the United States has insisted on since the 1989 military crackdown at Tiananmen Square.
"China does not accept linking questions unrelated to trade," Mr. Qian said. 
"This method is a means left over from the cold-war era. 
It is a means to exert pressure, and therefore one cannot expect China to accept this."
Mr. Clinton said in May that "overall, significant progress" in improving China's human-rights record would be the main criterion for whether he renewed China's favorable trade status with the United States next June.
 
Skepticism From Christopher
Just three weeks ago, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said he did not think he could recommend renewal of China's trade privileges because of China's human-rights record.
But in answer to a question about the desire by rights groups to inspect prisons, Mr. Qian said, "I believe that if the Red Cross does put forward such a request for exchanges, we would give positive consideration to that request."
[State Department officials said in Washington that the apparent decision by China to allow the Red Cross access to prisoners would be an important factor in determining whether China's favored trade status would be extended.]
Western diplomats and human-rights workers, who have been urging China to take such a step for years, applauded the move. 
If carried out, it would reverse four decades of refusals to allow any outside humanitarian organization access to the tens of thousands of Chinese who have been imprisoned, tortured or persecuted for their political beliefs.
Coming as it did days before Mr. Qian and Mr. Jiang leave for the United States, the statement was clearly timed to defuse the contentious atmosphere over China's record on rights.
Even though Mr. Qian rejected a link between trade and human rights, the turnabout on access to prisoners is clearly part of China's strategy to improve relations.
Access to prisoners is an explicit condition of Mr. Clinton's executive order on China's future trade relations. 
The order says China must make progress within one year on "insuring humane treatment of prisoners, such as by allowing access to prisoners by international humanitarian and human rights organizations."
The Asian representative for the International Committee of the Red Cross, Christophe Swinarski, said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong that the Red Cross would take Mr. Qian's statement "very seriously."
He hinted that talks on prison access could begin this week when Mr. Swinarski passes through Beijing on his way to North Korea.
John T. Kamm, an American businessman who has carried on private humanitarian work in China for years, characterized Mr. Qian's statement as "a significant change in the opinion of the Chinese Government."
"To me, the immediate impact of this announcement," he said, "is that it delivers a message to every warden holding prisoners that they better clean up their act because there is a very good chance the Red Cross is coming."
Apropos the talks in Seattle, business leaders in the United States have urged the Clinton Administration and the Chinese leadership to repair their relationship, which has been dominated by Washington's reprisals and threats on trade since China's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in 1989. 
The crackdown has been followed by four years of harsh political repression.
Some corporate leaders fear United States companies will fall behind those in Japan and Europe in building markets in China, whose economy is growing by 13 percent this year and may continue to grow 10 percent a year for the rest of the decade.
Business leaders have also warned that if Mr. Clinton cancels China's most-favored-nation trade status, the loss of markets could further slow the growth of the United States economy.
 
--------------------
Welcomed in Washington
WASHINGTON, Nov. 
9 (Special to The New York Times) -- State Department officials said today that the apparent decision by Beijing to allow the Red Cross access to political prisoners would be an important factor in whether Secretary of State Christopher would recommend extending China's preferred trade status.
State Department officials said that since it often takes more than a year for the Red Cross to reach agreement with a government to interview prisoners, actual visits need not take place before Mr. Christopher makes his recommendations to President Clinton next year.
But the officials said China must either allow visits or engage in serious talks with the Red Cross in order to have its new position counted in its favor.
United States officials have been pressing the Chinese for some time to allow the Red Cross to meet with political prisoners. 
The Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Winston Lord, raised the subject during a visit to Beijing in May, and Senator Charles S. Robb, a Virginia Democrat, did the same in August.
