
The subversion trial of one of the most prominent dissidents trying to promote a new political party in China has suddenly been scheduled for Thursday, family members said today.
The trial of the dissident, Qin Yongmin, will take place in Wuhan, in central China, on the same day as the trial of another prominent leader of the suppressed China Democratic Party, Wang Youcai, in the eastern city of Hangzhou.
Relatives of both men say they have been unable to find legal counsel because security agents have intimidated or detained potential lawyers.
"It's worse than it was a few years ago when Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan were tried," said Lu Siqing, director of the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, based in Hong Kong. 
Those two famous dissidents were sentenced to long prison terms, then later sent to exile in the United States. 
"At least they were able to have their own lawyers," Mr. Lu said.
In the last two months authorities have cracked down on dozens of democracy advocates who have tried to start the new party and promote discussion of political alternatives. 
In doing so, the activists cited China's signing of a global convention on civil and political rights, and they were emboldened by China's new friendship with the United States.
But the Communist Party maintains an iron grip on political activity in China. 
Through arrests and other actions, the authorities have made clear that the leadership's constant talk of "political reform" and "rule of law" does not mean that competing political groups will be allowed.
Mr. Qin, 44, and Mr. Wang, 32, are among a small number of leaders who have apparently been singled out for serious criminal charges. 
Both are charged with "inciting subversion of the state."
Mr. Wang is also charged with colluding with foreign enemies of the state -- dissidents abroad -- which makes the case more serious. 
Depending on the court's determination of the gravity of the offenses, the men could be sentenced to five years or more in prison.
A third longtime dissident who has promoted the new party, Xu Wenli, 55, of Beijing, is also being held for trial but has not yet been formally charged.
In Hangzhou still another democracy advocate, who lives in Spain but was arrested in China, was charged on Sunday with financially aiding activities that endanger state security and with illegal entry into the country, reported the Hong Kong-based information center, which maintains contact with dissidents throughout China.
The democracy advocate, Wang Ce, 50, who began study in the United States in 1984 and holds a Ph.D. in political science from the University of Hawaii, is chairman of the Alliance for a Democratic China - Chinese Liberal Democratic Party, an association of dissidents living abroad. 
He recently lived in Spain but retains Chinese citizenship.
Repeatedly denied entry to China, Wang Ce sneaked in from Macao. 
He was arrested on Nov. 
2 while meeting with Wang Youcai in Hangzhou and now will be brought to trial. 
His alleged offer of money to help Wang Youcai buy a computer is part of the legal case against both men.
Many other people who have been associated with the new party or have spoken out in defense of the arrested leaders have been detained for hours or days in recent weeks.
      
