
In a bleak omen for the Chinese cultural world, the Government has banned one of the nation's most acclaimed films after just a few showings.
The leaders had approved a censored version of "Farewell to My Concubine," a movie that follows the lives of two Peking Opera actors through five turbulent decades of recent Chinese history. 
But last week the authorities abruptly halted its release and distribution without offering an explanation.
The ban will not affect the movie's planned release in the United States in the fall. 
But it means that Chinese audiences will be unable to see the first Chinese film to win the top prize at the Cannes International Film Festival.
From the Politburo's point of view, the problem is that "Farewell to My Concubine" deals with homosexuality and depicts some of the turmoil in the Communist period.
Worst of all, a leading character commits suicide. 
That might be tolerable if the death occurred during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, when most of today's leaders were out of power. 
Instead, it takes place in 1977, when Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders were already clawing their way back to the top.
Normally the Chinese authorities ban a film in obscurity and almost no one hears about it. 
But to their huge embarrassment, a quiet execution is impossible this time.
 
The Praise and Prizes
In May, "Farewell to My Concubine" was a co-winner of the Palme d'Or, the top prize at the Cannes International Film Festival. 
The other film was "The Piano," a romance set in New Zealand.
"Farewell to My Concubine" also received the International Critics' Prize for "its incisive analysis of the political and cultural history of China and for its brilliant combination of the spectacular and the intimate."
Critics have given the movie some excellent reviews. 
Vincent Canby described it in The New York Times as "a handsome, exotic, beautifully acted film, full of the kind of humanism that festival juries like to commend."
The ban is a retreat in what has overall been a process of cultural liberalization in China. 
Books, magazines, music and art have all been flourishing and mostly finding ways to evade the cultural commissars.
The Propaganda Department, which is adjusting to the times by changing the translation of its name to Information Department, is loosening controls over news organizations and is even allowing a wave of talk-radio programs. 
Satellite dishes and cable systems are sprouting around the country, allowing millions of citizens to watch Hong Kong and Taiwan films and serials.
Speaking of the ban, Chen Kaige, the director of the film, said today, "When this kind of thing happens in my country, I feel very hurt."
He said his intention in the film had not been to pass political judgment on the Government, and he noted that films like "The Godfather" and "Platoon" were not regarded as anti-American even though they depicted violence by organized crime and the trauma of the Vietnam War.
Officials from the Chinese Film Bureau and the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television declined to comment today. 
The Chinese distributor, the Beijing Film Studio, also refused to say anything. 
By some accounts, the Politburo itself screened the film and decided to ban it unless major changes were made.
"Farewell to My Concubine" opened in Shanghai on July 26, and two weeks' worth of tickets promptly sold out, reportedly setting a record in the city. 
The authorities have allowed the film to continue its run there for all the performances whose tickets have been sold, apparently for fear of angering audiences who had paid nearly $4, half a week's salary for a typical worker, for each ticket.
In Beijing, the Government allowed a premiere on Wednesday last week but no other showings. 
The film has not been allowed in any other cities.
The ban already is having a chilling effect on other productions. 
Mr. Chen, the director, said he had put aside plans to film "Life and Death in Shanghai."
The book, by Nien Cheng, describes the sufferings of one family during the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Chen said that for now at least, he had also dropped the idea of making a movie of the early life of Jiang Qing, the actress who became Mao Zedong's wife. 
Both projects would be far more sensitive than "Farewell to My Concubine," which is not directly political.
Harvey and Bob Weinstein, the co-chairman of Miramax Films, which is to release "Farewell to My Concubine" in the United States, expressed outrage at the ban.
"We have been through this sad situation before and were hopeful that the blatant suppression of artistic freedom in China had changed since then," the Weinsteins said in a statement. 
"Obviously that is not the case."
