
Leaders of the official Protestant church defended China's policies on religious freedom this week, asserting that a record 15 million Chinese now worship in approved Protestant churches and that persecution of so-called underground Christians is rare.
At a news conference that appeared intended in part to contradict reports -- like one from the State Department this month -- that religious persecution in China is on the rise, the church leaders charged that meddling by hostile foreign evangelists has caused many of the reported conflicts between Christians and the police.
They also said the claim that tens of millions of Chinese attend illegal "house churches" is exaggerated.
"Some hostile forces overseas are still reluctant to see the Chinese Protestant church become independent," said the Rev. Cao Shengjie, deputy director of the China Christian Council, one of two government-affiliated organizations that run the nondenominational Protestant church. 
Foreign religious groups use secret donations "to attract Chinese into illegal activities," she said, and their secret missionaries seek to "undermine the stabilityI of the country and the running of the official church."
The news conference by four elderly church leaders on Thursday was tied to their celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Chinese Christian Three-Self Patriotic Movement, founded to direct Protestant affairs after the Communist victory in 1949.
At midcentury, building a new church dedicated to "self-government, self-support and self-propagation" was essential, the leaders said, because the Chinese people saw missionaries as agents of Western colonialism.
"The imperialist powers used Christianity to invade China," said Luo Guanzong, chairman of the Three-Self organization. 
"But now we have changed the old image that Christianity is a foreign religion. 
We've shown that Christians can love the country and actively participate in building a socialist society."
Although Christians were severely persecuted during Mao's Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976, over the last 20 years the government has allowed the gradual growth of official Protestant and Roman Catholic churches.
Within the legal constraints -- pastors, liturgy and church construction are subject to official controls, public proselytizing is forbidden and children may not be baptized, for example -- many followers say they enjoy genuine Christian worship. 
On Sundays, legal churches tend to be packed.
But groups that refuse to register with the authorities have come under increased pressure, with leaders sometimes fined, detained or sent to labor camps, giving rise to charges that human rights and freedom of worship are being violated.
According to the State Department's Sept. 
5 report on religious freedom, in 1999, "some unregistered religious groups were subjected to increased restrictions -- including, in some cases, intimidation, harassment, and detention," but the degree of repression varied by region.
Unregistered Protestant groups, often strongly evangelical in nature, have grown fast in recent years, according to outside experts who say such groups may have 30 million followers or more. 
Their leaders say they cannot pledge allegiance to the atheistic Communist Party, or accept restrictions on their work to spread the Gospel.
Evangelical Christians from Asia, Europe and the United States provide encouragement and funds for this "house church" movement, and in one recent case three Taiwan-born Americans on a brief mission were detained in central China and expelled.
"It's true that some groups have not registered due to theological difficulties," said Han Wenzao, chairman of the China Christian Council. 
"They believe the church belongs to heaven, not to earth, so they don't get registered."
"This is unrealistic," said Mr. Han, who argues that Christians should be thankful for the growth of the official church and the fact that a church-run company can print large numbers of Bibles.
The Roman Catholic Church here is also split, with an official "patriotic" church that rejects the authority of the Vatican and a large, illegal church that is loyal to the pope.
The Vatican and the Chinese government have reportedly held secret talks on such issues as the appointment of bishops and the Vatican's recognition of Taiwan. 
Last week, a cardinal from Rome met Chinese religious officials while attending a conference here.
But the arrests of pro-Vatican priests have continued, while the Vatican has just angered China by announcing that on Oct. 
1 it will canonize 120 Chinese Catholics and missionaries, considered martyrs.
