
China's minister of justice was removed from office this week, officials acknowledged today, and according to some accounts he is under investigation for corruption.
As of tonight, the departure of the minister, Gao Changli, 63, had not been announced. 
But during the day, as rumors swirled in legal circles, Justice Ministry employees were told that Mr. Gao had quit because of poor health, a ministry worker said.
If his departure involves financial improprieties, Mr. Gao's case would be another blow for the Communist Party, which is reeling at the scope of corruption coming to light.
Adding to the party's concern is a legal battle brewing in Vancouver, Canada, over the fate of China's most wanted suspect, Lai Changxing. 
Chinese officials say he was the mastermind of a smuggling operation in the southern city of Xiamen that drew hundreds of high party, police and customs officials into crime.
Officials said Mr. Gao had been replaced by Zhang Fusen, deputy secretary of the Beijing Communist Party and a former deputy justice minister.
Over the last two days, a few newspapers in Hong Kong and the West have reported that sources in the ministry were saying that Mr. Gao had been detained for interrogation about economic misdeeds. 
While some legal officials also said today that he was under investigation, others said that they were unaware of it, and details could not be confirmed.
Mr. Gao rose to power in Shandong Province, then in 1993 became a senior member of the national Supreme People's Court before being appointed to the top justice post in 1998.
Though traditionally weak, the ministry oversees prisons and legal education and regulates the legal profession. 
While Mr. Gao had no direct power over prosecutors and courts, which are notoriously susceptible to political control and corruption, he had taken a leading role in promoting the rule of law, a professed goal of the top leaders as China opens to the global economy.
Mr. Lai, the detained businessman, began as a barely educated farmer in Fujian Province but by the 1990's was a corporate kingpin living in Hong Kong, with his Yuanhua Group a dominant corporate presence back in Xiamen, a port in Fujian. 
The authorities say that by spreading bribes widely, Mr. Lai, 42, imported more than $5 billion worth of cars, fuel and other goods without paying duties. 
By the time the case broke earlier this year, Mr. Lai had disappeared. 
Now, with the detention of him and his wife, Tsang Mingna, by Canadian immigration authorities last week, it is known that Mr. Lai, his wife and three teenage children fled to Vancouver in August 1999, using Hong Kong passports.
The couple's detention has put Canada in a delicate spot. 
In hearings this week, officials made it clear that they hope to deport them to China, stressing that Canada does not want to be seen as a refuge for criminals. 
But Canada does not have an extradition treaty with China or a death penalty and has often declined to extradite criminals to countries where they are likely to be executed.
Eleven others in the smuggling case have been sentenced to death, and Mr. Lai would be almost certain to receive the same punishment.
In a court statement this week, Mr. Lai denied the smuggling charges and gave sensational but unverified details of past ties to senior Hong Kong and Chinese officials as well as his work as a Chinese double-agent against Taiwan.
Mr. Lai said that he met three times in 1999 with Chinese prosecutors who wanted him to help frame the vice minister for public security, Li Jizhou, who had been a longtime friend. 
It was his refusal to cooperate in a political struggle, Mr. Lai said, that led prosecutors to go after him.
In contrast, accounts leaking from government sources say Mr. Lai kept a pleasure house in Xiamen where he set up Mr. Li and other officials with mistresses, ensuring cooperation in his scheme.
