
EAST AND WEST
China, Power, and the Future of Asia.
By Christopher Patten.
Illustrated. 304 pp. 
New York:
Times Books/Random House. 
$25.
We now have the book that Rupert Murdoch refused to allow HarperCollins, owned by the news corporation he controls, to publish, presumably because he thought it would be offensive to the Chinese Communist authorities. 
That alone may persuade many people that Christopher Patten's "East and West" is important enough to buy -- even, perhaps, to read. 
If it does, Murdoch will have done us all an unintended service. 
This is a book we need to read, even though the tumult over its publication gave us little idea of what it is really about.
Those expecting sensational disclosures or gossip about scandalous personal behavior will be disappointed. 
Patten's book has none of that. 
Those expecting a defense of Patten's record as the last British Governor of Hong Kong and a critique of Chinese conduct during the negotiations over the handover of the city will find that, but it is only the start. 
The author's experience in Hong Kong makes up a relatively small, though critically important, part of the book.
Even its full title, "East and West: China, Power, and the Future of Asia," fails to do justice to its scope. 
It is, in fact, no less than the defense of a political and economic philosophy to guide public policy as we approach the next century. 
This description (which Patten does not use) may seem pretentious and, indeed, forbidding, so I should hasten to add that this volume is neither a dreary academic summary nor a tedious apologia by a politician who has just left office. 
It is, rather, a beguiling mixture of memoir and maxim, of well-chosen anecdote and pithy analysis, of experience and erudition. 
The result is that rarest of literary products: a book that is as delightful to read as it is enlightening to ponder.
When Christopher Patten was Governor of Hong Kong, his critics charged that his attempt to introduce elective democracy into the colony on the eve of its transfer to Chinese rule was misguided; it was, they said, too late in the day for reform to be carried out successfully and any attempt would only offend the leaders in Beijing, who would not only take out their resentment on Hong Kong when they had a chance but (infinitely more important in the eyes of many of the critics) deprive British businessmen of their fair share of trade and investment opportunities.
Patten's rejoinder is that, though British concern for democracy in Hong Kong may have been belated, it was nonetheless motivated by both principle and practicality. 
Hong Kong's civil society had matured to the point that it would not tolerate a secret deal struck behind its back. 
Furthermore, he argues that everything he did to make the legislative elections in Hong Kong as democratic as possible was consistent with what had been formally agreed to by the Governments of Britain and China before his arrival. 
It was not he, therefore, who was the problem, but rather the Chinese, who tried to undermine the clear purpose of that agreement. 
As for trade and investment, he doubts that political disputes ever had much effect on Chinese business decisions, despite occasional threats by officials in Beijing.
The record of negotiations, the pattern of trade and the course of events since July 1997, when Hong Kong became a province of China, strongly support Patten's view on all these questions. 
No fair-minded person who has bothered to read the Joint Declaration and looked at the facts can seriously charge that Patten violated the agreement in the arrangements for elections to Hong Kong's legislative assembly. 
The disputes with Beijing stemmed from a Chinese effort to subvert the clear meaning of agreements they had signed and thereby to avoid being confronted by too many awkward democratic institutions when Hong Kong came under Chinese rule. 
Despite occasional doubts stimulated by some "old China hands" and gullible businessmen, the British Government supported Patten most of the time, and there is no evidence that trade and investment have suffered.
While China dissolved Hong Kong's legislative assembly when it took over, it scheduled new elections for May of this year. 
Changes in the election rules handicapped the democratic parties, but they still won the largest single bloc of seats in an election with a record turnout of voters. 
So much for the argument that people in Hong Kong were interested only in making money, not in politics.
Who can doubt that, absent the precedent for limited representative democracy set by the citizens of Hong Kong during Patten's tenure as Governor, Chinese treatment of the erstwhile colony would have been harsher, and attempts to limit Hong Kong's autonomy more vigorous?
And who can doubt that, if China's Communist leaders had been encouraged to lay a heavier hand on Hong Kong's liberties, this would have weakened the city's economic performance and made it more difficult for China to resist the bout of Asian flu that spread through the region last fall?
Governments, preoccupied with staying in power, often fail to understand what is in their country's best interest.
The Chinese leaders, of course, understood that a prosperous Hong Kong would be useful to China. 
What they did not understand was the intimate connection between economic prosperity and a free society based on the rule of law. 
As Patten puts it, they had little comprehension "of the relationship between Hong Kong's hardware, a capitalist economy, and its software, a pluralist society."
If China is able to master the daunting problems now facing it (failing state industries, a vulnerable banking system, the social pressure of rising expectations, pell-mell urbanization), it will need more than Hong Kong's wealth; it will also need to heed Hong Kong's experience. 
Again, in Patten's words, "Hong Kong is at one and the same time China's window on the world, bridge to the world, shop front for the world and paradigm for the world of what China as a whole could become."
Following the spirited and persuasive defense of his record in Hong Kong, Patten turns to broader themes: what has brought about economic advance in Asia (and elsewhere)?
Is there a culturally determined "Asian" way that is either superior to the "Western" way or -- at least -- more suited to the Asian environment?
Are our civilizations doomed to clash?
Is democracy necessary for economic development?
What is the proper role of government, in the East, the West, or anywhere?
The claim that Asia's economic success resulted from specific Asian virtues has suffered a severe blow since the monetary and economic setbacks that became apparent last fall. 
Even so, the fallacy of this argument should have been obvious earlier. 
As Patten contends, what brought rapid economic development to the Asian "tigers" was the same thing that brought it to countries elsewhere: capitalism, hard work, frugality, limited government. 
There was no Asian miracle; if development was more rapid in some Asian countries than it had been in the West, that was because modern technology and communication have accelerated the process of change and because these countries were playing catch-up. 
It takes longer for a pioneer to clear the way than for late starters to follow a well-marked trail.
Patten heaps particular scorn on the thesis that authoritarian government fits the Asian character better than dem-
ocratic institutions. 
It is understandable that dictators, their sycophants and those who aspire to dictatorship would make the argument; it is harder to explain why intelligent scholars and businessmen should be taken in by it. 
After all, in country after country we have seen that as people become more affluent they demand a part in their own governance. 
If this is denied, governments eventually fall (witness South Korea and Indonesia) and sometimes the entire fabric of the state is left in tatters, as in most of the former Soviet Union.
While Patten is firm in his conviction that human rights are universal and that democratic countries should reflect that in their policies, he would not place human rights at the center of a foreign policy or attempt to promote them by ineffectual means. 
He praises the United States for supporting democracy in Hong Kong, but ridicules the annual farce in Washington when Congress debates extension of most-favored-nation trading status for China, to no useful effect whatever. 
He is uncomfortable with the choice to go with what he terms "Carter or Kissinger, with high-minded waffle or cynical common sense."
Such a choice does, indeed, create an awkward dilemma, but Patten's advice to treat China as we would any other country, while sound as a general principle, does little to resolve it. 
The fact is that the Chinese leaders will not respect the rights of their own people until they see that it is in their interest to do so. 
We have no means of forcing them to do what they should, and public lectures are more likely to engender acts of defiance than willing compliance.
Does this mean that the cause is hopeless?
Far from it: if in fact a civil society, the rule of law and democratic institutions are essential to a productive and stable polity, governments that block their introduction will only handicap their countries in today's and tomorrow's competitive world. 
This is something that some Communist officials have come to understand. 
Zhao Ziyang, the Chinese leader who was ousted in 1989 for opposing repression of the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, seems to have understood; in a different country both Mikhail Gorbachev and Eduard Shevardnadze came to the same conclusion.
We should have no hesitation in explaining why respect for human rights is vital to every society and why it influences our attitude toward the countries we deal with. 
But in doing so, we must be careful not to leave the impression that treating one's own people properly is in some way a concession to us, or deserves a reward from us.
Eloquent, compact and far-reaching in its range, Christopher Patten's "East and West" is a must for anyone who wishes to understand the forces that will shape the world of the 21st century. 
We should thank Rupert Murdoch for calling it to our attention. 
The leaders of the democratic China of the future will doubtless remember his signal service to their cause.
