
A FEW days after a widely publicized study found high levels of sodium, fat and cholesterol in 15 popular Chinese restaurant dishes, Charlie Chiang noticed something strange taking place in his Northern Virginia restaurant: the American customers had all but disappeared.
"Oh, we had our regular Chinese customers, but you could count the Americans on one hand," said Mr. Chiang, who owns nine Chinese restaurants in the Washington metropolitan area.
And if that weren't enough, there was only a trickle of telephone calls ordering takeout food.
Mr. Chiang wasn't alone. 
The Organization of Chinese Americans, a civil-rights advocacy group in Washington, said it received reports that business fell by 25 percent to 35 percent at many Chinese restaurants in Washington, as well as in New York, Boston and Chicago. 
The drop-off was especially severe among customers not of Chinese descent, with the suburbs being particularly hurt.
Many owners say they are convinced that the precipitous drop in customers is directly linked to the study's findings. 
And they may not be overreacting.
Since reading that Szechuan Shrimp, one of his favorite dishes, contained 19 grams of fat, about as much as a McDonald's Quarter Pounder, Michael Sims has cut back from his usual ordering two or three times a week from the Hunan Royal Chinese Restaurant in Greenwich Village.
"I'm on a low-fat diet right now, and it makes me all the more aware of the necessity to cut back," said Mr. Sims, the owner of Mike's Club Cafe in Manhattan. 
Although Mr. Sims admits that he always suspected that his favorite takeout food was not "as innocuous as it seemed," he says that seeing the statistics in print has forced him to alter his eating habits. 
"I'll still order Chinese, but instead of two or three times a week, maybe once a week or once every two weeks," he said.
Daphne Kwok, executive director of the Organization of Chinese Americans, said the report "outraged many in the Chinese community."
Many restaurant owners say they fear that the findings could not only hobble the Chinese restaurant industry, estimated by Chinese restaurant associations at $9 billion a year, but also blemish the reputation of people who pride themselves on hard work and good service.
"Almost 50 percent of the Chinese people in the United States make a living through this industry at some time in their lives," Mr. Chiang said. 
"I started as a cook in a Chinese restaurant before I owned my restaurant. 
This study could hurt us in more ways than just a drop in customers."
Some have even suggested filing a lawsuit, said Alfred Hsu, the owner of the Szechuan House in Chicago, who attended a meeting of Chinese restaurateurs in the Chicago area on Thursday. 
"But we voted against it because we don't want to be suit-happy. 
We decided to be on the nice side. 
People tend to support the weak."
To counter the negative impressions left by the study, restaurant owners in Chicago and Washington have started public relations campaigns. 
The Chicago restaurateurs have also done their own analysis of some popular dishes and will present the results this week to the Center for Science in the Public Interest, the Washington consumer group that produced the survey. 
The Chicago group said that it had found results that contradict the center's findings.
The association has advised members either to place advertisements in local newspapers or to put signs in windows or notations on menus indicating that their customers, like those at Burger King, can also have it their way. 
"If you want us to hold the sauce, we can," Mr. Chiang said. 
"If you want a dish steamed, rather than fried or stir-fried, we can do that."
Members of the Metro Washington Chinese Restaurant Association hired a public relations firm, then held a news conference to present their views.
The brouhaha has people at the Center for Science in the Public Interest shaking their heads.
"Our intent wasn't to stop people from eating Chinese food, but to have them eat healthier by eating more like the Chinese do, which is more vegetables, less sauce and less meat," said Jayne Hurley, a nutritionist at the center and an author of the report. 
"We're not picking on Chinese restaurants. 
We decided to do Chinese food first because it is the most popular ethnic cuisine in America. 
We're now in the process of doing a similar analysis of Italian food, followed by Mexican food."
The study analyzed 15 popular dishes from 20 midprice Chinese restaurants in Washington, San Francisco and Chicago. 
The ingredients were separated -- meat from vegetables from sauce. 
Each item was weighed, separated, pulverized in a blender, and sent to a laboratory to be analyzed.
It found fat content ranged as high as 76 grams in Kung Pao Chicken, and sodium up to 3,460 milligrams in the house lo mein.
The findings were widely reported in the United States and abroad. 
Mike Royko, the Pulitzer-Prize-winning Chicago Tribune columnist, took a swipe at the consumer group for destroying one of the few real "treats" in his diet. 
"Why can't they devote their energies to finding a cure for baldness?" he wrote in his column of Sept. 
9.
Even David Letterman got in a jab on his "Late Show" television talk show, cracking that his last fortune cookie contained the warning that there would be triple bypass in his future.
But Chinese restaurateurs aren't laughing.
Ivy Lin, the owner of the Golden Garden Restaurant in the East Village, went so far as to suggest a conspiracy.
"Maybe they do this because they do not like Chinese people," said Mrs. Lin, who said she normally doesn't voice her opinions because of "my broken English" but was nonetheless vocal when reached for comment last week.
"We work very hard to please our customers," said Mrs. Lin, who added that until two weeks ago, she could always count on business from students at nearby New York University, who often ordered up to 10 dishes at a time for themselves and their friends. 
Now, she lamented, in a soft plaintive voice, "even they are not coming."
Although some New Yorkers said the report had not changed their opinion of Chinese food, in part because they had always suspected that some dishes were high in fat, others said it had put a damper on their moo shu pork.
"I eat Chinese food much the same way I eat pizza, as a treat," said Gertrude Brown, a paralegal who lives in Harlem. 
"This study took some of the joy out of that. 
If what they report is true, I might as well eat a quart of Haagen-Daz chocolate ice cream."
In Chinatown in New York, meanwhile, it was business as usual for the regular Chinese clientele.
"Restaurants that cater to Chinese are very busy," said George Chew, who is Chinese. 
Mr. Chew, a lawyer, has an office in Chinatown. 
"I don't see that Chinatown will go out of business because General Tso's chicken is loaded with fat and cholesterol. 
Besides, the Chinese food they cite in the report is what they serve on the West Side of Manhattan, not the Chinese food Chinese people eat."
