
Senior Chinese officials today reaffirmed their determination to squeeze dead wood and red ink out of bloated state-owned enterprises, vowing to make nearly all of them competitive and profitable by the end of next year.
Reporting on his first year as Prime Minister, Zhu Rongji told the annual session of the National People's Congress that, despite the "grim environment at home and abroad," China would forge ahead with the overhaul of state industries as well as a streamlining of Government bureaucracy.
While his speech was mainly devoted to economic policy, Mr. Zhu implicitly acknowledged the social unrest that has flared as urban unemployment grows and farmers protest taxes and corruption.
In a statement that seemed to be aimed as much at local officials and the police as at potential protesters, Mr. Zhu said such conflicts should be resolved promptly, "eliminating them before they grow."
Mr. Zhu said the Government projected 7 percent economic growth in 1999, compared with an official figure of 7.8 percent for 1998, and would continue its effort to stimulate the economy -- which has been battered by the Asian financial crisis and a shrinkage of domestic demand -- by pumping large sums into capital investments.
But the determination to wring out state-owned enterprises was the clear theme of the day.
In a news conference after today's opening of the congress, the official in charge of revamping state industry sought to rebut the perception that economic reforms had stalled.
"We have continued to quicken the pace of state enterprise reform," said the official, Sheng Huaren, chairman of the State Economic and Trade Commission, noting progress in closing of excess textile mills and coal mines, and restructuring of the petroleum, petrochemical and metallurgical industries.
Mr. Sheng gave a surprisingly upbeat assessment of some of the challenges facing the Chinese economy.
Mr. Sheng said the Government aimed to stabilize 7,680 large and medium-size public companies, of which 2,300 are now losing money. 
The goal, he said, is to end the losses of one-third of those companies this year, and the losses of an additional one-third next year, leaving no more than 15 percent of the surviving companies in the red.
Last year, 48,000 company officials were demoted or fired for poor management, Mr. Sheng said, and under a system of inspection by outside auditors, more incompetent or corrupt managers will be removed.
