
Two Chinese immigrants held captive for 13 days in a Brooklyn basement closet were freed and their abductors were captured on Monday night, the police said, after an around-the-clock investigation of an international kidnapping-for-ransom plot.
Kidnappings of Asians in New York by members of Asian gangs have risen in the last two years and account for more than half of the 30 kidnappings in the city this year, Capt. George Duke of the Police Department's major case squad said. 
What made this case unusual, the authorities said, was that the immigrants who were abducted were here legally and the ransom was sought from the victims' relatives in China.
"The targets of many of these kidnappings are people who are here illegally and for an obvious reason, they are fearful to make a complaint," Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, said.
The kidnapped man, 24-year-old Shan Hua Chan, 24, and the woman, 33, who has not been identified because she was reportedly raped repeatedly by her abductors, were taken at gunpoint during a July 25 robbery of their apartment in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, Mr. Hynes said.
Both the victims and the men charged with kidnapping them are natives of the Fujian province in China and ransom demands were delivered to relatives of the victims living in China, Mr. Hynes said.
The victims were also beaten during their ordeal, which ended with the police raid about 9 P.M. Monday at the basement apartment of a three-family brick home at 451 Avenue Y in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn, Mr. Hynes said.
"They were absolutely terrified out of their minds," said a detective who specializes in crimes involving Asian gangs and took part in the five-minute raid. 
"The man was so relieved his legs turned to jelly."
The police refused to give detailed information about the victims to maintain the woman's anonymity. 
Both were taken to Coney Island Hospital. 
"The man was deprived of food and drink for most of the time he was kidnapped," Mr. Hynes said.
Four men have been charged with kidnapping, rape and illegal weapons possession in the incident, Mr. Hynes said, adding that two loaded .380-caliber semiautomatic pistols were found in the apartment. 
The most serious charge, kidnapping, carries a maximum prison sentence of 25 years to life.
Captain Duke said the four defendants live in Manhattan and belong to the Fujian Flying Dragons, a Chinese gang that is based both in the United States and in China and has engaged in smuggling l refugees.
The police have not yet established whether the defendants are legal immigrants, Mr. Hynes said.
Three of the men, Jin X. Lu, 32, of 52 Allen Street, Lo Yeang, 22, of 170 Forsyth Street and Xao He Lu, 19, of 202 Rivington Street were arrested in the raid on the Gravesend apartment, Mr. Hynes said. 
Documents found in the apartment revealed the whereabouts of the fourth defendant, Tong Feng Lu, 37, of 209 Madison Street, and he was taken into custody later Monday night, Mr. Hynes said.
"Kidnappings used to average about 40 a year," Captain Duke said, adding that the number rose to 60 last year, involving 88 victims. 
"Of those 60 kidnappings, 33 were of Asian immigrants in this country. 
So far this year, we have 16 kidnappings of Asians."
Captain Duke said the police got their first break in the Gravesend case by intercepting a ransom demand made during a call on a cellular phone to someone who resides at the Sunset Park apartment with the two victims.
Later, Captain Duke said, a partial license plate number provided by a witness led detectives to a light blue Ford Taurus that was apparently used in the kidnapping.
The initial ransom demand was $38,000, but it was later reduced to $28,000 and $18,000, Mr. Hynes said, adding that the number eight is a lucky number in the defendants' Fujianese dialect of Chinese.
The District Attorney said the defendants tried to arrange a ransom payment in China to avoid being arrested during a payoff here, which would surely have been monitored by the police.
"The families were trying to raise the money," Captain Duke said.
Police robbery squads in Brooklyn and Queens are working to see whether the four men are involved in other robberies and kidnappings, the captain said.
"We feel that we are uncovering a pattern of similar crimes," he said.
