
China's two state-owned telecommunications providers will acquire 15 percent of Hong Kong's largest telephone company as part of a joint venture, investment bankers said early today.
Under the deal, Cable and Wireless of Britain, the majority owner of the Hong Kong Telecommunications, will sell a 7 percent stake to the joint venture of the China United Telecommunications Corporation, a state-owned company, and the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, the banking sources said. 
Citic Pacific, a $10 billion conglomerate and China's main investment vehicle, will sell its entire 8 percent interest in Hong Kong Telecom.
Such a sale will be no surprise as many analysts had expected that Beijing would want a bigger stake in Hong Kong's telecommunications industry after the British colony returns to mainland sovereignty on July 1. 
China has been active in buying other elements of Hong Kong's infrastructure, including Cathay Airlines a year ago.
Shares of Hong Kong Telecom surged 5.6 percent Thursday, and this morning trading in the stock was suspended. 
While the sale of the stake is likely to be at a discount to the company's stock price, investors have been encouraged by the growth possibilities if Hong Kong Telekom had an ally on the mainland.
The deal is expected to be worth as much as $2.5 billion (United States) depending on the transaction's discount. 
The Bank of China and Hongkong Bank will finance the acquisition on behalf of the joint venture, the banking sources said.
The sale of the stake will allow Cable and Wireless, which owns 59.16 percent of Hong Kong Telecom, to retain control of the company.
Andrew Hall, an analyst with Kleinwort Benson, said that getting the company's stake down to below 50 percent was "psychologically and politically important" for China.
An official with the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications in Beijing said that he had no comment to make on the reported sale.
A representative of Hong Kong Telecom also declined to comment.
On Wednesday, the president of China United Telecommunications, known as China Unicom, said that the company had held talks with Hong Kong Telecom about taking a stake.
China Unicom is China's second state-owned telecommunications company. 
It was set up in July to install and operate basic domestic telephone services. 
The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications is the dominant carrier.
With the Ministry and China Unicom taking a minority shareholding in a joint venture, Hongkong Telecom would gain access to the mainland's telecommunications infrastructure, said Gary Chan, an analyst with UBS Securities. 
"It would be a dream alliance for Telecom," he said.
      
