
Prime Minister Li Peng accused Britain today of "perfidiously" trying to create disorder in Hong Kong and trying to impede the territory's smooth return to China.
Mr. Li used the occasion of a two-hour policy address, opening the annual session of the National People's Congress, to step up the attack on Britain's proposals to increase democracy in Hong Kong. 
His voice rising in outrage, Mr. Li departed from the advance text of his speech to warn that China would hold Britain fully responsible for the consequences of the dispute.
The speech also indirectly accused the United States and France of "having deliberately created obstacles to China's peaceful unification" by selling arms to Taiwan. 
While Mr. Li specifically referred only to "certain foreign elements" it was clear that he meant Washington and Paris. 
He also warned that China was ready to take "strong measures" -- apparently meaning full military force -- to prevent Taiwan from proclaiming itself an independent country separate from China.
Communist Party leaders have worked together for several months on the speech, which is equivalent to a state-of-the-nation address. 
It thus represents the views of the entire leadership, not just those of Mr. Li, and as such it is one of the best indications available of what vision the party has for China's future.
But this year the speech seemed to have more slogans than vision. 
While Mr. Li called for officials to "emancipate the mind" and hasten economic liberalization, he spoke in Communist cliches that undermined the message. 
"We should dare to think and act, boldly experimenting with new reforms, so long as we act with prudence," Mr. Li said, in a typically fuzzy passage. 
"We should evaluate our experience at every step, continuing to do what is right, correcting what is wrong and improving what is imperfect, so as to avoid losses, great losses in particular."
The speech affirmed China's current course, but its lack of vision underscored the extent to which the initiative in economic policy has passed from the central Government to the provinces. 
At a party this evening attended by many Chinese officials and business people, none of those questioned had bothered to listen to the speech. 
"Frankly, no one really cares," a businessman said, then changed the subject.
