
China's Communist Party leadership has notified the family of the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, that his trial on charges of attempting to overthrow the Government will begin on Wednesday.
International human rights groups called on President Clinton today to condemn the criminal proceedings against the outspoken democracy campaigner, who has already spent 16 years in prison or detention for his essays and public statements.
Two former United States Attorneys General, Richard Thornburgh and Nicholas Katzenbach, publicly offered to assist Mr. Wei's family in preparing his defense, although the gesture is sure to be rejected by the Chinese authorities.
The outcry over Mr. Wei's case in part reflects the frustration among his supporters that the Clinton Administration, which at one time strongly identified itself with Mr. Wei's appeal for democracy, has gradually put distance between itself and China's pro-democracy dissidents. 
Mr. Clinton has instead pursued a course of dialogue and "engagement" with China, in hopes that stable relations and continuing economic reform here will eventually lead to an end to political repression.
What is also clear, Chinese and American officials say, is that Mr. Wei's fate is being decided as Beijing and Washington are engaged in secret negotiations over the annual effort by the United States and European and other countries to condemn China's human rights record at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva.
The question that will only be answered by Mr. Wei's trial and sentencing is whether the Chinese authorities are seeking to exert pressure on Washington to drop the condemnatory initiative in Geneva. 
But it could also be that they simply want to dispose of Mr. Wei's case well in advance of the Geneva proceedings in March to signal that they are not willing to grant Mr. Wei his freedom at any price.
Tonight, Mr. Wei's younger brother, Wei Xiaotao, said the family had retained a prominent Chinese lawyer, Zhang Sizhi, who in the past has defended prominent dissidents like Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming.
The charge carries a minimum penalty of 10 years in prison and a maximum penalty of death, although the death penalty is almost never invoked against prominent political dissidents.
