
Chinese stock prices surged more than 30 percent yesterday after the Government's announcement late last week that it had halted the listing of new stock issues.
On the Shanghai stock market, an index of class A shares, meant for domestic investors, rose by 36 percent. 
And on the smaller exchange in the southern city of Shenzhen, across from Hong Kong, the A share index increased by 34 percent. 
Both markets had fallen by more than 75 percent from their highs last year.
The upward momentum appeared to be continuing today. 
At mid-morning, Shanghai A shares were up 10.3 percent, while those in Shenzhen had gained 11.25 percent.
Last Friday's halt on listing new stock issues was part of a Chinese Government effort to reduce inflation, which has risen to about 25 percent a year in large cities, through restricting capital formation. 
Last year, Beijing raised interest rates and restricted credit to curb price increases. 
As a result, many state-owned enterprises turned to selling stock as a way to raise capital.
Moving to prop up stock prices should attract investors who might otherwise spend their cash, said Philip J. Suttle, head of emerging-markets research at J. P. Morgan. 
"They are trying to build up the savings side of the economy, and the last thing you need is a stock market that is declining."
The move is only the latest of several moratoriums on new share issues by the Chinese. 
The previous halt occurred in February, but was lifted several weeks later. 
Some foreign investors applauded this step, but cautioned that it was a stopgap.
"The move would be meaningless now if that's all they are going to do," said Mary Yee, an analyst with Smith Barney, adding: "The problem really stems from the lack of regulation and the poor disclosure requirements. 
Some companies have been listed for two or three years and have not issued an annual report."
The halt is not likely to last much longer than six months, predicted James Polacheck, an Asian markets analyst for Baring Securities in New York. 
There is a backlog of about 1,700 companies waiting to issue shares, he said. 
These concerns have already sold restricted stock to employees and other insiders, and those people are waiting for a public listing in order to cash out their investments at large profits.
Yet, these future issues have hung over the markets, helping to depress shares of the 200 or so companies already listed domestically. 
The Chinese markets are quite volatile because trading volume is low and because they are dominated by individual speculators often operating without access to the most basic corporate reports or financial statements.
"The volatility is a reflection of a very junior, immature market," Mr. Suttle of J. P. Morgan said.
Chinese companies can issue two types of shares that foreign investors can buy. 
Class B shares are traded on the domestic exchanges, and the other category, class H shares, are traded in Hong Kong and New York. 
Companies that issue H shares are subject to much more stringent disclosure requirements and therefore attract money from Western institutional investors. 
B shares are more popular in Hong Kong and with expatriate Chinese, and are much more volatile.
The market capitalization of the A share market is about $60 billion, compared with $5 billion for the B share market, Mr. Polacheck said.
The prices of A and B shares of the same company have often been quite different, depending on the demand for each. 
Many foreign investors have wanted the two markets to merge in order to eliminate this discrepancy and create greater liquidity. 
Chinese officials have indicated that they would like to move in that direction, but that it is difficult until the nation fully eliminates currency controls.
On Friday, however, the Government said it would create a means for foreign investors to buy class A shares through fund-management companies.
In the meantime, stocks in Hong Kong also rose yesterday, in part a reaction to the China markets. 
The benchmark Hang Seng index of 33 stocks increased by 2.6 percent. 
This morning, though, it gave up part of yesterday's gains.
China's budget deficit has sharply increased recently. 
More problematic, Beijing has been running a trade deficit as it has imported equipment, raw material and, increasingly, luxury goods. 
This deficit, however, has been reduced this year. 
And foreign currency reserves have increased by 50 percent as the deficit has been more than offset by an increase in foreign investment, Mr. Suttle said.
"It looks as though the Chinese are going to have the soft landing they are aiming for," he added. 
As a result international investors are becoming a little less negative on China.
