
China threatened today to bring new criminal charges against the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, for his irrepressible advocacy of democracy and human rights.
Western diplomats here said the seizing of Mr. Wei reflected acute concerns in the Communist Party leadership about political stabilityI as corruption remained rampant despite a seven-month campaign against it.
With the failing health of the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, who is 89, and with the fifth anniversary of the military crackdown at Tiananmen Square in June 1989 approaching, China's leadership is showing its insecurity by cracking down on all dissident activity, the diplomats said.
 
Suspected New Offenses
In a statement this morning by the official New China News Agency, Chinese officials said, "The Beijing Public Security Department has decided to investigate suspected new criminal offenses by Wei Jingsheng."
Mr. Wei served 14 1/2 years in prison for the essays and posters he wrote as one of the leaders of the Democracy Wall movement in Beijing in 1978.
The brief dispatch continued, "Wei is being interrogated and placed under surveillance by the Beijing Public Security Department in accordance with the law because he violated the law on many occasions and is suspected of having committed new crimes when he was deprived of his political rights and on parole."
The 43-year-old dissident completed his six-month parole period on March 29.
Even Mr. Wei's secretary, Tong Yi, who brought word of his arrest on Friday to foreign news organizations, disappeared today and is feared to be in detention.
One diplomat said Chinese leaders who favored making concessions on human rights to improve American-Chinese relations appeared to be losing out "to those with the greatest security concerns."
He added, "It's an understandable tension."
 
Effect on Clinton's Decision
But with less than two months to go before President Clinton must certify that China has made "overall, significant progress" on human rights or cancel China's most-favored-nation trade privileges, a new criminal prosecution of Mr. Wei could only inflame the political atmosphere in Congress and limit Mr. Clinton's options.
Human rights workers in the region were stunned and incredulous at today's report. 
John Kamm, a Hong Kong-based American businessman who intercedes on behalf of many political prisoners with the Chinese authorities, said, "How in the world can the Chinese expect Bill Clinton" to extend China's trade privileges "with this kind of behavior?"
"The Chinese are playing with fire," he added.
Today's Government statement did not specify Mr. Wei's alleged crimes, but Chinese officials have stated publicly that Mr. Wei violated the conditions of his parole when he met with the State Department's top human rights official, John Shattuck, on Feb. 
27.
 
Conditions of Parole
Communist Party officials have also sought to interpret the terms of Mr. Wei's parole and the three-year deprivation of his political rights as including a ban on free speech, a ban on publishing and a ban on meeting with foreign journalists and diplomats.
Western and Chinese officials familiar with Chinese law say there is no apparent basis for these interpretations.
"They seem to be setting a new standard on the denial of political rights, and it's a little disturbing," one diplomat said.
A United States Embassy official in Beijing said today that American diplomats had made a formal inquiry to China's Foreign Ministry to express concern about Mr. Wei's status and to ask for additional information.
An embassy spokeswoman, Lorraine Toly, said that "to the best of our knowledge, Mr. Wei has only made use of the universal right to freedom of opinion and expression as set forth in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights."
Mr. Wei's sudden arrest on Friday by seven carloads of security agents followed months of controlled tolerance by Communist Party leaders for his free speech movement.
Much of the alleged criminal activity by Mr. Wei almost certainly relates to his outspoken criticism of the Chinese leadership and his campaign for democracy and human rights that has been waged through essays and through interviews with foreign journalists since last fall.
Public security officials have also taken exception to his plans to write a memoir of his more than 14 years in prison. 
Mr. Wei has retained a New York publishing executive, Robert L. Bernstein, to represent him in negotiations with publishers.
