
Delivering its first outline of "practical steps" to begin thawing its relations with the United States, the Chinese Government said today that President Clinton should reaffirm that there is only one China and that Taiwan is part of China, and declare that Taiwan's President will not be allowed to make any more visits to the United States.
A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official, speaking on the condition that he not be identified, cited a restoration of the status quo on Taiwan before last month, when its President was allowed to visit the United States, as a minimum requirement for Washington before another high-level meeting between the two countries could be held.
Such a meeting could take place, Chinese officials said, as early as the end of this month, when Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, go to Brunei for a regional security forum convened by Southeast Asian countries.
American officials have reaffirmed the "one China" policy in recent days, and President Clinton could do the same without risking serious political damage. 
But a declaration that the Taiwan President was no longer welcome in the United States would be seen as an admission of error, and could well be unacceptable to the President and to the Republican-controlled Congress, which pressed Mr. Clinton to allow the Taiwanese visit.
The senior Foreign Ministry official did not specify any actions Beijing might take to meet American concerns, which center on China's human rights record and trade issues. 
But Chinese officials hinted for the first time that the American human rights campaigner Harry Wu, detained on June 19 as he entered China and charged with espionage last Saturday, could be released after the conclusion of a formal investigation.
One official urged Americans to be patient in allowing the investigation to be completed before pressing for Mr. Wu's release.
A second official, also speaking on the condition he not be identified, said today that China had followed an unwritten policy of not imprisoning Americans charged with carrying out illegal political activities inside China.
Though Chinese officials have taken pains to say Mr. Wu's case is in the hands of the authorities in central Hubei Province, these statements today indicate that the strong outcry in the United States over Mr. Wu's arrest is beginning to have an impact on the Chinese leadership.
But it also seems clear that the case of Mr. Wu has handed the Chinese leadership a high-value bargaining chip to use to force Washington to reaffirm its commitments on Taiwan's status.
The Foreign Ministry official's remarks appear to signal a Chinese willingness to find a way out of the crisis that has undermined constructive communication between Washington and Beijing and has threatened to spill over to the rapidly developing trade and economic relationship between the United States and China.
The official acknowledged that there were powerful voices within the circle of Chinese leaders that viewed American intentions toward China as increasingly hostile, and he said these voices would only grow in strength if a new diplomatic accommodation cannot be reached.
Still, he said, Beijing insists that President Clinton take the first step.
The Clinton Administration's decision to admit President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan reversed 16 years of Washington policy and infuriated Beijing, which regards itself as the sole legal government of Taiwan.
Chinese officials said Washington should reaffirm the American commitment to the three joint communiques that form the bedrock of diplomatic relations between China and the United States, beginning with the 1972 Shanghai Communique negotiated during President Nixon's first visit to China.
Each of these communiques affirms that the Beijing Government is the sole legal government of China and that Taiwan is part of China.
Communist Party leaders say Mr. Clinton's decision to reverse policy and allow President Lee's private visit to attend a reunion at Cornell University last month has undermined the communiques.
"If the American administration knew that Lee Teng-hui was seeking to create the image of two Chinas, or one China and one Taiwan, and still allowed him to visit the United States, this indicates that the United States has changed it policy toward China," an official said.
The Foreign Ministry official also said Washington should reaffirm that only one China can be seated at the United Nations.
Taiwan is seeking international support to regain the United Nations seat it lost to the People's Republic of China in 1971. 
But China, as a permanent member of the Security Council, can veto any proposal to seat Taiwan.
[The State Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said today: "We have made abundantly clear from the President on down for the past several months that we have a one-China policy and that we recognize the People's Republic of China as the sole representative of the Chinese people."
[Regarding Taiwan, Mr. Burns said, "We've also made it very clear that on the subject of Taiwan we will retain unofficial relations only. 
We will not change that policy, and we have assured the Chinese Government to that effect."
[A senior State Department official said, "I doubt very much there will be many visas forthcoming for Taiwan's President or other senior Taiwanese officials. 
We've always said we would do this on a case-by-case basis only."]
But China appeared to be demanding a more elaborate statement, especially on the question of the future access of Taiwan's leader to America.
"Since the President made the decision for Lee Teng-hui to visit the United States," the Chinese Foreign Ministry official said, "the President should make a statement. 
The statement should be clear about the commitment the United States has made in the three Sino-U.S. communiques, and it should say that the United States doesn't allow Lee Teng-hui to visit the United States."
 
--------------------
Wu's Wife Urges Protest
WASHINGTON, July 12 (AP) -- The wife of an American human rights campaigner imprisoned in China suggested today that Hillary Rodham Clinton turn down an invitation to a women's conference in China in protest.
The White House said no decision had been made on whether Mrs. Clinton would attend the United Nations International Woman's Conference in September. 
Mrs. Clinton is the honorary chairwoman of the United States delegation.
Ching Lee Wu, the wife of Harry Wu, said she was generally pleased with efforts being made to win her husband's release. 
"They are all concerned about Harry very much," she said after meeting with the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, at the White House.
