
Russia and China have secretly concluded a broad agreement to upgrade the Chinese Air Force by completing the long-stalled sale of 72 high-performance SU-27 fighter planes to Beijing as a prelude to licensing the production of Russia's premier supersonic warplane in China.
Chinese military leaders have been pressing the Government for some time to finance a major upgrading of air and naval forces. 
The deal reflects the growing influence of the Chinese military in the competition for scarce budget resources.
The decision to move ahead now also coincides with an even more robust military buildup by Taiwan at a time of growing tensions in the Taiwan Strait.
Taiwan this year will begin taking delivery of 150 American F-16 fighters and 60 French Mirage 2000 fighter-bombers. 
Last year, Taiwan began deploying the first squadrons of its own new fighter, based on the F-16 design. 
The United States has recently delivered to Taiwan airborne command and surveillance aircraft that give its air force a distinct air combat superiority over the mainland.
With its speed and in-flight refueling ability, the SU-27 dramatically extends the combat range of the Chinese Air Force. 
The fighter can be modified for aircraft carrier launch, and though the Chinese Navy currently has no aircraft carriers, it has been reported to be shopping for the means to buy or produce them.
It was known since 1992 that Russia was selling the SU-27 to China, but after the delivery of the first 24 planes, recriminations over barter goods that China used for two-thirds of the estimated $1 billion price have blocked further deliveries.
In the meantime, China's deployment of the first 24 aircraft at Wuhu, an air base near Nanjing, has raised questions about the ability of the Chinese Air Force to maintain such a high-technology weapon properly. 
Western military officials have reported that maintenance problems with the initial SU-27's were delaying the program in which Chinese pilots are learning to fly the plane.
China has been pressing Moscow to transfer SU-27 production technology to Chinese aerospace industries, but Russian negotiators refused to go forward until China settled the payment terms on all 72 of the SU-27's ordered. 
The new agreement appears to have cleared the way for the overall deal to go forward after four years' delay.
China has never produced its own supersonic fighters, but has been tinkering with prototype models of such aircraft for more than a decade in its research institutes.
The agreement was struck in early December during a visit to Moscow by China's senior uniformed military leader, Adm. Liu Huaqing, who is vice chairman of China's Central Military Commission and who was appointed to his post in 1992 by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader.
But the deal was secret until Friday, when the commander of the Russian Air Force, Gen. Pyotr Dneikin, announced in Moscow that Russia had sold China the license for SU-27 production in a deal worth more than $2 billion.
In subsequent days, a more detailed description of the transaction has been provided by officials familiar with the negotiations. 
These officials said China had insisted that the terms of the transaction be kept secret until the end of 1996, when Russia would be required to report the international arms transaction to the United Nations.
Chinese officials, concerned about adverse political reaction in Asia, were reported to be extremely unhappy with General Dneikin's disclosure last week.
A Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, Aleksandr Panov, said Russia's goal under the five-year military cooperation agreement it signed with China in 1993 was to promote the sale of Russian military equipment without upsetting the military balance in the region.
"We do not see anybody objecting to such cooperation between Russia and China or fearing it," he said, pointing out that "it was deemed normal for Taiwan to get hundreds of aircraft."
"I have had consultations in Washington," Mr. Panov said, asserting that the Clinton Administration "has expressed no apprehensions too, because the scope of this cooperation is not very big, not very dimensional, and we are fixing definite limits to it."
[In Washington, a senior State Department official said the sale "does not significantly alter the military balance in Asia or even in the Taiwan Strait."
["In December, Panov did talk to us and informed us -- not consulted but informed -- that Russia planned to sell another batch of SU-27's to China," said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"He neither sought nor did we convey to him any approval."]
Mr. Panov said that Russia did not want Chinese-Russian military cooperation "to upset the balance of military forces in the region."
 
--------------------
Perry Voices Concern for Taiwan
WASHINGTON, Feb. 
6 (AP) -- Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that he was concerned but not alarmed that China was using "military maneuvering" to try to influence Taiwan's democratic presidential election on March 23.
Asked what the United States would do if China threatened to attack Taiwan, Mr. Perry said he could not be more specific than the commitment spelled out in the Taiwan Relations Act. 
That document, the basis of the unofficial United States relations with Taiwan, says belligerent actions meant to determine the future of the island would be "of grave concern" to the United States.
Mr. Perry said Chinese officials had asked Joseph Nye, then the Assistant Secretary of Defense for international security affairs, during a visit to Beijing last November how Washington would respond if Taiwan was threatened.
Mr. Perry said Mr. Nye had replied that the response would depend on the circumstances.
"At this point at least, with the present level of concern but no imminent danger, I don't believe we will make a statement more definite than that," Mr. Perry said.
"I am concerned about the military maneuvering the Chinese are doing to -- in not so subtle ways -- threaten Taiwan, to try to influence their election," Mr. Perry said. 
"I'm concerned about the military buildup that's going on in China today. 
I do not see this as a threat yet, but I am concerned."
