
Chinese authorities announced today that a former senior national police official had been arrested in connection with the government's investigation of corruption and smuggling in Xiamen, a southern port city.
It was the highest-level arrest announced so far in a billion-dollar smuggling scandal surrounding the Yuanhua Corporation. 
Several trials of lower-level officials implicated in the scheme began earlier this week in five cities in Fujian province.
In the announcement today, Zhao Dengju, deputy head of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, the country's top antigraft body, told Chinese journalists at a news conference that Li Jizhou, a former vice minister of public security, had been arrested late last year for taking "huge bribes" in connection with the Yuanhua smuggling case.
He added that Mr. Li had also been charged with taking bribes in two other smuggling cases in Guangdong province, according to the state-run China Radio International.
Until a recent government crackdown on graft, vast smuggling rings in southern China -- generally working in collaboration with government officials -- made huge profits by illegally importing a wide range of goods, including fuel, cars, cigarettes and electronic equipment.
As part of the same crackdown, the former vice chairman of Parliament, Cheng Kejie, was executed today for taking $5 million in bribes and kickbacks. 
Mr. Cheng, who was sentenced in July, is the highest-ranking official executed for corruption since the Communists took power in 1949.
"There is no place for corrupt elements to hide in the Party," said a commentary in People's Daily, the main Communist Party newspaper.
Corruption is widespread at virtually all levels of government, a fact that has greatly tarnished the party's image. 
China's leaders and, according to opinion surveys, ordinary citizens both point to corruption as the country's greatest problem.
The central government began a major campaign late last year to clean up government, led by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji. 
Hundreds of investigators were dispatched to Xiamen to delve into the Yuanhua smuggling empire and collusion with dozens of local officials.
But critics have complained that the investigations tended to focus on low- and mid-level officials and that the government's enthusiasm for public arrests went cold when the trail led to senior officials.
For example, when it seemed like government investigators were poised to implicate the wife of Beijing's Communist Party chief, Jia Qinglin, a protege of President Jiang Zemin, in the Yuanhua case, a government press office took the offensive to clear the couple's names.
The exact extent of the crackdown is unclear, since most high-level investigations are kept under wraps. 
But over the past six months, the arrests have slowly moved up the chain of command and have become somewhat more public -- presumably in part to satisfy public demands for more action.
Indeed, though the arrest of Mr. Li took place late last year, Mr. Zhao announced it only today. 
The deputy procurator-general's relatively candid discussion of the Yuanhua case also marks a change from the general secrecy.
Mr. Zhao said that from January to August this year, the national prosecutor's office had investigated 4 officials at the rank of minister or provincial governor and 100 at the rank of head of a bureau.      
