
In a case that American diplomats say they believe is intended to send a political message to the United States, China announced today that authorities in Shanghai had apprehended an American businessman "under strong suspicion" of importing contraband.
Shanghai police officials would not say what the businessman, William Ping Chen, was accused of bringing into China. 
Nor would they explain why his case, unlike other smuggling cases, was singled out for a report by the New China News Agency.
United States officials suggested that the arrest and unusual announcement were part of the intricate dance that Beijing is engaged in with Washington, as their trade negotiators prepare for another round of talks on how to fight piracy of music, movies and computer software.
The assistant United States trade representative, Lee Sands, arrived today in Beijing for meetings on Thursday, 11 days before the June 17 deadline when $2 billion of trade sanctions are to kick in on each side.
A United States Consular official, Richard Adams, met with Shanghai security officials today, but was not allowed to see Mr. Chen. Other United States officials said they suspected that Mr. Chen would be accused of importing contaminated waste paper, an activity that the official media here have been blaming on the United States for weeks.
The illegal dumping of garbage -- much of it labeled as recyclable paper but sometimes including scrap metal, medical waste and ordinary trash -- has gone on for years. 
During the past month, the Chinese media have latched onto the problem in a uniform way, indicating that the Chinese leadership was using the issue in part as a rhetorical retaliation against the series of criticisms of China that have come out of Washington in recent months.
Some Chinese leaders have bristled at American accusations that Beijing is complicit in the widespread piracy that occurs at compact disk plants in southern China, often with the help of the Taiwan and Hong Kong underworld.
Another example of unjustified China-bashing, in Beijing's view, came last month after arms smugglers, relying on a Taiwanese middleman, were caught trying to bring 2,000 AK-47 automatic weapons into the United States. 
Federal prosecutors in California implied that the Chinese leadership knew about it, although they offered little evidence.
The comparison to the case today did not escape United States officials. 
"When you see the garbage incident played up, its a reflection of the AK-47 case in the U.S.," a senior Western diplomat told reporters at a briefing in Beijing recently. 
"What we're seeing in China is a mirror image of what they perceive to be happening in the U.S."
The garbage incidents have indeed been played up in Chinese media. 
A newspaper in Shanghai, the Wen Hui Daily, reported last week that a special task force set up to inspect "foreign garbage smuggling" discovered several hundred tons of contaminated waste within five days.
"Customs officers found two containers of used diapers which, stinking to high heaven, made it impossible for people to come near," it said. 
"Eleven more containers, declared to be 'waste paper' actually included plastic bags, emulsive gloves and soda bottles."
With a domestic paper shortage, China imports millions of dollars of waste paper each year to be recycled into ordinary paper, and the United States is one of many suppliers. 
But such sales have been prone to shoddy business practices like deliberate soaking to raise the weight and contamination with all manner of waste.
Mr. Chen is apparently the first American citizen to be detained since Harry Wu, the human rights activist, was held and then expelled in August 1995, after a Chinese court convicted him of spying.
      
