
The worst part about being a peasant like Luo Qingguo is not the pangs of hunger or the sooty shack in which his family lives. 
The real torment comes when the tax collectors show up on shiny new motorcycles and confiscate rice and cash, leaving Mr. Luo unable to feed or clothe his four children.
"They don't get enough to eat," an embarrassed Mr. Luo said. 
"There is no money to buy them a pair of pants."
Mr. Luo, a lean 36-year-old in tattered clothes and bare feet, said his family earned the equivalent of $88 last year, not enough to buy clothes, and so two of his sons, ages 5 and 10, were naked below the waist.
There would have been money and food if the tax collectors had not seized 110 pounds of Mr. Luo's rice and corn, a month's food for his family. 
The officials also took a few more dollars in various other taxes: there was the irrigation tax, the subsidy payment to local officials, land rents, the contribution to help support the elderly, housing insurance, electricity fees.
 
900 Million Peasants
These are difficult times for China's 900 million peasants, who account for about one person in six in the world. 
With the spring sowing season under way, tensions are rising as peasants are being squeezed by rising costs, illegal taxes and corrupt officials.
These pressures are generating deep indignation, just as similar pressures did half a century ago, in the period before the Communist revolution. 
While no revolution is now in sight, there are a few tentative signs of peasant unrest.
This year in Renshou County in Sichuan Province, 1,000 peasants wielding rods, scythes and rocks attacked officials who were demanding levies to build a highway. 
Later on, said a Chinese who saw the revolt, 10,000 peasants, or more than half the county's residents, burned a police car and damaged the homes of the township leaders. 
The dispute was resolved only after the Deputy Governor ordered that the peasants be repaid their money with interest.
In a number of areas, peasants have stopped farming because high taxes and the Government's low purchase price for grain make agriculture a money-losing venture. 
In a county in Anhui Province, one-third of the peasants left all their land idle, a secret Government document reported. 
Many of the rest cultivated only part of their land.
In a country with a 4,000-year history punctuated by peasant rebellions -- including the one that put the current Government in power in 1949 -- such signs of peasant discontent are taken very seriously.
 
Peasants Were a Model
In its first few decades of Communism, China glorified peasants, making them a symbol of the new China. 
During the Cultural Revolution, in the 1960's and 1970's, physicists and poets and other intellectuals were banished to remote villages to learn from the peasants.
Then in the early 1980's the Government began a far-reaching series of agricultural changes that allowed peasants to sell a part of what they farmed at near-market prices. 
The measures gained broad support among the peasants, and so in recent years, diplomats and scholars have been more sensitive to the risk of protests by urban students or workers.
But agricultural growth is trailing the industrial boom, and now there is growing recognition that the peasantry may also pose a danger to the Government. 
While industrial growth last year was 20.8 percent, agricultural production rose by only 3.7 percent.
Chinese press reports also indicate that throughout the country, in rich provinces as well as poor, peasants are being taxed illicitly -- above a 5 percent limit -- by local officials trying to gild their coffers. 
The peasants' discontent is tempered by disorganization, however, and both are evident in the villages here in Guizhou, a stony and hilly southern province.
 
Family Pays 17.5 Percent
A sturdy, talkative 35-year-old woman voiced anger about the fees she and her family of five had to pay: grain tax, land fees, head tax, local management tax, educational fees, contributions to the families of military soldiers. 
Altogether, she paid 17.5 percent of her family's gross annual income, plus more than one-third of the grain her family brought in last year.
During a provincewide harvest battered by two months of drought, the authorities raised the fee for pumping water for crops from 44 cents an hour in 1991 to 53 cents last year -- or three days' income for an average peasant in Guizhou. 
By comparison, an average worker in Beijing pays about six cents for every ton of water, or a tiny fraction of a cent for an hour's use of water.
Provincial officials in Guiyang, 450 miles northwest of Hong Kong, have denied that they overtax residents in the countryside, but a group of peasants standing by the road quickly waxed indignant as they discussed the fees and taxes. 
Nonetheless, they expressed no hint of doing anything about it, no concept of any possibility of resistance. 
Instead, there was fear, and a lifelong tradition of obeying officials.
"It's not a matter of guts," said Peng Dagui, a 60-year-old peasant in a remote village who paid 16 percent of his grain in tax last year. 
"There's just nothing you can do."
Underlying problems in rural areas, the economic boom of China's coastal areas has bypassed many of the mud-brick villages where peasants live. 
While the quality of life in rural areas is clearly far better than it was a decade ago, the pace of improvement seems to be considerably slower there than in the cities.
 
No Taxes for City People
Last year, for example, the average peasant earned less than half of what city dwellers did. 
One measure of the gap is the ratio between total take-home pay in rural and urban areas. 
When subsidies to city dwellers and taxes on farmers are taken into account, an urban resident's income rises to four times as much as a peasant's.
Paradoxically, most city dwellers pay no taxes -- neither an income tax nor a sales tax -- but peasants, who are far poorer, pay various taxes in grain and cash. 
In part, this may be because officials believe that peasants will eventually pay without protest, while the authorities are deeply apprehensive of offending urban workers who can organize easily and might take to the streets.
Local governments are not only charging peasants more in fees and taxes but are also becoming bolder in demanding illegal fees that go into their own pockets.
In Shandong Province, one county raised $700,000 from charges to peasants, according to another secret Government document by a high-level team that recently investigated whether the 5 percent limit was being adhered to around the country. 
Officials then illegally diverted more than $200,000 to build township office buildings, buy new cars, renovate the houses of government officials, buy office equipment, give bonuses and pay for health care and other welfare services for officials, the document said.
 
Peasants Receive I.O.U.'s
The local governments also sometimes do not pay cash for the grain they buy from the peasants. 
In the last few years, local bureaus have often paid "white slips," or I.O.U.'s, to the peasants, redeeming them with cash months later.
Now they have "green slips" to worry about as well. 
These are I.O.U.'s that local post offices give out to peasants who receive money orders. 
It is common for peasants working in the cities to send money back to their families using these money orders, but now the recipients sometimes have to wait for months to cash in their green slips.
The cash shortage in rural areas also means that some people are not getting paid. 
For some teachers in rural areas of Hunan Province the most recent paycheck was in October, the official Peasant Daily reported in April.
Alarmed about the difficulties faced by peasants, the Government issued a regulation in December 1991 to limit the total amount of fees and taxes on peasants to 5 percent of the previous year's income.
But conversations with nearly two dozen peasants in several villages outside Guiyang indicated that they were typically paying taxes and handing over grain that together totaled one-sixth to one-third of incomes.
 
Coercion Is Reported
The taxes are often disguised as "peasant pledges," "common production fees," or contributions to "township and village collective capital."
In a township in Henan Province, a Chinese reporter discovered that officials had imposed nearly 80 different kinds of charges on the peasants.
In its findings, the team of investigators said they had found that local officials used coercion to raise funds through taxes, fines, insurance fees and sales of expensive materials, products and newspaper subscriptions.
"Many of the numerous taxes have a deadline, and the small income of a peasant often makes it hard for him to pay up," the document said. 
"So the local officials establish 'fee collection work teams,' 'branch brigades' or 'attack teams' that go to the peasants homes to collect grain and money.
"These 'work teams' pay no attention to how much a peasant actually earns or how much he can afford to pay. 
They neglect the law and legal regulations. 
Whatever the peasants have, they take. 
Sometimes they even carry handcuffs with them, or police batons, to threaten the peasants. 
If the peasants don't obey, they use violence or take the peasants into custody."
The difficulties facing the peasants have become so widespread and severe that in at least six provinces so far -- Henan, Hunan, Hubei, Liaoning, Anhui and Hebei -- excessive tax burdens have led peasants to commit suicide, according to the Government document and news reports.
 
What 5 Percent Limit?
In a village 40 miles from Guiyang, villagers said they had never heard of the 5 percent limit on taxes. 
A part-time village official said that in his village about four-fifths of the peasants do not have enough to eat.
Taxes in the village almost always exceed 5 percent, he said, and if a family does not pay the tax, they are fined an additional 8 percent. 
This could come in the form of grain seized from the peasants after the harvest.
But provincial agricultural officials in Guizhou denied that there were any illegal taxes or fees levied on peasants.
"The Government stipulates that we collect no more than 5 percent in taxes, but actually, we take only 4.5 percent," said Sun Youda, a senior provincial agricultural official. 
"We want to encourage our peasants. 
They are very important to our country."
Describing the comments of local officials, the document said: "Indiscriminate embezzlement of funds leaves less capital in the township coffers. 
The only way to compensate is to break the 5 percent rule, extract more from the peasants and increase the burden on them."
One member of the investigative team concluded: "This work affects the relationship between the party and the masses. 
And it weighs on the critical question of the life or death of this country."
