
While Harry Wu was being celebrated as a hero in the United States, Chinese authorities continued their campaign against him today, portraying him as a thief, a fraud and a womanizer who wanted revenge against his native land.
Beijing's decision to release Mr. Wu, the Chinese-American human rights advocate, is widely expected to ease tensions between China and the United States. 
But the old Communist-style denunciations of him today are a reminder of how far apart the two countries remain on human rights.
Undersecretary of State Peter Tarnoff flew from Shanghai to Beijing this evening, and is scheduled to meet with Deputy Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing on Saturday and with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on Sunday. 
Mr. Tarnoff may also meet one or more senior leaders, who often wait until the last minute before confirming appointments.
Whatever benefits these diplomatic meetings bring to bilateral relations, they are unlikely to break much ground on the seemingly intractable issue of human rights.
Chinese leaders apparently decided to expel Mr. Wu less as a human rights concession than as a gesture to improve cooperation with the United States on other matters.
Political prisoners in China have often been used as diplomatic bargaining chips. 
Chen Ziming, a leading dissident, was released last year just before President Clinton decided to remove China's human rights record as a condition for extending its most-favored-nation trade status.
But Mr. Chen was taken back into custody in June as relations with the United States deteriorated. 
In recent months, China has taken dozens of other dissidents into custody. 
Just last week it detained Ding Zilin, a university professor who has pressed the authorities for a full accounting of how many people were killed in the June 4, 1989, massacre near Tiananmen Square.
Today, the harsh invective and detailed accusations hurled publicly at Mr. Wu seemed intended to communicate within China that the authorities were as tough on him as they would be with anyone who directly challenged the leadership.
"A man who was morally corrupt and did many evil deeds," is how an article in today's People's Daily characterized Mr. Wu.
It said Mr. Wu's thievery began in 1959, when he was a student at Beijing Geological College, saying he had stolen money from a classmate and was punished with three years of "reform through labor."
The article went on to accuse him of stealing public property, faking documents to get radios and electric fans, and forging his superior's signature on travel expense forms. 
It also alleged that he later tried to seduce a student at a university where he taught.
The article drips with innuendo, describing him as "morally degenerate," and accusing him of a lack of patriotism.
"His heart was full of hatred," the article said. 
"He felt China owed him, and he wanted to settle an old score with China."
Political prisoners in China often face trumped up charges with only a vague basis in fact.
Mr. Wu has said he was first taken into custody in China's radical campaign against political "rightists" in 1957, and was sentenced to life imprisonment in April 1960.
By his own account, Mr. Wu spent 19 years in prisons and in forced labor on state farms, coal mines and chemical factories. 
He was freed only in 1979, after Deng Xiaoping came to power and pardoned some political prisoners.
It was those years of suffering, and the memory of fellow prisoners whom he watched die, that Mr. Wu has said made him determined to expose the abuses of China's vast penal system.
Mr. Wu was allowed to leave China in 1985 to go to the United States as a visiting scholar. 
He became an American citizen and in 1992 set up the Laogai Research Foundation, named laogai for "reform through labor," a reference to forced labor camps. 
He returned to China several times to obtain fresh information about the labor camps and prisons.
Communist Party authorities insist on repentance from prisoners, as a way of showing submission, and official accounts of Mr. Wu's case have gone out of their way to say Mr. Wu recognized his wrongdoing.
"After considering his admission of guilt, his signs of repentance and the fact that he had been used by others, the court gave Wu a lenient sentence," one agency report said.
Yet, after all his years of experience in Chinese prisons, Mr. Wu appears to be expert at expressing respect and submission while evading any actual admission of guilt for the most serious charges leveled against him, in this case spying and stealing state secrets.
A New China News Agency report said Mr. Wu had signed a confession in court. 
Yet the account says he conceded only that "his actions had damaged the interests of the Chinese Government and the Chinese people, and violated Chinese laws."
 
--------------------
China Ends Missile Tests
BEIJING, Aug. 
25, (Reuters) -- China announced today the end of 11 days of missile and live artillery tests in the East China Sea just north of Taiwan, but diplomats expected more tests before the island's presidential elections next March.
The tests, and an earlier round of missile-firings last month, were widely seen as an attempt to intimidate Taiwan as relations worsened when President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan was allowed to make a private visit to the United States.
Mr. Lee's visit enraged Beijing, which saw it as a move toward independence by what it regards as a rebel province. 
Mr. Lee has announced his candidacy for reelection.
