
"They are playing the bully," Xu Liangying said today about being confined by the Chinese authorities to his tiny apartment in Beijing's university district. 
"I have been put under house arrest because I am not allowed to go out."
Professor Xu, the 74-year-old Academy of Sciences researcher and translator of Albert Einstein's works, had wanted to arrange a meeting with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who arrived here on Friday. 
But the professor found himself restricted to his residence today, apparently because he and six other leading intellectuals made a written appeal to President Jiang Zemin this week to end the repression of free speech in China and release all political prisoners.
Shortly after Mr. Christopher's arrival, scores of Chinese uniformed policemen set up cordons in Beijing's diplomatic quarter. 
The United States Embassy and the residence of Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy were also surrounded.
In one of the most sweeping clampdowns in recent years, China's security forces today fanned out with hundreds of uniformed and plainclothes agents to put Beijing's dissidents in effect under house arrest.
 
Christopher Is Lectured
With dozens of dissidents corraled, the Chinese leadership lectured Mr. Christopher and his human rights chief, John Shattuck, about interfering in China's internal affairs in secret meetings with dissidents. 
Mr. Shattuck met with Wei Jingsheng, the country's most prominent dissident, on Feb. 
27.
Some of the other six intellectuals who joined Professor Xu's petition were in a similar state of confinement. 
Ding Zilin and Jiang Peikun, philosophy professors whose son was shot and killed in the military crackdown at Tiananmen Square in 1989, lost their telephone service today.
Reporters who tried to approach the homes or apartments of dissidents were turned away or, in some cases, briefly detained. 
And the Beijing bureau of The New York Times was placed under close surveillance for the first time in many months.
Four uniformed Public Security policemen in the doorway of Professor Xu's apartment building prevented this reporter from entering this afternoon. 
When the reporter asked what regulation prevented him from meeting an acquaintance in the building, Public Security official said: "I can only tell you that you are not able to go in. 
It's just not going to be allowed."
In a brief telephone call, Professor Xu said: "Since 8 o'clock this morning six policemen have been around my apartment building. 
Two of them have been sitting in the doorway of the seventh floor where I live."
 
'To Protect Intellectuals'
When he first challenged the police presence in his building, a policeman told him, "We are here to protect the intellectuals from bad people."
When he went out later to collect his newspapers at the elevator 20 steps from his doorway, two burly policemen stopped him.
"You are violating my personal freedom," the professor said.
"We are obeying the orders of higher authorities," one replied.
"I am over 70 years old -- what are you trying to do?"
Professor Xu said. 
"Your actions to stop people from meeting with people is uncivilized. 
China is a civilized and ancient country."
His words had little effect.
At 10 A.M., Professor Xu said, three Communist Party representatives from the Academy of Sciences came to visit him under instruction from the higher authorities.
 
No Promises Given
"They said that they hoped that I would not make an effort to meet with Mr. Christopher," Professor Xu said. 
"They asked me to take into account the social stabilityI and the interests of the whole nation and agree not to meet with Mr. Christopher."
But Professor Xu was not in a mood to make promises.
"I said I could agree after they reconnect the telephone line of Ding Zilin's home and evacuate the police," he said. 
"I said high pressure won't work on me."
Recalling his response to the party representatives, he said: "Yesterday, I would not have taken the initiative to meet with Mr. Christopher, but now I would like to take the initiative to meet with him because I could not tolerate what has been happening."
Then the party representatives left, the professor said
Correction
