
The head of China's central bank today described renewed efforts to turn China's giant state banks and ailing state enterprises into sound commercial operations, able to withstand the competitive pressures that are certain to follow China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
The head of the People's Bank of China, Dai Xianglong, speaking at his annual news conference, also pledged a smooth growth in the money supply and a stable exchange rate. 
But what grabbed public attention was something Mr. Dai said in passing, with words that underscored how deeply China's financial culture has differed from the West's.
"We have a plan to adopt a real-name system for bank deposits this year," Mr. Dai said in answer to a question. 
This step -- requiring people to put their names on their bank accounts -- is intended to aid tax collection and to fight corruption.
Now, anyone can open a savings account under any name, no identification required, with only the passbook needed for deposits and withdrawals. 
While most individuals use their real names, the use of false ones is common enough to have attracted the concern of top officials.
The practice seems to have roots in the aversion many Chinese have to revealing their often-sizable nest eggs. 
People have also been known to open accounts under aliases to conceal money from spouses, Beijing residents said today, while companies sometimes hide revenue from tax collectors.
But the technique is mainly used by individuals concealing money gained through bribery, embezzlement or the stripping of the assets of state corporations, said a corporate lawyer in Beijing. 
The lawyer said that officials and state enterprise managers with questionable income often open several bank accounts under different names.
"The adoption of a real-name mechanism is consistent with international practice," Mr. Dai said. 
Under the new rule, he said, money in an account under a false name will have to be withdrawn and deposited under the depositor's actual name.
Several Beijing residents said today that they welcomed the plan as a blow against rampant corruption. 
In private conversations and on Internet sites, rumors have been traded here about what may be the largest corruption case in decades. 
It reportedly involves scores of officials, mainly in the southeastern province of Fujian, who are accused of smuggling billions of dollars worth of cars, electronic goods, firearms and oil, avoiding large duties and fees.
In recent days, the Reuters news agency and The Wall Street Journal, citing anonymous sources, have reported that the wife of a Politburo member has been implicated in the government investigation, making the case an especially embarrassing one for the authorities.
Under detention, these sources say, is Lin Youfang, head of a trading company of the Fujian provincial government. 
She has been married to Jia Qinglin, a member of the Politburo who is Beijing's Communist Party secretary, though some accounts say they recently divorced.
Investigators are said to have taken over two hotels in the southern port city of Xiamen, where witnesses and suspects are being questioned.
