
China again shielded North Korea today from the consequences of its decision to block a United Nations investigation into whether it is secretly developing nuclear weapons.
In the Security Council, China, which has a veto, objected to a proposed United States resolution urging North Korea to readmit the nuclear inspectors but also threatening "to consider further Security Council action" if it has not done so within a month -- a thinly veiled warning of a trade embargo.
Instead, China wants the Council's president to issue a statement in the name of all the members urging North Korea to cooperate with inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
But the United States fears this will prove even milder than the bland resolution it has proposed, sending the wrong signal to North Korea.
 
Toward Chinese View
In Beijing, the visiting South Korean President, Kim Young Sam, who has already backed China's call for a mild statement rather than a resolution, appeared to move further toward the Chinese view that the crisis should be resolved through negotiations. 
After two days of talks, President Kim said he, too, hoped a solution could be found through negotiation.
He said that he and the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, had "confirmed a common position" on the North Korean issue and that they would "cooperate closely" in dealing with it.
But earlier, in an address at Beijing University, he had made clear that he was pressing China, North Korea's only significant ally and the source of much of its oil and food, to use its influence to end North Korea's nuclear ambitions. 
"I ardently hope that China will play an active role in this effort," he said. 
"We have never wanted the North to be isolated and we will spare no effort to help Pyongyang join the international community as a responsible member."
 
Details Not Disclosed
He said he is sending his Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, for talks in Washington on Wednesday before traveling on to Tokyo. 
But he declined to disclose any details of his own talks with Chinese leaders.
In Vienna the North Korean Ambassador to Austria, Kim Gwan Sop, said North Korea would only agree to new inspections if the United States agreed to a third round of talks with on normalizing relations. 
But in Washington the State Department spokesman, Michael McCurry, repeated the Administration's position that these talks could be held only when North Korea allows the nuclear inspections and exchanges envoys with South Korea.
The third round of talks was to have started in Geneva on March 21 but Washington canceled the meeting after North Korea prevented the international inspectors from carrying out tests to determine whether civilian nuclear material has been diverted for military use.
