
Within a 300-mile radius of this energy capital, hundreds of thousands of coal miners are shredding subterranean seams thicker than ocean liners and hauling a black treasure to the surface to power the economic rise of China.
From the great forest of chimneys that punctures the haze of China's industrial landscape, a nimbus of carbon- and sulphur-based gases is billowing into the atmosphere. 
It is mixing with the buildup of the century-long industrialization of Europe and North America and, many scientists say, it is contributing to the overall warming of the earth's atmosphere.
And as the evidence hardens that global atmospheric warming is a result of human activity, especially the production of gases from the combustion of coal, oil and natural gas, questions are growing about whether China can change course.
China's heavy reliance on coal, along with its inefficient and wasteful patterns of energy use, will make it the largest single producer of climate-warming carbon dioxide by the second or third decade of the next century.
As it surpasses the United States and other industrial countries as a cause of the problem, China seems certain to come under strong international pressure to curb its reliance on its vast, cheap coal reserves.
And China itself may face serious consequences from global warming, as a rise in sea levels inundates coastal zones. 
Right now, many of its citizens are choking on the air pollution produced by the widespread burning of coal.
But coal development on a vast scale appears inevitable. 
China's dilemma is repeated, on a lesser scale, in India, Brazil and the rest of the developing world, where diverting scarce funds to meet global environmental goals is seen as a rich country's luxury.
For China's leadership, it is simply a question of capital, massive amounts of it. 
Already, Beijing's leaders face a daunting array of demands to build highways, railroads and modern industries to compete for export markets with the developed world and to provide the economic growth China's expanding population will expect.
Some efficiency improvements will pay for themselves, but with its huge reserves of coal, China sees any energy alternative that costs more or requires more up-front capital as a threat to development.
"You try to tell the people of Beijing that they can't buy a car or an air-conditioner because of the global climate-change issue," said Li Junfeng, a senior energy researcher for the State Planning Commission in Beijing. 
"It is just as hot in Beijing as it is in Washington, D.C.
"If we reduce our emission of gases, it means we must reduce our energy consumption," Mr. Li said. 
"When people get rich, they want to buy an air-conditioner or a car; that will increase energy consumption."
It already has.
Between 1970 and 1990, energy consumption rose 208 percent in China, compared with an average rise of 28 percent in developed countries during the same period.
More than five million Chinese are now engaged in the largest coal extraction enterprise in human history, feeding China's enormous thirst for energy and pushing toward fulfillment of the national goal of quadrupling the country's economic output between 1980 and 2000.
Last year, China's national honeycomb of mines produced 1.2 billion tons of coal, more than any other nation, and the numbers are only growing, perhaps nearly tripling to 3.1 billion tons annually by the year 2020, when China will be overtaking the United States as the largest source of waste gases being pumped into the atmosphere.
Still, despite the possible economic cost, the Chinese have plenty of impetus to change.
 
The Emissions
Whose Are They, And Who Pays?
Researchers at the Chinese Academy of Sciences now say they believe that global climate changes during the next 30 to 50 years could cause a 1-meter rise in sea levels that, when magnified by storm tides, would inundate an area the size of Portugal on China's coastal plain, including the important manufacturing centers at Shanghai and Guangzhou, forcing 67 million people to abandon their land and homes.
Equally vulnerable is China's straining agricultural base, which must nearly double its harvest to feed the 1.6 billion Chinese who will live here 30 years from now.
Though uncertainties abound in these projections, profound concerns about the potential impact of global climate change has mobilized China's scientific community and elevated climate research, monitoring and computer modeling to a high-priority national effort.
"We are paying a great deal of attention to this issue," said Sun Honglie, a senior Government scientist in Beijing and a member of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, China's Parliament.
But for China's Communist Party leaders, the question of who should bear the burden of reducing the enormous volume of warming gases rising from the Americas, Europe and Asia draws a fiercely nationalistic response, and quickly turns to the rancor-filled question of whether the West, led by the United States, is seeking to limit China's emergence as a great power.
"Developed countries discharge more carbon dioxide than developing countries on a per capita basis and the United States discharges 10 times more than China on a per capita basis," Qin Zhongda, the vice chairman of the environmental protection committee of the National People's Congress, said last month during a news conference at the Great Hall of the People.
For many Chinese, the question of whether the rest of the world will accommodate China's coal-burning juggernaut is a question of fundamental equity, and the country's political leaders have been thus far unwilling to enter serious negotiations about their future emissions.
"China has not recognized that they are going to have increasing obligations for the future," said Timothy E. Wirth, the State Department's undersecretary for global affairs who visited China last year seeking to broaden cooperation on strategies to combat climate change.
"We may have fouled the atmosphere in the past," he continued, "and that's our responsibility. 
But we both are fouling the atmosphere for the future and that is both of our responsibilities."
China disagrees.
"Two hundred years after the Industrial Revolution, the world economy has greatly advanced and the developed countries are the main beneficiary," said Lin Zongtang, a former head of China's Aero-Space Ministry and now vice chairman of the environmental protection committee of the National People's Congress. 
"About 80 percent of the world's pollution is caused by developed countries and they should be responsible for these problems."
That means, Chinese officials say, that the developed countries should help pay for cleaner coal burning technologies in the third world, as well as helping to finance capital-intensive hydro-electric projects, nuclear power stations and alternative energy sources like wind and solar.
Many Western and Chinese scientists say they believe that despite China's dependence on coal for the foreseeable future, China's emissions of carbon dioxide could be held to a doubling of output, instead of a tripling, during the next 30 years by increasing efficiency and investment in alternative energy sources.
But that, in itself, would require a huge mobilization of capital, technology and political commitment.
 
The Attitude
So Many Burners, One Thing to Burn
Here in China's coal capital, miners, mine bosses, engineers and power plant operators all seem to believe that China is resigned to a heavy dependence on coal for decades, even though this dependence may have serious consequences for China and the rest of the world.
"We are a developing country and we started out without a very good foundation," says Zhang Fengtong, the senior engineer at the Gu Jiao mine complex 50 miles north of here. 
"We have so few choices and no funding, so our industries are going to rely heavily on coal for a long time to come."
Farther north, on the road to Datong, another coal capital, Yang Zeguo peered out from under the chassis of his parked Liberation-brand truck looking incredulous at a visitor's question about China's dependence on coal.
He was in the process of transporting his 27-ton load of raw coal to the market of neighboring Hebei province when he stopped for lunch and repairs at a dusty truck stop littered with coal carriers and prostitutes draped across the doorways of one-table diners.
"If we don't burn coal, what else can we burn?" he asked. 
"We can't find anything else to burn."
In one sense, he was right. 
Even if China improved the efficiency of all of its electric power plants, much of the coal burned in China is consumed in small industrial and municipal boilers and in millions of cooking stoves and household heaters, for which no alternative fuels are currently available.
"You really have to change the culture to have any impact," said Vaclav Smil of the University of Manitoba in Canada, one of the leading experts on China's environment.
"They have this coal; they have to use it," Prof. Smil said. 
"But they could use it in a proper way. 
Much of the coal is now coming from these very small coal mines, but there is no sorting, no cleaning or washing and this kind of coal generates a tremendous amount of pollution. 
It meets the needs of today, but it doesn't meet the needs of tomorrow."
The decentralization of economic power in China has made it more likely, not less, that boilers for heat, steam or electrical generation will be smaller and less efficient.
At Yuanping, a scruffy crossroads town sandwiched between mountain ranges in central Shanxi, Gong Gaoshou is the deputy manager of the local power station, whose chimney was spewing a black plume visible in the next county on a recent afternoon.
Yuanping's power plant is rated at six megawatts, less than one-100th the size of a standard power station in the West, and its boiler is among the least efficient for clean burning or for the economies that accrue to large-scale power production.
But even though national policy now forbids the construction of such plants, China's provincial leaders continue to underwrite them because they are the most affordable on provincial budgets.
"We don't have any money," Mr. Gong said. 
"The price of electricity is too low and the price of raw materials is increasing greatly. 
What can we do?
We are trying our best."
Susan E. McDade, a United Nations energy specialist in Beijing, said China could reap the same benefit Western countries did when sharp increases in energy prices during the 1970's and 1980's led to a host of efficiency improvements and conservation measures that cut energy consumption.
Electricity prices in China are half those in many developed countries.
"Liberalizing energy prices would be the single most effective policy to promote energy efficiency," Ms. McDade said.
From the lowliest coal miner to the most senior scientist, it is this sense of inevitability that China's energy economy will be dominated by coal that impels China to insist that the world must make room.
"The most important thing for China is to modernize the economy, and after that occurs, we will have more money to deal with environmental issues," said Mr. Li in Beijing. 
"But it must follow economic development" and, he added, "we can't change the energy situation."
 
The Alternatives
Hey, Buddy, Can You Spare a Reactor?
China is working with the World Bank, Japan and the United States Department of Energy to fund an assortment of projects that could improve the efficiency of Chinese power plants and develop alternative energy sources like hydroelectric power, solar, wind and the burning of biomass, or plants.
Earlier this year, a joint study team of Chinese scientists and experts assembled by the World Bank and the United Nations Development Program concluded that China could marshal the technology to ameliorate significantly the global effects of its coal economy.
"By the year 2020," the team concluded, "large-scale adoption of low-carbon energy sources such as hydro, nuclear, gas, biomass, solar and wind technologies could displace a substantial quantity of coal, particularly for electric generation."
Mr. Li of the planning commission's energy institute said that even if there were no fear of climate change, "We are trying to increase our efficiency."
Ever quick to remind an American of the nationalistic tensions that persist, he added: "The United States has so many nuclear power stations that it has given up on. 
Why not sell them to China and help China reduce its greenhouse gas emissions and develop its economy?
"If you don't sell nuclear equipment to China, the demand is still going to be there," he added, "and people will build with coal."
