
As a senior official from Taiwan ended a landmark visit here, China and Taiwan promised to continue talking but also reiterated their profoundly different visions about the island's political status.
The differences, extending even to what they ought to discuss, suggest that a solution to one of Asia's most dangerous rifts remains distant.
"Only when the Chinese mainland has achieved democracy can the two sides of the Taiwan Strait talk about reunification," said Koo Chen-fu, the 81-year-old tycoon representing Taiwan here. 
His statement followed an hour-and-a-half discussion with China's President and Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin.
This morning, after Mr. Koo had a blunt exchange of views with Deputy Prime Minister Qian Qichen, Mr. Koo complained that Beijing still failed to recognize "one simple fact, which is the existence of the Republic of China."
His use of that name reflects the decades-long rift. 
In 1949 the Republic of China, governed by the Nationalist Party, lost a civil war to the Communists, who then founded the People's Republic of China. 
The Nationalist Government fled to Taiwan, which Beijing has considered a renegade province ever since.
After the morning meeting a Chinese spokesman, Tang Shubei, said Taiwan must "look upon the mainland objectively and bravely face up to the international situation."
He added, "Don't be an ostrich."
Still, both sides seemed eager to put the best face on this visit and to keep the diplomatic wheels spinning. 
Even if they produce no breakthrough, continued talks are seen by both sides -- and by keenly interested bystanders like the United States -- as a way to head off a disastrous conflict that nobody wants.
China is anxious to negotiate Taiwan's return to the motherland. 
Taiwan has become a relatively prosperous democracy. 
More and more its people have an independent identity, and its Government vows that it will not even consider reuniting with the mainland until China, too, is transformed.
Mr. Koo, leader of Taiwan's semiofficial Straits Exchange Foundation, came to the mainland on Wednesday to meet with his counterpart, Wang Daohan, 84, the leader of China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits.
The two elder statesmen met in Singapore in 1993. 
But a second meeting scheduled in 1995 was canceled by China, which was angered by what it saw as moves by Taiwan toward independence. 
Relations reached a dangerous low in the next year as China shot missiles near Taiwan during the island's presidential election and the United States warned China to back off by sending two aircraft carriers near the area.
China has vowed to attack Taiwan if it declares independence and is pressing for political negotiations aimed at bringing the island under its wing. 
It has offered greater autonomy than that granted last year to Hong Kong -- if Taiwan will accept Chinese sovereignty. 
The offer includes the right to preserve its capitalist economy, hold elections and maintain its own army.
But Taiwan refuses to negotiate about its political status, insisting that China must acknowledge that Taiwan's Government is already sovereign in practice. 
Instead, Taiwan wants to talk about matters like fishing disputes and the treatment of cross-strait visitors and businesses.
During the current visit, the two sides pledged to continue the newly reopened dialogue, and Mr. Wang accepted an invitation to visit Taiwan at an undetermined future time.
Reflecting both sides' desire to keep up positive momentum, the question of future agendas was blurred: the Chinese said Taiwan had agreed to include political matters, while the Taiwan representatives said today that the practical issues they wished to discuss included, of course, a political element.
The meeting this morning between Mr. Koo and Mr. Qian included the most pointed and honest exchanges in a visit mostly filled with smiling toasts and visits to tourist sites.
In his meeting with President Jiang late this afternoon, which lasted half an hour longer than scheduled, Mr. Koo said in an interview, the divisive central question of Taiwan's political future was not directly discussed. 
He described the meeting as pleasant and friendly, and said the two had engaged in a general discussion about the meaning of democracy, with Mr. Jiang emphasizing that the mainland had its own needs and path.
A central goal of China, and of many of Taiwan's business leaders, is for Taiwan to lift its restrictions on direct travel, commerce and communications across the strait at a time when the island's investment and trade here are climbing. 
Mr. Koo said the restrictive policy represented Taiwan's effort "to strike a balance between security and commercial concerns."
"If we could get assurance that China will not use force against us, then we could talk about this," he said in the interview.
The Taiwan representatives, while expressing a desire for friendly dialogue, took several opportunities to publicize their positions.
When Mr. Wang, the Chinese official, agreed to make a return visit to Taiwan, the Taiwan delegation immediately suggested that he go in early December, so he could view at first hand the country's democratic legislative elections. 
The Chinese said that would be a bit too soon.
During the current visit, officials back in Taiwan complained that China was aggressively continuing its strategy of isolating Taiwan diplomatically, courting some of the 27 countries that still recognize Taiwan.
In this morning's meeting, Mr. Qian, the Chinese Deputy Prime Minister, said it was only a natural development that more countries would switch allegiance from Taiwan to the mainland, since that was the official United Nations position, according to Chinese media accounts.
The third-ranking member of the visiting delegation, Kang Ning-hsiang, has a well-known history as a democracy advocate on the island and is now associated with a pro-independence opposition party. 
The Taiwan officials asked if he could be one of the small group attending the Koo-Jiang meeting, but the Chinese refused. 
So this evening, when Mr. Koo gave a final news conference, Mr. Kang was also given a chance to speak, and he made his plea for democracy in China.
This morning, Mr. Koo surprised the Chinese by announcing that Taiwan was considering asking to join an American-led multinational program in North Korea that aims to forestall production of nuclear weapons ingredients by helping to provide other energy sources. 
China is generally annoyed by such efforts by Taiwan to gain international acceptance, but today it had no clear reaction.
Mr. Koo said he was encouraged by the visit. 
"We'll keep talking, and we'll find ways to narrow the differences," he said in the interview. 
"We do have the patience."
But diplomats here wonder and worry how patient China will be on reunification, which it calls its overriding foreign policy goal.
      
