
A senior officer of the People's Liberation Army says he warned the Clinton Administration last March of "explosive" consequences should the President of Taiwan be allowed to visit the United States. 
In June the White House allowed the President, Lee Teng-hui, to make a private visit to a college reunion, touching off a crisis in relations with China, which claims Taiwan as a province.
The military official, Lieut. 
Gen. Xiong Guangkai, added in an interview this week that any future visit by President Lee would incite an even stronger reaction.
General Xiong, an assistant chief of staff, said he gave the warning to impress upon top American defense officials the volatile nature of Chinese attitudes regarding Taiwan.
In the interview, the 56-year-old officer also accused Washington of breaking a commitment made in 1982 to reduce arms sales to Taiwan.
And, going further than any other Chinese leader thus far, General Xiong disparaged the expansion of democracy on Taiwan through direct presidential elections next March.
"I can tell you the so-called popular president or president directly elected by the people is not democratically or legally elected," he said. 
"Taiwan cannot declare the election is in accordance with sovereignty and in accordance with democracy or legality. 
A leader elected in Taiwan, in whatever form, can only be regarded as a leader in a province, a region or a part of China. 
They can by no means be regarded as a leader of a political entity with sovereignty because there is only one China in the world."
The general's forceful remarks indicated that despite a recovery in diplomatic relations with China since the summer, a substantial amount of tension remains, especially among military leaders.
It is rare for a top military officer to discuss a political issue as bluntly as General Xiong did this week with editors of The New York Times. 
The general's emphatic remarks reflect the depth of nationalistic feelings in the Chinese military over the mainland's sovereignty over Taiwan, whose Nationalist Government was once a bitter rival to the Communists in the civil war of 1945-49. 
It also suggests the strong pressures that China's President, Jiang Zemin, is under from his own military to be unrelenting on the Taiwan issue.
"This is a major issue that we have to settle in order to safeguard the reunification of the motherland," General Xiong said, adding that China would not rule out the use of force in recovering Taiwan.
Earlier this year, a significant rupture in relations between Washington and Beijing occurred after President Clinton decided to allow President Lee to visit Cornell University, where he delivered a speech with strong political overtones.
Since then President Clinton has reiterated Washington's "one China" policy, but has refused to rule out allowing the Taiwan leader to return for another private visit.
"The United States has damaged the overall interests of United States-China relations by allowing Mr. Lee to visit the United States," General Xiong said. 
"We hope that the incident will not occur again, but if it recurs, the damage will be bigger than this time."
China withdrew its ambassador from Washington for five months and canceled numerous exchanges on military, trade and human rights issues.
The general is a senior adviser to the Communist Party Central Committee. 
During a visit to Washington last March to brief Defense Secretary William J. Perry on details of China's defense budget, General Xiong said, he issued a blunt warning on Taiwan.
"I quoted a saying from Deng Xiaoping," he said, referring to the 91-year-old paramount leader: " 'The Taiwan issue is the crux of Chinese-American relations. 
If this issue is not approached well, the result of that can be explosive.'
"
Adding emphasis, the general continued. 
"The word 'explosive' carries much weight and the audience at that briefing was shocked to hear that."
He said Mr. Deng's words "have been proved true" since the Taiwan leader's visit to Cornell: China has conducted military exercises intended to intimidate Taiwan.
He then said the damage from another visit would be greater, echoing a similiar warning by another senior Government official this week.
On arms sales, he pointed out that the 1982 joint communique negotiated with China by the Reagan Administration required the United States to gradually reduce the flow of arms to Taiwan. 
"What I can tell you is that the United States side has not honored its words," he said, citing the decision by President Bush in 1992 to allow the sale of 150 F-16 fighters to the Taipei Government.
