
Happily married, his career flourishing, a 31-year-old midlevel city official named Lu Zhoukui abruptly decided last August to xia hai, or plunge into the sea.
Mr. Lu was not feeling suicidal, and in fact it may have been the best decision he ever made. 
"Plunging into the sea" is the new slang in China for going into business, and it is becoming a nationwide craze.
Tens of millions of Government and Communist Party officials are plunging into the sea. 
Deng Xiaoping's youngest son has dived in, along with the children of most other top leaders, and the official newspapers are full of praise for the phenomenon.
"From top to bottom, the Government is encouraging us to do business," Mr. Lu said as he sat in the anteroom of his plush new office in this eastern Chinese city. 
"The only restriction is that the business must be legal."
 
Cash Over Politics
It says something about the giddiness of the economic and social revolution under way in China that the Communist Party is hailing its officials for abandoning their posts to the temptations of capitalism. 
More fundamentally, the rush to plunge into the sea reflects the growing sense among China's elite that power and comfort and prestige in the coming years will no longer derive from political position, but rather from hard cash.
One measure of the trend is that the number of registered companies in China soared 88 percent last year alone, rising to 486,000. 
The registered capital of private enterprises surged 79 percent in the year, to $3.9 billion.
Fragmentary statistics suggest that about one-third of China's 103 million Government employees have leaped into the sea, or at least waded in far enough to get a second, part-time job. 
Many more Chinese are expected to take the plunge, for the word is getting out that the sea is warm and inviting -- and that almost no one sinks.
Mr. Lu, for instance, started a company in August to engage in everything from running restaurants to placing Chinese laborers in foreign jobs. 
The company turned a profit of $219,000 in the four months it was operating last year, and this year Mr. Lu is expecting a profit of almost $1 million.
By comparison, his income at his old Government job was $46 a month.
 
Some Troubling Questions
Nevertheless, the trend toward leaping into the sea raises some troubling questions. 
Some people worry, for instance, that China is becoming a nation of money-grubbing materialists, in which intellectuals are obliged to sacrifice more important work just to keep up with the Wangs.
There was considerable disquiet when a Beijing newspaper reported that a Communist Party secretary at the Forestry University was selling meat pies on the side. 
It is not clear which of two items bothered readers more: that the man would stoop to be a vendor or that by doing so he tripled his income.
"I am totally appalled," a commentator wrote in The Guangming Daily News, a newspaper for intellectuals. 
"I'd like to read the professor's works rather than eat his meat pies."
A broader question is whether those leaping into the sea are unfairly taking advantage of their guanxi, or connections. 
Good guanxi are paramount in China, for they make the difference in getting bank loans, electricity, running water and tax waivers. 
Guanxi are often more important than rules.
 
How He Hired Russians
Mr. Lu, for instance, is about to open a restaurant with Russian waitresses. 
Many other bars and restaurants around China have lately been forbidden to hire Russians, partly because of concern that some engage in prostitution.
Perhaps Mr. Lu has obtained permission through luck, or through astute preparation. 
But it cannot hurt that he knows all the city officials, and that calligraphy given to him by the provincial governor is hanging in his office.
"Some of these people going into business worked for many years in Government offices, and they have lots of contacts," said Zhang Huafu, the Deputy Mayor of Yantai. 
"I can't deny the problem. 
But because of this problem, we shouldn't oppose the whole idea of people going into business."
The term "plunging into the sea" reflects the sense of daring and uncertainty that is associated with business in China. 
Much of that is dissipating, but one recurring problem is finding housing.
 
Having to Return Apartments
Government employees normally get low-cost apartments from the state, and unless they have good guanxi, they often have to return their apartments when they go into business. 
Private housing is difficult to obtain and extremely expensive.
Wang Quanjie, a 42-year-old engineer in Yantai, is now grappling with the housing question. 
Mr. Wang, who used to oversee leather factories for the city government, left his job in July with 10 colleagues to form a leather research institute.
Mr. Wang and his friends have done extremely well, winning consulting fees from factories and making back their starting capital of $17,000 five times over. 
Like most Chinese who plunge into the sea, they raised the money by dipping into savings and by borrowing from friends and relatives. 
Also like most, they are trying to use their guanxi with friendly officials to get large loans from Government-run banks.
The problem is that the Government gave them a one-year grace period to leave their housing. 
So the staff has to find new apartments this summer.
"That's a huge headache for all of us," Mr. Wang said. 
"I've got to figure out how to house all my staff."
 
Quitting Is Avoided
Partly to avoid losing their apartments, many Chinese leap into the sea without formally quitting their other jobs. 
They neglect their work, but keep the salaries and housing, knowing that it is very difficult to be dismissed.
A result is that while not enough officials have resigned to create staff shortages, many schools and offices have a very clear shortage of employees concentrating on their work.
Policemen moonlight as pimps. 
Factory workers wave rags on street corners as an offer to wash cars. 
University students sell photocopiers and X-ray machines on commission. 
Professors become corporate consultants, working with such enthusiasm that The Economic Daily complained recently about faculty members who rush out of class when their beepers go off.
As for Chinese journalists, a joke going around says there are now five kinds of reporters. 
The top tier is made up of those who run a business on the side, and they are followed by those who play the stock market.
The third kind sells advertisements as a sideline, winning a typical commission of 7 to 12 percent from their business departments. 
The fourth kind freelances for other publications.
"The bottom rank of journalists is the least respected," said a reporter for one of China's most distinguished newspapers. 
"They're the ones who actually do the work and write the front-page stories."
 
Traditionally Demeaned
Traditionally in China, Confucianism looked down on business people, and until recently officials and intellectuals disdained commerce as demeaning. 
Many Chinese also regarded business as risky, because of fears that private enterprises would be confiscated if hard-liners returned to power.
The term "plunging into the sea" apparently originated early in this century in Shanghai but then migrated to Taiwan, where it was a pejorative expression for young women working as prostitutes. 
The term returned to mainland China last year, and fell into common use only in the last six months.
But on the journey from Taiwan, the meaning of the phrase was twisted to reflect the broader concept of going into business in any way. 
Now it encompasses moonlighting professors as well as prostitutes.
Because of the traditionally negative associations of engaging in private business, in the early and mid-1980's a hugely disproportionate share of entrepreneurs in China were ex-convicts. 
They could not get any respectable job and so were forced into business.
 
Ex-Convicts Are Prosperous
A result is that perhaps in no other country are ex-convicts so prosperous. 
China often boasts about its low recidivism rates; one reason is that released prisoners -- mostly common criminals, but also some dissidents -- are part of an old-boy network that offers some of the most lucrative jobs in the country. 
For making useful business connections, Beijing No. 1 Prison is the Harvard Business School of China.
As time passes, fears of a major policy reversal by the hard-liners are diminishing, and so is the scorn for private business.
A well-known writer, Zhang Xianlang, has just started his own holding company, setting up a huge billboard as its first project. 
And China's most famous movie actress, Liu Xiaoqing, has started the Xiaoqing Industrial and Commercial Company, with interests varying from cosmetics to real estate.
 
Favorite Job Preference
A survey of young people found that their top job preference was to be an entrepreneur. 
National Government work ranked 8th out of 16 choices.
All this is very heartening to those who have plunged into the sea, like Wang Qian, who left her Government post last summer to join the private leather research institute in Yantai.
"A few years ago, it would have been tough for somebody in my present situation to find a boyfriend," said Ms. Wang, 24. 
"Then a woman in business could look for a boyfriend only among other traders."
"But now it's very different," Ms. Wang added, beaming. 
"People accept the fact that it's a market economy. 
Anybody will go out with you."
