
Associates of Wei Jingsheng, the prominent Chinese dissident who was arrested this week in a roundup of at least a dozen dissidents, were awaiting his return to Beijing tonight after receiving a call in which he said he was free.
There was speculation that Mr. Wei had gone into hiding. 
A close associate of Mr. Wei, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the dissident had told him that he was returning to Beijing from rural Changping County about 20 miles north of Beijing, where the Public Security Bureau maintains a "guest house" for interrogations.
 
At Least a Dozen Seized
Mr. Wei said he was going to have lunch with some "old friends" before he returned to the city, the associate said. 
Tonight associates were still awaiting word of his return.
Early on Sunday, China's official news agency issued a brief statement saying Mr. Wei had been "summoned" on Friday by security officials "for violating the relevant regulations during his probation period."
It did not elaborate. 
Mr. Wei was released in September after 14 1/2 years in prison.
A dozen or more dissidents have reportedly been arrested in Beijing and Shanghai since Wednesday. 
It is possible that the detentions are intended to send a defiant message to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who plans to visit Beijing next week to remind the leadership that renewal of its trade privileges will depend on China's performance on human rights.
[Visiting Hawaii on Saturday in advance of a 10-day trip abroad, Mr. Christopher said he was relieved that Mr. Wei had been freed but that the United States was pressing for information about the whereabouts of the other dissidents who were detained.
["You can be sure that human rights will be right at the top of my agenda when we get to Beijing," the Secretary of State said. 
He said the wave of arrests "redoubles my determination to make sure that they understand the seriousness of our concern."]
Reuters reported that a half dozen dissidents in Shanghai were detained by internal security agents when the State Department's top human rights official, John Shattuck, visited the city this week.
Yang Zhou, a longtime democracy campaigner who had been scheduled to meet with Mr. Shattuck, told Reuters that he was arrested on Thursday and released on Friday, after Mr. Shattuck had left the city.
