
China's leaders are trying to rein in a growing and increasingly assertive liberal intellectual movement, criticizing prominent academics and authors in speeches, forbidding newspapers from running their articles and punishing or shutting down publishers who have brought out their work.
In recent years, unofficial and quasi-official outlets for liberal political ideas have multiplied rapidly in China -- on the Internet, in informal discussion groups, in magazines and books that result from collaborations between independent editors and state publishers. 
At a time of rapid economic and social change, China's leaders clearly view this trend as a threat to their political power.
Despite his Western-leaning economics, President Jiang Zemin has in the last year constantly reiterated the importance of standing fast by Communist ideology in a China overrun with dot-com start-ups. 
In the last few months, those admonitions have led to a series of punitive actions against writers perceived as straying too far in a liberal or reformist direction.
"It's a very tense time," said a prominent professor, who like others would speak only if not identified. 
"President Jiang is very unhappy with some things that friends have written. 
He wants to undertake some ideological cleansing."
In a country where economic reforms have spawned greater pluralism in ideas and the means to express them, it is impossible to mount a concerted old-style Communist Party campaign, academics here say. 
But the scattershot attacks have been many and varied, and do have short term consequences, at least.
In a speech in Guangdong province, Mr. Jiang himself directly criticized a much-revered retired official of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Li Shenzhi, for an Internet essay.
The editorial offices of the Reform Publishing House in Beijing have been shut down for bringing out "The Secret Scriptures of Officialdom," a book that obliquely describes the back-stabbing and bribery required to attain public office.
Liu Juning, a political scientist who has written about the need for political reform, was fired from his job at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, and editors at the state-owned Commercial Publishers had to write self-criticisms for publishing his book.
High-level officials have canceled the scheduled publication of the second volume of the official "History of the Chinese Communist Party, covering 1949-82, saying the final draft was too critical of the party's past errors. 
Gong Yuzhi, one of the book's chief editors, has retired as deputy head of the Central Party School, in part as a result.
Editors at two lively, independent newspapers, Southern Weekend and Shopping Guide, have been replaced. 
And editors at a popular newspaper have been criticized for reporting that several employees of the United States Central Intelligence Agency were disciplined for the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade a year ago -- a fact not reported in the state-controlled media.
"It is evident that Jiang Zemin feels that the intellectual community has become too brazen," said a newspaper commentator, who also would not be identified. 
"Everyone is aware of the spirit of Jiang Zemin's speeches. 
And even if they don't agree, they know if they don't act, they're putting themselves in danger."
Chinese liberals say the timing of the intense criticisms, after years of stuttering but slowly expanding intellectual freedom, is probably related to Communist Party politics.
They say China's leaders are nervous about the liberalizing forces that could be unleashed by China's expected entry into the World Trade Organization, as early as this year. 
They add that Mr. Zemin's tenure as president and party leader will probably end in the next few years and that he is trying to burnish his image to maintain some role for himself in the future. 
That means turning down the volume of critics.
Overall, the campaign has had a clear dampening effect: China's growing stable of liberal intellectuals -- in universities, government research institutes, the media and publishing -- are lying low. 
For instance, more than half a dozen people who last year would have been happy to be quoted by name, refused to be identified in this article.
But most remain confident that the current tightening on intellectual life will pass. 
And in the China of today, threats from the central authorities have diminished influence. 
Bookstores are still filled with provocative books. 
And people fired from government institutes can now often find a way to make a living in the expanding private sector.
"I can continue to do my work, but it will be more difficult," said Mr. Liu, the political scientist who was fired. 
"Now, for example, I think it will be very difficult to publish articles or books in the major media. 
And, perhaps, students will not be able to invite me to lecture at universities."
The government's surprising face-off with Mr. Li -- by far the mosttalked-about event in the crackdown -- shows both the government's determination to curb liberal voices, and also how far some essayists have gone.
A one-time aide to Zhou Enlai, the late Prime Minister, Mr. Li had been considered nearly untouchable, until he was berated by Mr. Jiang in a speech this year to Communist Party cadres. 
The criticisms were deleted from published versions of the lecture, Chinese journalists said.
Mr. Li, who is in his late 70's and will probably suffer no immediate effects from Mr. Jiang's speech, has long issued muted criticisms of the government, generally concerning the 1988 military suppression of pro-democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square. 
But his recent essay was considerably more explicit, mocking last year's lavish celebration of 50 years of Communist rule.
"Hitler is dead, Stalin is dead; there can't be that many countries left that strive for this vision of grandeur," he wrote. 
"My own guess is perhaps only Kim Jong Il's Korea would embrace it."
His essay was widely circulated in intellectual circles -- on paper and by e-mail. 
It was ultimately posted on the Internet, though not by Mr. Li himself, his friends say. 
That is when it came to the attention of government officials.
Although liberal academics say senior officials have also directly criticized a few other longtime reformers, including the economist Mao Yushi, the tightened policy has generally trickled down by more circuitous routes.
In the last year, Mr. Jiang has insisted that all officials rededicate themselves to Communist ideology through his "Three Stresses" campaign ("Politics, Study, Probity"), and some have clearly heeded the call.
In early March, the central government's News and Publications bureau called publishers to a conference just outside Beijing to deliver Mr. Jiang's admonitions, specifically criticizing two publishing houses.
Although all publishing in China is theoretically owned and controlled by the state, most publishers these days collaborate with independent, for-profit book editors, generally by selling them a government license to print a particular book. 
This widespread practice, which started as a way to raise money for cash-strapped state publishers, has opened up the industry to a broad spectrum of politically sensitive topics, since the actual editing is no longer done by government employees.
At the conference, state publishers were told that Mr. Jiang wanted to curb the practice and were instructed to review all books they had brought out since 1997 to see if they contained attacks on the leadership.
"Suddenly, all of the publishers totally withdrew, without exception," said an independent editor. 
"Now they've started coming back, but very slowly, and the book has to be totally secure and unprovocative."
The tightening has surprised many Chinese who had hoped that the government would open publishing and generally relax security, once the 50th anniversary celebrations were over last fall. 
And in a throwback to old-style Communist campaigns, trouble for individuals has often been heralded by an article in an obscure journal or a letter to the editor.
Mr. Liu's firing from the Academy of Social Sciences grew out of an indignant letter from a graduate student at Beijing University who had heard him speak. 
The letter, printed in Guangming Daily, a party newspaper aimed at intellectuals, was addressed to the academy and also to the president.
Still, even as Chinese intellectuals bemoan the current climate, they feel more inconvenienced than terrified by the government's wrath.
"The methods are pretty much the same as in Deng Xiaoping's and even Mao's time," the professor said. 
"What's different is that nobody pays attention anymore. 
The effect is very limited. 
Intellectuals don't feel that much pressure. 
And ordinary people don't pay much attention or sympathize with the authors."
He predicted that the current effort would peter out within a year because "no one approves of this kind of criticism anymore."
And the graduate student who caused the dismissal of Mr. Liu would probably have trouble getting a university job in the future, he said.
And even as some authors complained that publishers had put their books on hold, strong liberal voices were cropping up here and there -- in some very unlikely places.
The current edition of "Reading Room," a monthly journal published under the auspices of the Hunan Province News and Publication Bureau -- the provincial censorship organ -- features two long, somewhat daring essays. 
One advocates more aggressive economic reform. 
The second explores the often prickly relationship between writers and politics.
"In China, winning and consolidating state power was the main objective of all revolutionary work, and publishing, as a part of it, was no exception," Li Xianzhi wrote in this second essay. 
"The longstanding precepts of 'class struggle' and 'ideological dictatorship' destroyed people's ideas of rule of law, that is, their ideas of freedom."
