
At the outset of a climactic week of military and political struggle over Taiwan's future, China warned the United States today to keep its naval forces away from the Taiwan Strait.
Prime Minister Li Peng, speaking in Beijing at the conclusion of the annual session of the National People's Congress, China's parliament, said, "If someone makes a show of force in the Taiwan Strait, that will not only be a futile act, but it also will make the situation all the more complicated."
The United States has stated no intention to send either of the two aircraft carrier battle groups it has dispatched to the western Pacific through the 137-mile-long international waterway that separates Taiwan and the mainland, although the carrier Nimitz transited the strait in December. 
In 1958, a major American naval deployment to the strait ordered by President Eisenhower, and backed by an implicit threat to use nuclear weapons, was believed to have deterred Mao Zedong from mounting an invasion of the Taiwan-held islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
The same threat does not exist today, but the "complicated situation" to which the Chinese Prime Minister referred is China's nine-month-old campaign to bring military pressure on Taiwan's people, who this coming Saturday will elect their President for the first time by direct vote. 
The current President, Lee Teng-hui, 73, is expected to easily win the contest, but Beijing is hoping to weaken his electoral mandate by frightening voters toward other candidates. 
China fears that a large show of force by the United States will further embolden Taiwan's leaders to assert the island's independence.
Meanwhile today, hundreds of people fled small islands under Taiwan's control off the Chinese mainland close to the area where Chinese troops will begin a new round of air, land and naval war games on Monday.
And on the campaign trail today, Mr. Lee called on Taiwan's voters to give him a strong mandate of at least 50 percent of the vote. 
He also issued another rebuke of the mainland's pressure tactics, calling them the equivalent of "state terrorism."
"Communist China's attempts to use joint sea and air exercises to destroy our elections will be spurned by freedom-loving Chinese and people of international communities," he said in a nationally televised speech.
And in a forum for all four presidential candidates, Mr. Lee disparaged the legitimacy of the Communist Party on the mainland. 
"Its power came from guns, and it relies on guns to maintain its power, and the biggest threat to its power is the democratic direct election across the Taiwan Strait."
Clinton Administration officials say there is no evidence that China has military plans to invade Taiwan or its scattered island territories, but the White House nonetheless is sending a second carrier force to the western Pacific to underscore Washington's insistence that China and Taiwan resolve their longstanding differences by peaceful means.
"Although we don't like the newly announced military exercise," a White House official said in Washington, "we take note of the fact that there is little to no interference with international shipping or air travel, that they take place far from Taiwan proper so that there is no direct threat, and that the Chinese have been careful in their rhetoric not to issue direct threats."
China refuses to renounce the use of force should Taiwan move toward independence, and on Friday a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang, sought to reiterate that point by describing as groundless earlier reports that China has signaled privately that "it has no intention to resort to arms in solving the Taiwan issue."
"China has never promised to abstain from resorting to arms," he said.
Mr. Shen's attempts to harden China's position in the last days of the presidential campaign on Taiwan reflects the extent to which both China's Communist Party leadership and President Lee are vying for the hearts and minds of the Taiwan electorate. 
Beijing has sought to reach out to Taiwan voters and businessmen, telling them not to panic and trying to reassure them that their $20 billion in investment on the mainland is secure, as a banner headline in the semi-official China Daily said today.
In Beijing, Prime Minister Li said, "We wholeheartedly hope that people in Taiwan can live in a peaceful and stable environment" and he again blamed the Taiwan leader for the "chaotic situation in Taiwan."
The Communist Party leadership in Beijing is said to believe that Mr. Lee is bent on leading Taiwan toward permanent separation from the mainland, a step that would undermine the "one China" commitment of his Nationalist Party, which is dedicated to eventual reunification with the mainland.
Just as Beijing has sought to isolate Mr. Lee by painting him as a "separatist" bent on "splitting the motherland," Mr. Lee has sought to cast Beijing in the role of an enemy of Taiwan's common man, who has been granted a democratic franchise for the first time in the island's history under the reforms begun by the late President, Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Chiang Kai-shek, and continued by Mr. Lee.
Beijing's military campaign began in July with what a Pentagon official described at the time as an "escalating menu" of exercises intended to destabilize Mr. Lee's rule. 
Mr. Lee has now pledged to seek a new dialogue with the mainland after the election, but many political experts in Beijing and Taipei say tensions will remain high for some time as Taiwan undertakes a significant buildup of air and naval weaponry that could make it the most potent air power in Southeast Asia.
For the new round of Chinese war games beginning on Monday, China has declared a large part of the Taiwan Strait as a military exercise area and has warned international shipping and aviation to stay away. 
The prospect of the exercises prompted about 300 Taiwan citizens to leave small islands around Matsu, the strategic bastion off the Chinese port of Fuzhou that was to serve as the Nationalists' staging area to retake the mainland.
"We are leaving for Taiwan to escape disaster," said a schoolgirl from the island of Tong Chu, near Matsu and just 10 nautical miles away from the area of the Chinese war games. 
Taiwan television stations carried film of the mini-evacuation, but also noted that a number of residents were choosing to stay in their homes.
Of the two aircraft carrier battle groups, the one centered around the Independence has taken up its station several hundred miles east of Taiwan. 
The other, the Nimitz, is due to arrive in the days ahead from the Persian Gulf. 
The commander of the Independence group, Rear Adm. James O. Ellis Jr., has stated repeatedly that his mission is to monitor China's exercises.
 
--------------------
U.S. Dismisses Chinese Warning
WASHINGTON, March 17 (Reuters) -- The United States today brushed aside a warning by China to keep American warships out of the Taiwan Strait.
The White House Chief of Staff, Leon E. Panetta, declined to say where the American fleet was heading. 
"I am not going to tell you one way or the other where the carriers are going," Mr. Panetta said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation."
Another American official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the United States retained its right to move through international waters near the strait just as it does around the world.
"Our decision to deploy naval forces to the region was done with the intent to defuse tensions, not to raise tensions," he said. 
"Any movement of forces would be done not with the intent to be provocative."
Mr. Panetta urged peaceful settlement of relations between China and Taiwan, and reinforced the American commitment to a one-China policy.
"We want a peaceful solution to that situation, and we think the acts that they have taken in the period of the last few weeks have been reckless and frankly provocative," Mr. Panetta said of Chinese military exercises and test missile firings near Taiwan. 
"Our hope would be that they would back off and resort to a peaceful solution."
