
The Chinese Government stunned South Korea today by announcing that it was withdrawing its delegate from the four-decade-old military commission that oversees the armistice between North and South Korea.
On the surface, the move seemed to have limited practical importance, since the commission's once-crucial role in managing day-to-day problems at the demilitarized zone separating the two Koreas has sharply diminished. 
As the number of confrontations has been reduced, so have the functions of what is known as the Military Armistice Commission, which consists of China, North Korea and the United Nations Command, dominated by the United States.
But in a region where such pronouncements usually have a deeper meaning, the announcement was an unmistakable blow to South Korea.
It was perceived here as part of Communist North Korea's unceasing efforts to cut Seoul out of any diplomatic maneuvering over the future of the Korean peninsula. 
Ever since a South Korean general replaced the American general on the commission in 1991, North Korea has snubbed the commission and has sought to eliminate it. 
North Korea does not recognize the South Korean Government.
 
North Wants Treaty With U.S.
Earlier this year North Korea established what it described as a separate office at the border village of Panmunjom and pulled its delegation out of the armistice commission. 
The North has also said it wants to scrap the armistice and instead negotiate a formal peace treaty, but only with the United States, not South Korea.
In a statement carried by the official New China News Agency, Deputy Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan said North Korea's withdrawal in effect rendered the commission inoperative. 
Mr. Tang was said to have agreed with North Korea that a new agreement should be negotiated to protect the peace on the peninsula.
The announcement added to South Korea's growing discomfort over the fact that in another crucial area, North Korea recently began negotiating directly with Washington over its suspected nuclear weapons program.
South Korea is being consulted on the talks, but it has no formal role. 
That has caused simmering resentment among many officials here, particularly since Washington and the North Korean Government in Pyongyang have agreed to take steps toward possible diplomatic recognition if North Korea abandons its efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, China is North Korea's last major ally. 
China is seen by the United States and South Korea as playing an important role in moderating North Korea's behavior. 
The announcement today was thus seen as an attempt by the Chinese to back up its ally.
It was disclosed on Thursday that North Korea had invited former President Jimmy Carter to mediate the dispute with the United States. 
That also discomfits the Government here since Mr. Carter is seen as taking a more sympathetic view of the North than the Clinton Administration does.
China's withdrawal will weaken the commission, but officials here said it was not expected to create new military tensions at the demilitarized zone or make conflict any more likely in what is one of the most heavily defended frontiers in the world.
South Korea's Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the Chinese had informed the Government of its move in advance. 
"They affirmed that the armistice agreement was still valid and that the withdrawal of their representative was merely an administrative decision," it said. 
"We recognize this, but we believe the decision was made at an inappropriate time."
The United Nations Command said in a statement, "Any action that weakens the Military Armistice Commission will increase the potential that minor incidents could escalate into a more serious situation."
