
Emerging to speak for the first time since his release from prison, China's most illustrious political dissident said tonight that if Beijing was trading on the freedom of a few political prisoners to win the 2000 Olympic Games, it was indulging in "dirty" politics.
Wei Jingsheng, who met with reporters at his parents' tiny apartment in central Beijing, said he would not give up the "struggle" for democracy in China, but would be forced to restrain his activities for three years while he is on probation.
The former Beijing Zoo electrician, who energized China's 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement with his simple and eloquent essays and wall posters, was released last week after serving 14 1/2 years of a 15-year term.
 
The Sakharov of China
Mr. Wei, the longest-serving pro-democracy campaigner in China, is well known for his tenacious adherence to his cause and has become as powerful a symbol of resistance in China as Andrei D. Sakharov was in the former Soviet Union.
Wearing a white polo shirt and tennis shoes, Mr. Wei, 43, smoked a cigarette as he met with reporters tonight. 
Although he was relaxed, he measured his words and asked reporters to quote him accurately, especially on the sensitive subject of China's Olympic quest.
Fang Lizhi, the Chinese astrophysicist who unsuccessfully urged the Chinese leadership to free Mr. Wei in January 1989 on the 40th anniversary of the Communist takeover in China, characterized Mr. Wei's release as a serious gamble for the Communist leadership.
"These leaders will never accept the principles of human rights and democracy," Mr. Fang said in a telephone interview from the United States. 
"They just want to use Wei in a trade to get the Olympics."
Mr. Wei was far more cautious, making clear that he did not know whether his release was a government ploy to enhance its bid for the 2000 Games.
Responding to a question on whether the Chinese authorities would trade the release of political prisoners in an effort to enhance their bid for the Olympics, Mr. Wei said he thought any such effort would fail. 
"The Olympics, after all, is a kind of sport which should not be mixed with politics," he said. 
"If it is changed into a political trade, I think that is very dirty and abnormal."
He added that in his own view, "It is not compatible with the feelings of the people and the whole nation to bargain for the Olympics."
Confessing to a heart ailment and the loss of a dozen teeth during his long incarceration, Mr. Wei said his mental faculties and his will remain unbent.
He said he hopes someday to publish some of his prison writings in China or abroad.
"I will continue to carry forward political activities, but not for the present time," Mr. Wei said. 
"According to Chinese law, probation means I cannot vote, I have no freedom of expression, I cannot form any kind of organization, even doing business is not allowed" over the next three years.
He said he was thrust out of prison without notice last week. 
In the six days since he was released, he has been staying at an unidentified Government guesthouse and members of his family have at times said they were becoming concerned about whether Mr. Wei would be allowed to come home. 
He would not discuss his whereabouts since his release.
 
No Secrets
Mr. Wei was arrested on March 29, 1979, and later sentenced to 15 years for his anti-government writings and, Chinese authorities said, for passing state secrets about Chinese troop movements in Vietnam to a foreign journalist. 
Mr. Wei said his discussions with journalists were about what he had heard on official television, and that as an electrician, he knew no such secrets.
Over the years, a number of Mr. Wei's supporters have speculated that the length and severity of his prison term were partly a result of the special animosity borne toward him by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, who was the target of Mr. Wei's most biting criticism. 
In a 1987 speech, Mr. Deng mentioned Mr. Wei by name as a threat to Chinese "unity."
If by unity Mr. Deng meant the absolute control of Chinese society by the Communist Party, he was probably correct in his assessment, for Mr. Wei saw the perpetuation of this control by Mr. Deng and others as the principal shortcoming of their reform efforts.
 
'Shameless Bandits'
In one of his most famous essays, Mr. Wei asked pointed questions about whether China should characterize Mr. Deng as a hero or villain for having reversed the course of Mao Zedong's final tumultuous decade in power.
Though Mr. Deng ushered in an era of economic reform under his "four modernizations" in agriculture, industry, science and technology, Mr. Wei held him responsible for failing to deliver a "fifth modernization," political reform, at the same time.
"People should have democracy," he wrote. 
"If they ask for democracy, they are only asking for something they rightfully own. 
Anyone refusing to give them democracy is a shameless bandit no better than a capitalist who robs workers of their money earned with their sweat and blood."
Although Beijing released Mr. Wei, human rights organizations said today that they have learned that the authorities in China are preparing for the largest crackdown on pro-democracy dissidents in more than two years. 
They are to start next month with secret trials to sentence 17 men arrested last year for crimes related to free speech.
While Chinese officials have made no public mention of the trials, judicial officials have told families of the defendants that they should try to retain lawyers, Chinese and Western human rights groups said. 
In some cases family members were shown bills of indictment, but authorities refused to provide copies of the documents.
 
Trials Denounced
By scheduling these trials in October, the Chinese Government may have been trying to spare itself criticism in advance of Thursday's vote by the International Olympic Committee on Beijing's bid to play host to the games. 
But when Government prosecuting authorities began contacting family members, word of the impending trials began to circulate in Beijing.
Today, two human rights organizations condemned the trials. 
Human Rights Watch, based in New York, called on the Chinese Government to "drop the charges and unconditionally release all those arrested for the nonviolent expression of their political views."
Similarly, Human Rights in China, also a New York group, criticized Chinese authorities for failing to improve the country's human rights record while demanding that the international community confer on Beijing the honor of hosting the 2000 games.
Most of the jailed dissidents are from Beijing and all of them are believed to be members of pro-democracy and labor reform organizations that sprang up in secret since the 1989 military crackdown on the mass student movement at Tiananmen Square.
The outlawed organizations include the Freedom and Democracy Party, the Free Labor Union and the China Progressive Alliance.
If the trials go ahead as planned in October, said Robin Munro, director of Asia Watch , the regional arm of Human Rights Watch, in Hong Kong, it would be the largest cluster of political prosecutions since the trials of the so-called "black hands" of the Tiananmen Square movement began in early 1991.
"The Chinese leadership appears to be deliberately postponing these trials until after the decision of the International Olympic Committee is announced," Mr. Munro said.
Among the 17 dissidents scheduled for trial is Liu Jingsheng, 38, a former bus driver who became a vocal campaigner for democracy in 1979 and edited a short-lived pro-democracy journal, Explorations, with Mr. Wei.
Unlike Mr. Wei, Mr. Liu served only a brief term in 1979. 
He was arrested again last June when, according to Asia Watch, Beijing police raided his home and discovered pro-democracy leaflets.
 
No Regrets
Reflecting on the years spent in prison, Mr. Wei said he had no regrets, and he smiled at a question about whether there had been any conditions set for his release, saying: "You don't know me very well. 
If there is any precondition, I would not accept it."
During his imprisonment, much of it spent in solitary confinement, Mr. Wei said his reading was limited to official propaganda organs of the state, like the People's Daily and the Legal Daily.
"I know very little about the outside world," he said. 
But he said he has plans to read, and observe and catch up for the rest of his life.
