
Last November, representatives from the communications firm of Robinson Lerer Sawyer Miller were invited to the Chinese Embassy to present an ambitious three-year public-relations strategy for Beijing.
Focus on "hot-button issues" like human rights and weapons sales, the Chinese were told, according to people familiar with the day-long presentation. 
Put on a road show of Chinese athletes during the summer Olympics. 
Create a "command center" to handle crises. 
Set up a news bureau with television links and an on-line information system. 
The firm boasted that it operated "well behind the scenes" and represented corporate giants like Microsoft and Chrysler and the Governments of countries like the Philippines, Columbia, Chile and Indonesia.
The Chinese listened politely and thanked their guests. 
Officials at the firm say they have not heard back since.
Given China's historic suspicion of outside interference, the encounter was highly unusual, as were China's tentative overtures to other American lobbying firms. 
The search for a hired gun was part of an awkward effort to defeat Taiwan -- not with a missile attack across the Taiwan Strait, but with a public relations campaign in the United States.
On this battlefield, however, even a nuclear power of 1.2 billion people and the fastest-growing economy in the world is no match for a small island of 20 million inhabitants that has assiduously worked Washington for decades.
"It's hard to think of anybody who does this kind of thing worse," said Stanley Roth, director of studies at the U.S. 
Institute for Peace, who was the senior Asia specialist at the White House until last month. 
"The Chinese come in and tell you what they want to do and you're supposed to say 'good.'
They are not willing to compete in the realm of ideas nor do they recognize that the key to lobbying is education over time."
But ever since the Clinton Administration bent to Congressional pressure and allowed President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan to visit the United States last summer, the Chinese have seemed determined to sell their message better.
President Jiang Zemin has admitted the need for China to develop its skills in dealing with other nations, telling U.S. 
News and World report last year: "We have not developed the practice of picking up the phone and saying 'hello' to President Clinton. 
I think we need to improve this. 
We certainly haven't done enough lobbying of the U.S. 
Congress."
Late last year, according to press reports, the Chinese created an entity called the "Central Leading Working Group on the U.S. 
Congress," which reports indirectly to Mr. Jiang and whose mandate is to study and understand Capitol Hill. 
But the group is either so low-profile or so new that even China specialists at the Central Intelligence Agency and James Sasser, the newly confirmed American Ambassador to China, know nothing about it.
To help burnish their image, the Chinese are pressing members of Congress to visit and treating them like heads of state when they come.
Last month, when three Democratic senators -- Diane Feinstein of California, John Glenn of Ohio and Sam Nunn of Georgia -- visited Beijing, President Jiang showed them Mao's bedroom, billard room and indoor swimming pool, telling them that they were the first foreigners to step foot in that part of the palace since the Chinese leader died.
But when it came to the tough policy issues that divide the two countries -- like Taiwan, human rights and missile sales to Pakistan -- Mr. Jiang and his subordinates turned tone deaf, Senator Glenn said.
When Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu, China's top specialist on the United States, suggested during one meeting that Congress not bring up anything negative about the relationship between the two countries during the election year, the Senator lost his patience.
"I told him 'You just don't understand our form of government if you think anybody could tell a particular Congressmen or Senator not to bring up something about China,' " Senator Glenn said. 
"We're not that kind of country. 
China has a few top leaders who decide what the country is going to do and it happens. 
In our country, every individual is a king."
That exchange underscores why China experts, businessmen and lawmakers like Senator Feinstein, who has emerged as a chief defender of China on Capitol Hill, have begun to urge the Chinese to look to Taiwan as an example of how to mold American public opinion.
Even though the United States Government considers Taiwan part of China (its diplomats cannot even enter the State Department), its lobbying efforts have led 24 states to pass resolutions to treat Taiwan like any other country.
Taiwan has 13 regional offices to push cultural and trade ties; it buys good will with donations to universities and first-class trips to Taiwan for Congressional staff members, rotary clubs, state legislators and veterans groups. 
As Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton visited Taiwan four times; he has never visited the People's Republic of China.
The Chinese are well aware that Taiwan is paying $4.5 million over three years to the Washington lobbying firm of Cassidy & Associates, which helped get President Lee a visa last year.
"I say to the Chinese you have a lot to learn here," said Robert Kapp, president of the U.S.-China Business Council. 
"I say to them, 'America is not a mystery.'
I say to them, 'If you're going to talk to Congress, you have to talk the talk and walk the walk.'
"
Among his specific advice is for the Chinese to assign younger people with strong language skills to reach out to Congress, state legislatures and the American people.
Although China's Ambassador, Li Daoyu, gives an occasional speech and makes an occasional trip to Capitol Hill, his embassy keeps an exceptionally low profile. 
The only time many American journalists step foot inside the embassy is trick-or-treating with their children at Halloween.
When Lu Wenxiang, the ever-polite embassy spokesman, was asked to comment on China's efforts to reach out, he said he would call back. 
He did not.
The Chinese can expect to get some help with Congress from Ambassador Sasser, who spent 18 years in the Senate and pledged during his confirmation hearings last October to have "as many senators as possible" visit him in Beijing.
"Part of my role is going to be -- how should I say it -- to more fully inform the Chinese of the importance of good relations with the U.S. 
Congress and of the way our Government functions," said Mr. Sasser, who leaves for Beijing on Saturday.
A few months ago, China sent out tentative feelers to several leading public relations and lobbying firms, but has yet to proceed with serious negotiations, a number of China specialists said.
One of those approached was Fleischman-Hillard, Inc., whose clients include Sony and MasterCard and the governments of Angola and Turkey, and which already has a trade office in Beijing. 
The company had presented the Chinese with a plan to promote American trade and investment, and has talked to independent China experts about developing a public-relations proposal for Beijing, according to people familiar with the company's activities.
For now, the single best lobbyist on behalf of China is probably former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, who is not paid by China but who advises American companies doing business there. 
Mr. Kissinger's meetings with Speaker Newt Gingrich last year led him to back off his call for Taiwan's independence.
But even Mr. Kissinger's efforts have not been enough to make Mr. Gingrich a friend of China.
Just last Saturday, in a town meeting outside of Atlanta, Mr. Gingrich warned of a future nuclear threat from "China or Iran or Korea or some place like that," adding that an angry China might some day decide to launch a missile at Los Angeles.
