
China said today that it would unify its two-tier exchange-rate system and let the value of its currency, the yuan, float at market rates starting Saturday.
The step brings China closer to making its currency convertible, which will help foreign investors and improve its chances of some day entering the world trading organization, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
"It's a gesture of good faith toward GATT," a diplomat said. 
"It's a sign of a real seriousness of purpose of the Government."
The action allows businesses to freely exchange yuan for foreign currencies, easing the flow of imports and exports and aiding China's slow shift toward a market economy.
Zhou Zhengqing, vice governor of the central bank, said on state radio and television that the plan "lays a foundation" for the yuan to become "a convertible currency in the future."
He did not say when true convertibility -- allowing the yuan to be exchanged for foreign currencies at any bank -- might occur.
 
Pain Before Gain Expected
Today's action suggests a devaluation of the yuan. 
At official exchange rates now, a dollar is traded for 5.7855 to 5.8145 yuan. 
But at the semiofficial, market-driven swap centers, the dollar buys 8.7 yuan.
Despite the loosening of restrictions, the central bank made clear that Beijing was not giving up total control of the currency.
"This unitary and controlled floating-exchange-rate system based on market demand and supply will replace the current dual-track system," said a bank spokesman, quoted by the official New China News Agency.
An announcement said that the bank would intervene in the market and use monetary and interest-rate policy to keep rates stable -- just as many capitalist countries do.
"The word 'controlled' is key," said a Western diplomat who specializes in the Chinese economy, quoting the Government's description of the new system. 
"This isn't convertibility, but it's quite a big step" because the gap between the official and market rates is so great.
The two-track system has served as a subsidy for state-owned companies, which were allowed to buy hard currency at the lower official rate.
 
Pledge on Convertibility
But China has promised GATT that it will make its currency fully convertible within five years, establishing a foundation for worldwide trade.
Earlier this year, it began weaning state industries away from the official exchange rate, cutting back on the amount of hard currency available at the cheaper price.
Officials have said that 80 percent of trade-related exchanges already take place at swap-market rates.
China also announced the demise of Foreign Exchange Certificates, the special money for foreigners that has circulated along with the reminbi, or "people's yuan," for 13 years. 
The certificates will be gradually withdrawn from circulation, now that the artificial, two-track exchange system that created them is to be ended.
Tourists and most other foreigners will cash in their certificates at a rate of 5.8 to the dollar. 
Hotels and tourist centers have demanded certificates from foreigners while allowing Chinese to pay in yuan.
The black market for the Foreign Exchange Certificates collapsed today as reports of the changes swept through Beijing.
