
Shares of Chinese and China-related companies surged here today as investors concluded that a landmark trade agreement between the United States and China -- and the competition it promises -- would help Chinese companies more than it would hurt them.
The Hong Kong Stock Exchange's "red chip" index, which tracks the performance of Hong Kong-based, Chinese-controlled companies, soared 9.8 percent after the news broke that American and Chinese negotiators had achieved a deal in Beijing after six days of talks. 
The H share index, which tracks companies based in mainland China, jumped 9.69 percent.
Hong Kong's broader Hang Seng index rose 2.64 percent, to close at 14,564.79 -- its highest close in more than two years. 
Shares also rose strongly on the stock exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen, though not as spectacularly as China-related stocks in the Hong Kong market.
The Hong Kong market was stronger in morning trading on Tuesday, with the Hang Seng up seven-tenths of a percent at noon.
Analysts said that the trade agreement, which removes a major barrier to China's entry into the World Trade Organization, would strengthen Chinese companies, simply by exposing them to competition. 
Although few details of the agreement have been disclosed, officials said it would open China's telecommunications, banking and insurance industries to American companies.
"If China joins the trading world, its companies are going to be forced to change," said Andy Xie, an economist at Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter here.
Such optimism is far from conventional wisdom in mainland China. 
Indeed, a main reason this trade agreement took so long to reach was that some Chinese government officials feared that the country's state-owned corporations -- many of them bloated relics of a command economy -- would be thrashed by more nimble rivals from the United States or Europe.
Those fears have not gone away. 
But Mr. Xie said they were outweighed by the prospect that foreign companies could help Chinese companies as partners or investors. 
One of the oft-mentioned candidates for such a partnership, China Telecom (Hong Kong) Ltd., recorded an 8.5 percent increase in its shares.
China Telecom is a prime example of a company that could be transformed by China's entry into the World Trade Organization. 
As the dominant player in China's burgeoning mobile phone business, it would be an instant candidate for an alliance with a European or American cellular carrier, when outsiders are allowed to own stakes in Chinese telecommunications providers.
As if to dramatize that point, one of Hong Kong's leading telecommunications providers, Hutchinson Whampoa Ltd., announced a $1.2 billion joint venture today with Global Crossing Ltd., the operator of a worldwide fiber optic network. 
The new venture, to be called China Crossing, will build a high-speed fiber optic voice and data network, initially in Hong Kong but later aiming at the mainland China market.
Some analysts contend that Chinese fears of foreign competition are overblown. 
American companies have stumbled in China in businesses as diverse as insurance and beer, and not always because of trade barriers.
"The obstacles to making money in China are not just those that have to be removed as part of W.T.O. accession," said Richard Margolis, a regional strategist at Merrill Lynch here. 
He cited issues like pricing and marketing.
Not all the Chinese companies that benefited from today's announcement are on the frontier of technology or communications. 
Two old-style shipping companies, Cosco Pacific and China Shipping Development, recorded 12 percent and 13.69 percent increases in their shares, respectively, because of hopes that the trade pact would expand the amount of cargo flowing between the United States and China.
Mr. Xie said the agreement also raised the odds that several big Chinese state-owned companies would be able to issue shares in the Hong Kong market the next year. 
Beijing hopes to raise more than $20 million by offering shares in companies like China National Petroleum and the Bank of China.
      
