
In a harsh warning against sharing official information with foreigners, the Government has sentenced a former Foreign Ministry employee to 10 years in prison for providing documents to a reporter for The Washington Post.
The Beijing Intermediate People's Court confirmed this week that it had given Bai Weiji a 10-year sentence "for the crime of illegally providing national secrets to a foreigner."
It said it had sentenced Mr. Bai's wife, Zhao Lei, to six years for the same crime.
Two others, including a newspaper reporter and an assistant to a Cabinet minister, are believed to have received lesser sentences in the case.
Mr. Bai's sentence is unusually long and apparently reflects the alarm of the State Security Ministry, which handled the case, that China's bureaucracy is turning into a sieve through which confidential information regularly reaches foreigners.
 
Friend Got Documents
The sentences, which were handed down May 20 and upheld by a higher court this month, were first reported on Sunday in an opinion section essay in The Washington Post. 
The essay was written by Lena H. Sun, The Post's Beijing correspondent, who was a close friend of Mr. Bai's and the recipient of the documents.
Ms. Sun described how the couple's year-and-a-half-old child, Melanie, is now being cared for by a peasant woman. 
She recalled that Ms. Zhao, before her arrest, tearfully telephoned to ask Ms. Sun to adopt Melanie.
John T. Kamm, an American who has raised Mr. Bai's case in discussions about human rights with Chinese officials, said he found the length of the sentences "very troubling."
"We haven't had much good news coming out of China in the last few months," Mr. Kamm said, speaking of human rights. 
"On the contrary, we've had some serious disappointments."
Several dissidents have been arrested in Shanghai since late May and one has been confined to a mental hospital. 
The authorities have also modestly stepped up their harassment of some dissidents and Christians in other parts of the country.
 
Reporter Briefly Detained
The authorities arrested Mr. Bai in May 1992. 
Two weeks later, the case came to public attention when State Security officers briefly detained Ms. Sun and her family and searched The Post's office in Beijing. 
The security officials seized some documents from the safe and apparently used them in their case against Mr. Bai and his wife.
The United States Embassy in Beijing complained about the search, but Mr. Bai's arrest attracted much less attention. 
He remained in detention for a year, and Ms. Zhao was arrested in April of this year.
Mr. Bai had been dismissed from the Foreign Ministry in 1989 because of his support for the Tiananmen democracy movement, so he had no direct access to official documents. 
The two other people convicted in the case apparently were accused of supplying him with the materials that he passed on to Ms. Sun.
The court did not identify the other two, but Chinese familiar with the episode say that one of them is Tang Yi, 36, who was the assistant to Commerce Minister Hu Ping. 
Mr. Tang is believed to have admitted to the authorities that he showed documents to Mr. Bai but to have insisted that he did not know that they were going to be given to a foreigner.
Mr. Tang's wife, who was pregnant with their first child when he was arrested in September, had an abortion because of uncertainty about her husband's fate. 
Her career has also been affected; she was passed over for a routine promotion at the hospital where she works.
The fourth person convicted in the case is believed to be Wang Jun, a journalist at People's Daily. 
Mr. Wang was sentenced to two years in prison.
In her account in The Washington Post, Ms. Sun acknowledged receiving internal documents from Mr. Bai but suggested that they were innocuous ones, relating to People's Daily, a provincial gambling case and other mundane matters.
"The brutal sentences passed on Bai and his wife show just how determined the Beijing authorities are to thwart the emergence of a more open and free society in China, economic reform notwithstanding," said Robin Munro, a researcher in Hong Kong for Asia Watch, a human rights organization.
The Foreign Ministry and the State Council Information Office declined to comment on the sentences.
More than a dozen Chinese have been sent to prison since the early 1980's for giving information to foreigners. 
In almost every case, the foreigner is scolded and perhaps expelled but not otherwise harmed, while the Chinese is arrested and usually imprisoned for many years.
In 1987, for instance, an editor for the New China News Agency, Tang Dadi, was arrested and charged with providing information to a Japanese reporter. 
Mr. Tang is apparently still in prison, and he is believed to be serving a seven-year term.
Two years later, in the aftermath of the crackdown on the Tiananmen democracy movement, a 25-year-old student named Zhang Weiping was sentenced to nine years in prison for telephoning the Voice of America radio and passing on "rumors."
Mr. Zhang is still apparently serving his sentence.
