
The latest round of trade negotiations between the United States and China broke down in Beijing today, and the United States Trade Representative, Mickey Kantor, threatened to impose steep tariffs on Chinese goods if an agreement was not reached by next Saturday.
The United States is demanding that China crack down immediately on the pirating of copyrighted American computer software, movies and music, and that it stop Chinese businesses from putting phony American labels on consumer products.
In a conference call with reporters, Mr. Kantor said he had invited Chinese trade officials to come to Washington next week to resume the talks but had not received a response.
In Beijing, the official New China News Agency maintained that Chinese negotiators "made ultimate efforts and showed considerable flexibility" during the latest talks but that the United States had made new demands that made an agreement impossible.
The talks over the last nine days were the latest in negotiations that have gone on for years as the Chinese Government has refused to close down 29 factories in southern China that turn out 70 million compact disks and other illegally copied products every year.
Many of these products are sold elsewhere in Asia, and officials here estimate that American businesses lose $1 billion a year because of the thievery.
"We want a detailed agreement that's going to address the problem," Mr. Kantor said.
If such an agreement is not reached by Saturday, the deadline for imposing sanctions under an American law called Special 301, 100 percent tariffs will be imposed within days on some Chinese exports, Mr. Kantor said. 
That would double the price that American consumers pay for these items. 
In theory, that would cause sales of Chinese-made products to fall.
Mr. Kantor did not identify today the exports that would be affected, but a list of potential products published late last year included consumer electronics, toys and clothing.
Asked whether he was serious about imposing the stiff new tariffs or was just seeking to strengthen the United States' hand in the negotiations, Mr. Kantor responded, "Watch our actions."
He added, "With this Administration, it's been quite clear that we're willing to impose trade sanctions."
Chinese negotiators have often waited until the last moment to present concessions, as was the case during textile talks last year. 
So an agreement by the deadline Saturday is not impossible.
Two years ago, the United States threatened similar measures but backed off after China agreed to new laws to prevent the illegal copying of foreign products. 
The laws were never enforced.
Then, last May, President Clinton reversed a promise he made during his election campaign and agreed to renew trade benefits to China, called "most favored nation" treatment, without regard to the way China dealt with its political dissidents.
The President maintained that continuing the trade benefits would be good for American business and good for the dissidents. 
But since then, crackdowns on dissidents have worsened, and China has not followed through on commitments to let the Red Cross visit dissidents in prison to check on their conditions.
With American markets open to the Chinese and markets in China largely closed to American products, the United States' trade deficit with that country has mushroomed. 
The trade imbalance last year was about $30 billion, second in size only to the $60 billion deficit with Japan.
Mr. Kantor said that on the street in Beijing, American negotiators were able to buy a package of illegally copied American computer software worth $10,000 for only $100. 
He said he found it "somewhat stunning" that even Government ministries in China used pirated American software "on a daily basis."
 
--------------------
Beijing Blames U.S. 
Negotiators
BEIJING, Jan. 
28 (AP) -- China blamed the United States today for the failure of the two nations' talks aimed at ending patent, trademark and copyright piracy in China.
The New China News Agency said American negotiators had made new demands as the talks were about to end that went "beyond the scope of intellectual property."
American negotiators here were not immediately available for comment.
"We don't want to see a trade war," the official news agency quoted an unidentified spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation as saying.
The official said China believed it important to protect intellectual property rights. 
But he repeated China's warning that it would retaliate with trade sanctions of its own if Washington made good on its threat.
China contends that it has made significant progress in protecting intellectual property rights. 
American negotiators say China's enforcement of laws to protect these rights has been inadequate.
