
A delegation of Christians, including three Americans, who came to China this month to visit friends and who passed an evening of fellowship and prayer with a village congregation was detained and held incommunicado for four days, the group's leader said today.
The churchmen's cash and valuables were confiscated by Public Security Bureau agents who said they were enforcing a new ban on foreign religious activities in China.
The leader of the religious group, the Rev. Dennis Balcombe, said today by telephone from Hong Kong, where his Revival Christian Church is based, that he feared that a new pressure campaign against the underground church movement in China had begun.
"This is going to look bad internationally," Mr. Balcombe said. 
"It's like going back to the days of Mao."
The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin, today defended the actions of the Public Security agents, saying the foreigners had "conducted illegal religious activities" during their stay in China and were released after they acknowledged their guilt. 
A spokesman for the United States Embassy in Beijing said today that the detentions were being "discussed" with the Foreign Ministry.
"We are concerned about the failure to properly inform the U.S. 
Embassy about the detention and release of three U.S. citizens," the spokesman said.
The incident is likely to complicate China's effort to demonstrate progress toward improving its human rights record this spring before President Clinton's decision whether to renew China's favorable trade and tariff privileges in the United States.
A key requirement in Mr. Clinton's May 1993 executive order on China is the release of Chinese detained for nonviolent expression of their political or religious beliefs. 
Mr. Balcombe said that while the foreign participants at the prayer meeting were released, the Chinese hosts were still being held.
 
Crackdown Is Seen
Robin Munro, a Hong Kong representative of Asia Watch, the New York-based human rights group, asserted that there had been an "intensive crackdown on religion in the provinces of China" and that in some cases, the local police are using the "cover" of enforcement to "extort money" from unofficial church organizers.
Religious activity in China is permitted only in state-sponsored churches, which many Christians reject as organs of the Communist Party.
New regulations on religious activities went into effect Jan. 
31 under an order signed by Prime Minister Li Peng. 
They forbid foreigners to set up religious organizations in China or cultivate disciples, the New China News Agency reported on Feb. 
5. The arrests of both foreign and Chinese participants occurred after a Christian dinner and prayer meeting of about 90 people during the traditional Chinese New Year celebrations on Feb. 
9 and 10 in the central China province of Henan.
Mr. Balcombe said in an interview that "several dozen" Public Security Bureau agents burst into the house where his group was staying in the Tong Zhuang village area of Fang Cheng county at 3 A.M. last Friday.
"They dealt with us quite crudely," he said. 
"They told us we had broken the regulations on religious activity and wanted to take us back to the Public Security Bureau for interrogation."
He said all the valuables of the foreign and Chinese Christians -- including video cameras, a portable computer, cameras, a portable cassette player and more than $5,000 in cash -- had been gathered and ultimately confiscated by the authorities.
 
Three-Day Interrogation
After three days of interrogation, he said, the group agreed to sign a statement that they had come to Henan province to visit Christian friends and that they had happened on a New Year's Christian meeting, at which they "gave out a few innocent pamphlets about the Bible and prayer."
Mr. Balcombe and his two American colleagues, Paul Star and Daughin Chan, were accompanied by two Indonesians and two non-American Hong Kong residents. 
Mr. Balcombe said he and the other Americans had been deported from the Zheng Zhou Airport, while those from Indonesia and Hong Kong had been stripped of all their money and released.
