
The one time this spring that there was actually enough water in the Yellow River to flow all the way to its mouth on the Bohai Sea, the peasants in this village of brick and mud homes were not allowed to use it.
Just a month away from the summer wheat harvest, the farmers here were forced to stand by as hundreds of millions of gallons of water flowed past their thirsty crops to a state-run oil field downstream at Dongying. 
The oil company's directors had pleaded to Communist Party officials in Beijing that without the water they would be forced to shut down crucial pumping operations.
Tempers flared and earthy epithets flew when the peasants discovered that guards had been stationed at the valves to their fields.
"All this water started flowing but we were told it was restricted for use only by the oil company and we were not allowed to use it," said Li Lixing, a 28-year-old farmer in the village, where almost everyone is named Li and whose residents have farmed the banks of the Yellow River for centuries. 
"We had to go at night and secretly take some for our crops," Mr. Li said, shaking his head and concluding, "The life of a peasant is pretty pitiful."
What happened along the lower reaches of the Yellow River this spring was another portent of China's developing water crisis. 
And the anxiety that has seized this farming village is the anxiety of 120 million Chinese whose lives, agriculture and industry depend on the Yellow River. 
They want to know: Will there be enough water?
The answer is probably no, say Chinese and Western water experts, unless China undertakes extensive conservation measures and builds some of the largest dam and aqueduct projects ever conceived, requiring the dislocation of hundreds of thousands of Chinese at tremendous cost to the economy.
Indeed, the key to the future of the Yellow River may be the Yangtze River, whose virtually inexhaustible flow has prompted Chinese leaders to consider building mammoth waterworks to divert a part of its volume to northern China. 
These waterworks would be even larger and more costly than the Three Gorges Dam, the world's largest hydroelectric project, which is now under construction on the lower Yangtze.
"These are the world's largest engineering schemes," said Pieter Bottelier, the World Bank's resident director in China. 
"Even if they build a series of dams and reservoirs on the Yellow River, they will still have to do the south-to-north water diversion scheme. 
That is the judgment of our engineers."
Until then, the Yellow River basin and the broad, northern plain of China face a growing water shortage as economic growth, a surging population and the contamination of water supplies combine to squeeze the country's available water resources.
Known as the cradle of Chinese civilization and also as "China's Sorrow" for the millions it has killed in floods, the Yellow River has gone dry in its lower reaches for an average of 70 days a year in each of the last 10 years. 
In 1995, the dry period stretched to 122 days, as water users all along its course diverted its flow for some of the most extensive irrigation networks ever built.
And so, this spring, the oil company officials at Dongying sent their urgent appeal to Beijing, warning that without a guaranteed water supply, the oil field -- critical to China's energy needs -- might have to shut down.
The Government declared a state of emergency to force farmers and factories along a 400-mile stretch of the river in Henan and Shandong provinces to close sluice gates so the water, released by the upstream dam at Sanmenxia, would reach Dongying, the last stop on the Yellow River's course to the sea.
The oil field got the water, but the crisis continues.
More than 100 large Chinese cities, but particularly those in northern China, have acute water supply problems and only 6 cities can meet safe drinking water standards due to growing pollution of water sources from untreated sewage, industrial waste and agricultural chemicals.
This year, Shanxi province, China's coal-producing center, is so parched that drinking water is being rationed and most people in Taiyuan, the capital, get nothing when they turn on the taps in their homes.
In China's arid northwest, peasants travel up to 10 miles a day under back-breaking conditions to secure their daily water supplies.
Even in Beijing, the water demands of the luxurious new hotels and office buildings have so overstressed supplies that farmers in the broad agricultural belt outside the city have been cut off from traditional water sources. 
The capital is rapidly outgrowing the two small reservoirs that serve it and the city is expected to enter a period of serious shortfall within a decade.
Chinese Government scientists now predict that demand for Yellow River water will outstrip available supplies by 250 billion cubic feet in the year 2000. 
A World Bank assessment says the shortage could reach 280 billion to 425 billion cubic feet, or about 20 percent of the river's flow.
"The current level of water supply cannot hope to meet the demands of the provinces," said Huang Ziqiang, a senior engineer at the Yellow River Conservancy Commission in Zhengzhou. 
"If the eight provinces along the river got everything they wanted, they would want a total of 92 trillion cubic feet by the year 2000, but the total water resources of the river are only 71 trillion, so that is a big difference."
 
Erratic Resource
Plenty of Water At Wrong Times
At first it seems counterintuitive that China could be running short of water. 
Its geography has created dozens of mighty rivers that form in the western part of the country high on the Qinghai-Tibetan plateau. 
They cascade down from two-mile heights through spectacular gorges before emerging onto alluvial plains in the east. 
Their scenes of violence and beauty have inspired Chinese poets and artists over two millennia.
China ranks sixth in the world in total water resources, but the average Chinese uses less than a quarter of the world's per capita consumption.
The core of the problem is the seasonal nature of China's rainfall and the lack of control over its rivers as they run to the sea, sometimes in devastating floods. 
Beijing gets more annual rainfall than Paris, Berlin or even London, but most of it falls during an eight-week period in summer.
"China has abundant water resources, but it is often found in the wrong place at the wrong time, so we have shortages," said Chen Chuanyou, a leading water and irrigation expert at the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Li Zunyao, 73, one of the oldest farmers in Litingzhuang, which means "village of Li households," complained, "It seems that when you don't need the water, like in winter, there is plenty of it, and when you really need it for planting crops in the spring, there is never enough."
 
'China's Sorrow'
Managing Control Of the Yellow River
Because it is the dominant water system in northern China, the Yellow River is the key to the future of the region, where industrial and mining output are expected to double the demand for water over the next five years.
From its headwaters, the Yellow River travels 3,000 miles to the sea. 
In its upper reaches, its waters are crystal clear. 
It is only when it makes a long serpentine loop through Inner Mongolia and around the loess plateau that the river becomes the muddiest in the world, gathering the "yellow earth" at sediment concentrations 10 to 30 times as dense as in the Mississippi River, itself often called the Big Muddy.
"In some places, the river resembles more a flowing mudslide than a river," said Michel Oksenberg, a China specialist at Stanford University.
There is now no longer any dispute that within five years demand for Yellow River water will be well beyond its capacity to deliver it, leading to what the World Bank terms "severe crop stress" in the vast farmlands the river now supports.
In part, the problem is management.
The river is so choked with mud that roughly a third of its annual flow is used each year to "flush" the mud downstream.
The rest is parceled out by a series of dams under a water management plan that is chaotic at the best of times.
"Fundamentally, the Yellow River is out of control from an overall planning standpoint," said Arthur N. Holcombe, director of the United Nations Development Fund in Beijing.
Chinese officials in charge of the river seem to agree.
"The management of our water supply is very poor," said Wu Zhiyao, the chief engineer of the Yellow River Conservancy Commission in Zhengzhou. 
"So many cities and industries along the river are greedy for water and they take more than they need without any regard to the people downstream."
In theory, he added, the commission has the authority to manage the Yellow River's water, but in reality, provincial leaders can flout any water management plan until Beijing intervenes to sort out water priorities, as it did this spring at Dongying.
After the Three Gorges project, the second largest dam project under way in China is the Xiaolangdi Dam, which has received little notice. 
But its construction will force the relocation of 400,000 peasants by the time it is completed in 2002. 
The $3 billion dam is being built with the help of a $500 million World Bank loan and will be designed to protect the lower reaches of the Yellow River valley from the hypothetical flood that occurs every 1,000 years and could kill a million Chinese.
Indeed, China's prime concern in planning a series of new dams costing a total of $12 billion to $15 billion on the Yellow River is flood control.
"The Yellow River is very dangerous when it comes out of the mountains and onto the open plain," said Mr. Bottelier, the head of the World Bank mission in Beijing. 
"It is always a threat to break out of its levies."
 
Diversion Project
Enormous Plan To Tap the Yangtze
Even if the Yellow River's water were used with maximal efficiency, it could not meet the demands of expanding irrigation and industry.
This spring, Government scientists and engineers are deliberating over an enormous water diversion plan that would tap central China's Yangtze River at five points and convey the water north through huge tunnels and aqueducts that would bore through mountains and traverse plains.
The proposed diversion has prompted a major debate among China's scientists and significant opposition from those who favor conservation over massive engineering projects.
"There is lots of internal opposition, more than that against the Three Gorges Dam," said Vaclav Smil, a scientist at the University of Manitoba who studies China's environmental problems.
"But I think they will go ahead with these schemes," Mr. Smil said, "because to them it will be the simpler solution to increase the supply of water rather than manage the supply through conservation. 
That is the typical Communist Party solution."
The Yangtze, with 15 times the flow of the Yellow River, "has virtually limitless water resources," said Mr. Bottelier of the World Bank, and may be the only long-term solution to north China's water shortage.
Although the cost of these water diversion plans is still being calculated, together they far exceed the estimated $17 billion cost of the Three Gorges Dam.
"I think they will make their decision this year," said Mr. Wu, the chief engineer of the Yellow River Conservancy Commission. 
"but there is a big debate going on."
Even the peasants in Litingzhuang have heard about the water diversion plans.
"It is said that the future is bright and the Yellow River can be controlled so that when we need the water it will be released and when we don't it will be stored," said Li Zhonghua, 31.
In the meantime, said Li Chengliang, a carpenter who makes horse carts, "Life here is not so good, but it is interesting."
