
Early in January a group of Hong Kong's wealthiest tycoons boarded an Air China flight to Beijing for three days of meetings to promote the territory's interests with some of China's most senior officials. 
The visit reached its climax in a meeting with Li Peng, China's Prime Minister, the man widely regarded as having ordered the 1989 massacre of protesters at Tiananmen Square.
The tycoons assembled in the Pavilion of the Purple Light, one of the ceremonial halls of the old imperial compound in the heart of Beijing. 
Bit by bit the flattery and obsequiousness seeped out.
One member of the delegation asked whether Li's feelings had been hurt by the relentless negative coverage he had received in Hong Kong's free press. 
Another suggested that China buy a television station in Hong Kong so that it could more easily propagandize the people there. 
And another raised eyebrows even among his sycophantic colleagues when he praised Li for his "extraordinary leadership" of China's Communist Party. 
Li himself was taken aback at this. 
"I'm not the leader," Li reminded him. 
"President Jiang Zemin is."
The Union Jack still has 16 or so months to fly on Hong Kong's flagpoles, but many members of the city's elite are hurrying to cozy up to their new colonial master. 
Yet Hong Kong doesn't have to travel to China for that. 
In some respects the master is already there. 
You can find him on the top three floors of the old Bank of China, where China's Communist cadres once hung streaming banners denouncing British colonialism and hailing the glories of Mao Zedong. 
David Tang remembers those days. 
"One of my early memories was how mysterious that building was," says the 41-year-old Tang. 
"And there was a distinct smell. 
There was a Communist smell about it."
Today, Tang wishes he could bottle that smell because, for him, it is the smell of China. 
Tang is selling China, or at least the romance of it, here at the China Club, where nearly 2,000 of Hong Kong's toniest have shelled out $19,500 in membership fees for the privilege of eating fairly ordinary Cantonese food in a Chinese memory palace.
Waiters pad about in black slippers on worn plank floors. 
Dark wood columns are sconced with faintly Art Deco lamps. 
Rotary telephones sit beside old stuffed-leather chairs draped with antimacassars. 
And paintings of Mao cover the walls. 
Mao orating to the masses. 
Mao cheek by jowl with Whitney Houston.
Many of those who live in Hong Kong now were once victims of Maoist persecutions, but Tang, the founding spirit and part owner of the club, doesn't worry about the paradoxes. 
"Mao is an intrinsic part of Chinese history," he says. 
"We are not condoning everything Mao has done. 
I think people ought to be a little more relaxed about these kinds of things."
The transfer of Hong Kong will soon become part of Chinese history, too, and relaxing about Mao, and about China, is the message of the day in some of its inner circles.
"The message of the China Club is to create a new Chinese superiority based on being Chinese, based on being privileged Chinese," says a prominent Hong Kong lawyer. 
"And who are the privileged Hong Kong Chinese?
Those with relations with privileged Chinese. 
This is the new comprador class. 
The China Club is the new symbol."
