
A prominent leader of the Tiananmen Square democracy movement was released today and immediately sent to the United States to seek treatment for hepatitis and a heart ailment.
The dissident, Wang Juntao, was one of five political prisoners with serious medical problems who were the subject of a letter signed by a majority of United States Senators and sent to President Jiang Zemin in February.
[Mr. Wang arrived at Kennedy Airport in New York Saturday and was met by his wife, the Reuters news agency reported.]
The release of Mr. Wang, a 35-year-old physics graduate from Beijing University, may be the first step in a series of releases leading to the June 3 deadline President Clinton has set for China to improve its human rights record or face loss of its trade privileges for $30 billion in annual exports to the United States.
In Hong Kong, John Kamm, an American businessman and human rights advocate, said the release of Mr. Wang was welcome news, but cautioned that other seriously ill political prisoners remained in jail, in particular Mr. Wang's closest colleague, Chen Ziming, and Bao Tong, who was an aide to Zhao Ziyang when he served as Prime Minister.
By sending Mr. Wang out of the country for treatment, the leadership has rid itself of a major figure from the Tiananmen period as China approaches the fifth anniversary of the democracy movement. 
The authorities may also refuse to allow him to return home after treatment.
"It has all the earmarkings of an exile," Mr. Kamm said. 
"But the Chinese Government has not taken a position on whether it will readmit him."
Mr. Wang's mother, Ge Yumei, told the Reuters news agency that Mr. Wang had been taken to the airport, where he was allowed to see his family before he boarded a flight to the United States.
"I am very relieved that the Government has allowed him to be released on medical parole for treatment in the United States," she said.
A short statement in the official New China News Agency said Mr. Wang "has left for medical treatment abroad after the Chinese judicial authorities released him on bail according to law on account of the conditions of his illness."
Mr. Wang was arrested in 1989 and was in detention until he was tried and sentenced to 13 years in prison on Feb. 
12, 1991. 
He and Mr. Chen were co-directors of the Beijing Social and Economic Sciences Research Institute, whose newspaper, Economics Weekly, was a strong advocate for political reform and democracy before the 1989 crackdown.
The two dissidents spent many hours advising the student leaders at Tiananmen Square, and were regarded as voices of moderation during the long standoff leading to the declaration of martial law and the military crackdown on June 4, 1989.
Mr. Wang and Mr. Chen were accused of manipulating the Tiananmen protesters in an attempt to overthrow the Government, a charge they denied during their secret trials.
Mr. Wang's wife, Hou Xiaotian, has been in the United States campaigning for her husband's release while serving as a visiting scholar at Columbia University.
 
--------------------
U.S. Says More Is Needed
WASHINGTON, April 23 (Special to The New York Times) -- Clinton Administration officials said today that they welcomed the release of Wang Juntao but that more needed to be done for China to have its preferred trading status renewed.
"There are other cases very similar to Wang's, and we hope in the future to see other prisoners released in this way," said Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman.
He also said the Administration "expects the Chinese Government to honor his right to return" to his homeland.
