
Opponents of a decisive China trade bill refused to admit defeat today and vowed to step up their lobbying over the weekend. 
But growing signs indicated that barring an unforeseen shift in votes or provocation by Beijing against Taiwan, the measure was edging toward victory.
House Republican leaders expressed confidence that the legislation to grant China permanent normal trading privileges was on track for passage, and they scheduled a vote for Wednesday.
Prospects for approval increased today as supporters outlined details of a bipartisan agreement to monitor Beijing's human rights record, and agreed to fold the monitoring provisions into a single package with the upgraded trade status.
Supporters said the agreement should attract at least 6 Republicans and 10 to 15 Democrats who otherwise would have voted against the trade bill.
"This proposal is a hard-fought compromise that should help us in the House pass permanent trade relations with China," Speaker J. Dennis Hastert said in giving the House Republican leadership's blessing.
Administration officials said publicly that they were still a few votes shy of the 218 needed for passage, but privately they expressed confidence that the goal was well within reach. 
President Clinton and members of his cabinet, including Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, will continue to make calls to wavering lawmakers this weekend, aides said.
The White House announced tonight that it was canceling a short, prime-time television address on China that Mr. Clinton was to give on Sunday night. 
White House officials said Democrats who supported the measure or were undecided had told them a speech now would come too late to influence any lawmakers and would only put additional strains on House Democrats.
Two-thirds of the 211 House Democrats are expected to oppose the bill, leaving its passage in the hands of Republicans, who are expected to deliver about 150 votes in favor.
If Mr. Clinton had delivered his speech on Sunday, it would have put overwhelming pressure on the House Democratic leader, Richard A. Gephardt, to deliver a rebuttal.
Since Mr. Gephardt announced his opposition a month ago, he has studiously played a behind-the-scenes role, leaving the public lobbying job to the No. 2 House Democrat, David E. Bonior of Michigan. 
"It's a division of labor that's worked," said Peggy Taylor, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s chief Washington lobbyist.
Mr. Gephardt fears that taking a more aggressive stance would worsen tensions among Democrats, and threaten his goal of reclaiming the House this fall and becoming speaker.
But in recent days, Mr. Gephardt has quietly stepped up his activity, in part because more members are seeking him out before the vote next week. 
Mr. Gephardt said on National Public Radio today, "I'm going to talk to everybody I can."
When asked if Mr. Gephardt was breaking his pledge not to lobby actively against the measure, Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, a Democratic vote-counter in favor of the bill, said, "No, not yet."
But a prime-time speech by Mr. Clinton would have pushed Mr. Gephardt dangerously close to crossing that line, Democratic aides said.
Supporters say passage would allow American companies to benefit fully from a market-opening agreement connected with China's bid to enter the World Trade Organization.
Labor unions, some religious leaders, environmental groups and veterans' organizations oppose the bill because of China's record on human rights and labor standards, and fears of job losses in the United States.
The ranks of the undecided diminished today. 
Supporters picked up Diana L. DeGette of Colorado, John J. LaFalce of New York, Thomas C. Sawyer of Ohio and Martin T. Meehan of Massachusetts, all Democrats.
Opponents won over Robert E. Andrews of New Jersey, Rod R. Blagojevich of Illinois, Karen McCarthy of Missouri, Peter Deutsch of Florida and Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, all Democrats; and Harold Rogers of Kentucky and Steven C. LaTourette of Ohio, Republicans.
Publicly, most opponents were putting on a brave face today. 
"I don't think either side has a majority, but at this point we're in the lead," said Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California.
But other foes were more fatalistic, especially as business groups promised to ratchet up their advertising campaigns. 
Representative Gene Taylor, a conservative Democrat from Mississippi who opposes the measure, said, "Have you ever seen big money lose?"
