
Sitting in his storefront shop beneath a karaoke bar, surrounded by tall blackboards listing job openings, Fu Xuanrong could be a Government prototype for the new era of worker layoffs, for he embodies the official dream of how redundant workers should cope.
Like tens of millions of other Chinese, Mr. Fu was sent home for good from a state-owned enterprise, in his case two years ago from the bankrupt steel mill that had been this Yangtze River city's biggest employer. 
But instead of languishing on welfare or demonstrating in the streets, Mr. Fu, who is 40, took it on himself to create his own new niche, becoming a sidewalk job-broker.
"I am serving as a bridge to the new economy," said the genial Mr. Fu, revealing, with his politically correct choice of words, that he has political wits, too.
"What I am doing is a good example of China's economic reforms: It serves the people, it helps the whole world economy and it also shows the correctness of Deng Xiaoping Theory," he said, referring to the mix of capitalism with state planning that was fostered by the late leader and has been declared official gospel.
Mr. Fu's business is enjoying modest success, but a look through the scores of jobs he has to offer suggests why China still faces a formidable employment problem.
"Bookstore sales clerk, under age 30, hours 8 to 6, pay $36 a month" reads one typical listing. 
"Restaurant busboy/dishwasher, $30 a month plus room and board," reads another.
Other examples include "Garment-market salesperson, $54 a month plus free lunch," and "Casual labor, $36 a month plus per-load fees."
Yes, the wages do tend to be rather low, Mr. Fu allowed. 
"There are so many laid-off workers that they are driving the price down," he said.
He insisted that most of the spots will be taken within a few weeks, although he did admit that the one offering $24 a month for night-shift workers in the street market may be too unappealing to attract anyone.
Since the pace of layoffs began to accelerate nationwide last fall, when the Government pledged to wring out state-owned industries once and for all, a steady propaganda campaign has urged former factory workers who cannot create their own work, like Mr. Fu, to swallow their pride and move into "service" jobs. 
In practice, that usually means relatively menial positions that have often been filled by poor migrants from the countryside.
Beijing and other large cities around the country have even issued new regulations banning rural migrants from all but the most laborious occupations, hoping to force some of them to return home and increase opportunities for registered city residents.
Some former state workers are, of course, landing new jobs in the expanding national economy. 
But many jobs in the service sector that is supposed to absorb the unemployed involve onerous work and wages that appall one-time factory workers used to receiving more like $80 to $100 a month plus housing, health and pension benefits -- and, perhaps more important, thought of themselves as proud standard-bearers of a people's republic.
"Workers are not so willing to pick up some kinds of jobs," lamented Deputy Prime Minister Wu Banguo in a recent interview in Beijing. 
"We have to readjust their mentality toward certain kinds of jobs."
Here in Yichang, everyone seems to have a few unemployed relatives. 
This city of one million is in a curious economic state: As the nearest city to the construction site of the giant Three Gorges Dam, it is enjoying something of a boom, with new banks and government offices and apartment blocks rising.
The boom appears to be thinly spread, though, overlaying the rot of the state-owned industries that used to dominate Yichang. 
Many residents here say they have felt little direct benefit from the billions of dollars poured into the dam.
The August 1 Iron and Steel Works, where Mr. Fu worked, ceased operations entirely in early 1997, laying off its last 4,000 workers. 
In January, when their promised monthly survival stipend was delayed, hundreds of former workers blocked a busy street in protest. 
The payments resumed, a steady drain on public coffers.
Today the giant steel works -- named after the founding day of the People's Liberation Army in 1927 -- is an unguarded, overgrown estate of silent industrial hulks and crumbling apartment blocks in which hundreds of former workers continue to live for free.
One former steelworker, a man in his early 40's who sat outside on a stool in this desolate tableau, said he was willing to take any work but had run up against a strong bias toward younger hires. 
He said his wife had taken up selling vegetables and made about $36 a month. 
When that is added to his $20 monthly stipend from the mill, they are able to eat, he said, but he despaired of the $120 they needed for school fees and books so their boy could enter the junior high school, which is ostensibly free.
As for Mr. Fu, he had first displayed his flair for enterprise when, after his layoff, he sought permission from various Government departments to set up his employment broker service. 
Pushing every political button he could, he named his operation the Yichang City Straits Information Service Center -- that is "straits" as in Taiwan straits, because "Taiwan is an inseparable part of China," he said, and "I always have Taiwan in my heart."
The local district labor office insisted on a piece of the action and requires him to pay $48 a month, he said.
Mr. Fu has supplemented the employment service with apartment listings and a matchmaking service: hopeful men and women each pay him $18 for a referral, and if the couple does not hit it off, they each get $12 back. 
He says he has brought together 15 happy couples over the last year, though he is not sure if any actually got married.
Mr. Fu said that over all he is clearing about $120 a month, a bit more than he had earned at the steel mill. 
His wife, who was also laid off from the mill, is also making some extra money making and selling birthday cakes.
Despite their success in private business, the two of them continue to receive the steel mill's $20 monthly living stipend.
"This is the superiority of socialism!"
Mr. Fu said with a hearty laugh.
