
The Government today announced a 15 percent increase in the military budget for this year, adding to a series of increases in military spending that is alarming neighboring countries.
Although China no longer faces a major threat on its borders, its military budget is almost double the figure for 1988. 
Other Asian countries fear that China is trying to intimidate its neighbors and resolve longstanding boundary disputes in its favor. 
More fundamentally, some diplomats suggest, China is trying to fill a vacuum in the Pacific after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the withdrawal of United States forces from the Philippines.
Chinese officials made no attempt today to justify the increase in military spending. 
But on Monday, Prime Minister Li Peng told the National People's Congress that China needed to turn the three-million-member army into "the best armed forces that China's conditions permit."
Without citing any threats, Mr. Li said the army must "constantly increase its combat effectiveness and defense capabilities under modern warfare."
The spending figures were included in a budget speech today by Finance Minister Liu Zhongli to the congress, a rubber-stamp parliament that is meeting in its annual session. 
Mr. Liu said the military budget was 42.5 billion yuan, or $7.4 billion. 
That compares with military budgets of 37 billion yuan last year and 21.5 billion yuan in 1988.
Military spending increased even though Mr. Liu released figures indicating that by Western accounting methods the budget deficit grew to $19.8 billion, or 27 percent of revenues last year. 
Other areas like education, culture and health care increased much less than military spending.
In fact, the publicly announced military budget includes just half of all military spending, experts say. 
It does not include money spent on acquiring new equipment, on weapons research or on relocating and supporting retired officers. 
Those amounts are disguised in other areas of the budget. 
In addition, the military has other substantial sources of income, including arms exports and the sales of the refrigerators, radios, clocks and other civilian items made by military-owned factories.
Even so, total military spending probably accounts just only a bit more than 3 percent of the gross national product, a smaller share than in many other countries. 
Other Asian countries are nervous largely because China has boundary disputes with at least seven neighbors and has lately been aggressive in pressing its claims.
Diplomats and other military experts say among the improved weapons that China is building or obtaining from Russia or other countries are fighter planes, surface-to-air missiles, destroyers, frigates, tanks and radar equipment. 
Chinese documents also say the country will acquire an aircraft carrier.
Distressed by suggestions abroad that China is becoming a threat, officials in Beijing have mounted a vigorous counteroffensive. 
"Recently, some people in Western countries have deliberately spread slanderous rumors that China is building up its national defense to a level 'seemingly beyond a capability for defense,' " the official New China News Agency complained a few weeks ago.
Mr. Li referred to such analyses in a meeting last month with former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and added, "All these fabricated rumors and absurd tales are totally ridiculous."
The New China News Agency asserted last week that critics of increased military spending here were "simply unhappy that there is no chaos in Asia, and they are trying to drive wedges among the Asian nations."
One Chinese official cited inflation as a factor in the rising military spending. 
But according to official statistics, retail prices rose less than 7 percent last year, and they have increased 32 percent since 1988, the same period in which the military budget has increased 98 percent.
Sympathetic diplomats, usually from countries that are not adjacent to China, also say it is natural for a country to increase its military spending as its overall economy grows.
