
Sooner or later someone was going to discover a way to make money on the Chinese craze for America. 
Now it looks as if someone has -- perhaps at the expense of thousands of naive Chinese.
All across the country, from the ice-glazed terrain of Harbin in the north to this moneyed metropolis in the south, Chinese people are talking about the chance to buy a "piece of America."
"I want to be a landowner in America!" said Bi Fei, a young financier who carries a cellular telephone and dashes around from luxury hotel to fancy restaurant. 
"How many Chinese people can say that they own American land?"
Driven by a belief that possessing land in the United States gives the owner the right to inspect the property -- and therefore obtain that sorely wanted visa -- tens of thousands of Chinese are rushing to buy tiny bits of America.
 
A $1,700 Gimmick
In the United States, a "Deed of Land to the United States of America" is a deed to a square inch of terrain in each of the 50 states. 
It sells for $49.95 as a novelty gift, like a pet rock or canned air.
But in China, the deed represents a dream, and prices are going berserk. 
In Guangzhou, the price this month was $468, in Beijing $700. 
In Shanghai, the price once hit $1,700.
While the novelty was intended for sale primarily in the United States, 100,000 Chinese have purchased the deeds since they arrived on the market in China last November. 
That is twice as many as bought the deeds in the United States, where they have been available for more than a year.
The mania reflects the infatuation with most things American. 
But what really captures the Chinese imagination is the prospect that as American landowners, they will be allowed to visit their property. 
This is coupled with the fear that, as with real estate in China, there is not much around.
 
An Inch Here, an Inch There
In fact there is plenty, according to American Acres Inc., which sells the product in the United States. 
The company, which says it has purchased an acre in each of the states, divided its holdings into 6,272,640 shares, one for each square inch. 
Three of the properties are in Saint Lawrence County, N.Y.; Danbury, Conn., and Oldmans Township, N.J.
About 250,000 deeds have been sold around the world, with China by far the largest market.
In Guangzhou, where enough people have hidden bank accounts that they can begin to appreciate the concept of buying novelties, a few business executives are thinking about the deeds as a collector's item or a speculative stock.
But for many Chinese the land offers a remote possibility: the chance to clinch that visa to America. 
Unfortunately, the Chinese are mistaken.
United States Embassy and consular officials deny that a deed will help obtain a visa. 
The calls and the questions, however, are still coming in.
The fine print is in English, and many buyers ignore it.
In a dilapidated Guangzhou office, a middle-aged engineer tells how he was sadly disappointed when the United States Consulate told him his property would not win him a visa.
 
The Fine Print
"What we bought is not a piece of land at all," he complained. 
"What we have is just a piece of paper. 
We can't even resell the land on our own. 
The only thing we can resell are the pieces of paper."
The engineer said his company had purchased several hundred shares in the hope of reselling them at a profit. 
But after discovering that the deeds do not help to get a visa, the company decided to drop its plans and absorb the loss.
In fact, the deed states that owners shall not resell it as a security, but a secondary market has sprouted anyway in several cities. 
Many of the people who buy the deeds, even distributors who buy in bulk, cannot read English and seem to have little idea what they are buying.
 
The Real Estate 'Market'
"The sellers tell us to buy now, when the price of land in America is low, and then sell later, when the economy and the real estate market rises," said a Chinese reporter who covers business and the economy.
The main distributor in China is the Haiwang Group, an influential company based in Shenzhen, next to Hong Kong. 
Haiwang plans to arrange for new property owners to visit the United States to "inspect" their land, a marketing strategy that seems to have contributed to the confusion over visas.
Haiwang representatives refused to comment when reached by phone in Shenzhen. 
"I'm sorry, I can't answer your questions," said a staff member who answered the phone and would not give his name. 
"Our officials are on vacation. 
They cannot be contacted."
Scott Moger, the president of American Acres, which is based in New York, said the marketing in China was handled by Haiwang. 
He said he was concerned that buyers may be misinformed, and he added that he had given interviews to the BBC and Voice of America, which broadcast to China, explaining that the deeds are novelties rather than investments.
"I know nothing about China," Mr. Moger said in a telephone interview. 
"We sell it at one price. 
The subdistributors seem to be trying to mark it up."
