
China's Securities Regulatory Commission has ordered a halt to all new share listings in an effort to brake steep drops in the value of issues on the nation's two stock exchanges.
The decision, announced late Friday as the markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen were closing at sharply lower levels, barred new listings for the rest of the year and left open the possibility that new listings would be suspended next year, as well.
Using language meant to calm millions of first-time Chinese investors who evidently went into the market believing that stock prices could only go up, the securities commission said through the official New China News Agency that the halt to new issues was simply another step in "paving the way for a healthy development of the stock markets."
 
Authorities Brake Growth
The plunge in the two stock markets has been linked by analysts to the Government's recent tight-money policies, intended to control inflation and slow what has been the world's fastest-growing major economy.
Many foreign investors who were once infatuated with the Chinese markets have pulled out, frustrated by the refusal of companies to provide even the most basic information about their performance. 
Some investors have turned to Chinese shares listed on exchanges in Hong Kong and New York, where the issuers are subject to more stringent reporting rules.
The Chinese Government has nonetheless kept trying to woo foreigners into this country's stock markets, which are of great symbolic importance in efforts to prove the viability of what is being called a "socialist market economy."
The New China News Agency dispatch said, "Several important reform measures aimed at establishing a socialist market economy have been carried out smoothly."
Then it added, "Problems with the stock markets will gradually be solved."
Despite this calming language, trading in Shanghai in what are called A shares -- those available only to Chinese investors -- fell by 2.19 percent on Friday, reaching a record low. 
The Shanghai exchange, which is far larger than its rival exchange in the southern city of Shenzhen, is down 80 percent since its peak in February 1993, and most of that plunge has occurred in the last three months.
Analysts said the Shanghai exchange was likely to continue falling unless the Government took even more dramatic action to restore confidence in the country's three-year-old stock exchanges.
The market in Shenzhen, a booming city just across the border from Hong Kong, was also floundering near record-low levels on Friday in anemic trading for both class A and class B shares -- those open only to foreign investors.
 
Plans Perhaps in Limbo
Yet as the Government was suspending new listings on Friday, the chairman of the Securities Regulatory Commission, Liu Hongru, was announcing plans to issue $1 billion worth of new class B shares for foreign buyers. 
This will now presumably have to wait until after the listings ban is lifted.
Mr. Liu gave no timetable for rolling out the new class B shares, a category of stock first offered in 1992 to attract foreign capital. 
The shares are denominated in Chinese yuan but sold for the equivalent amount in United States or Hong Kong dollars. 
So far, 42 Chinese companies have issued class B shares worth nearly $350 million.
The press agency's report said the decision to halt new listings on the exchanges came during a meeting of Government and market officials, who had decided that "the country's stock exchanges are in a stage of periodic lull."
The halt was one of several measures meant to restore some confidence in the Chinese markets. 
The Securities Regulatory Commission said it was also searching for ways to develop domestic investment funds and to bring foreign investors into the market for class A shares.
