
President Jiang Zemin ordered China's military to relinquish its sprawling multibillion-dollar commercial empire, saying it is the only way to combat an epidemic of smuggling, which the army dominates, the state news media reported today.
Addressing an extraordinary meeting of top military commanders, Mr. Jiang called on the armed forces to regain their "purity" in order to regain public confidence and to safeguard the nation's long-term stabilityI.
Yet business -- and smuggling -- are so entrenched in the army that separating the military from its commerce could take years.
The announcement, broadcast nationally this evening on China Central Television, offered scant clues about whether Mr. Jiang has the political will or the support from military leaders to carry out such an ambitious undertaking.
Most remarkable, perhaps, was his indirect admission of the degree of lawlessness that exists in the army. 
Never before in 49 years of Communist Party rule has the military been so publicly questioned, suggesting that Mr. Jiang may be serious about deep-seated change.
"The army and armed police forces must earnestly carry out checks on all kinds of commercial companies set up by subsidiary units, and without exception from today must not engage in their operation," said Mr. Jiang, looking somber in a pea-green Mao suit at an anti-smuggling conference convened Monday and Tuesday in Beijing.
In the television broadcast, dozens of military leaders were shown earnestly taking notes. 
As chairman of the Communist Party's Central Military Commission, Mr. Jiang is China's Commander in Chief. 
Yet the army wields wide power, and it is unlikely that he would make such a bold pronouncement without the support of top generals.
All of the army's senior leaders attended the conference. 
Seated beside the President were Gen. Zhang Wannian and Gen. Chi Haotian, vice chairmen of the Central Military Commission. 
Four other generals, Fu Quanyou, Yu Yongbo, Wang Ke and Wang Ruilin, also appeared.
The vast array of businesses the army owns or partly controls ranges from commercial airlines to pharmaceutical companies and from vegetable growers to arms dealers.
Army-related businesses earn billions of dollars each year, though they are so numerous and disparate that virtually no one inside or out of China can accurately estimate their full scope.
Although China's military often appears a stern-faced monolith to outsiders, its money-making role is a hodgepodge of ventures, essentially built by military officers taking advantage of their authority in the political apparatus to build lucrative operations.
The army's role in smuggling appears to have grown in tandem with the nation's stunning economic growth over the last 20 years. 
Although the true volume of goods smuggled into China cannot be measured, officials conservatively estimate that it has reached tens of billions of dollars each year.
More than $10 billion a year in tax revenue is lost to smuggling, the New China News Agency reported. 
Chinese Customs, alternatively seen as corrupt and unable to stand up to military smugglers, confiscated just $330 million of smuggled goods in the first five months of this year.
The main contraband is not drugs or illegal arms, but rather high-end goods that face such onerous import duties that customers are willing to pay handsomely for an army transport that escapes scrutiny at a border.
Mr. Jiang, echoing comments he made last week at the opening of a broad anti-smuggling campaign, said that all party and Government offices and law enforcement agencies would also be required to cut ties with companies they own. 
That will be a gargantuan task.
When any national campaign begins, several political elements may be at work. 
Yet decison-making in China is so opaque that it is difficult to know if the driving force behind the anti-smuggling campaign is Mr. Jiang's desire to flex his muscles over the military, or to buttress his reputation as a corruption fighter.
There may also be financial concerns. 
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji has argued that the drastic drop in tax collection must be reversed at a time when the Government is undertaking a huge spending program to spur economic growth.
 
--------------------
House Renews Trade Status
WASHINGTON, July 22 (Reuters) -- By a 264-166 vote, the House of Representatives endorsed President Clinton's renewal of China's trade status today despite concerns about a huge trade imbalance and China's human rights record. 
The status grants Chinese products the same tariffs allowed other countries.
      
