
China is the world's biggest source for technology used by third-world nations building ballistic missiles, chemical weapons or nuclear bombs, according to a new report by the Central Intelligence Agency.
The unclassified, biannual report submitted to Congress and made public this week briefly summarizes the C.I.A.'s efforts to keep track of the spread of weapons of mass destruction -- nuclear, chemical and biological weapons as well as powerful missiles to deliver them.
It listed China and Russia as the two biggest exporters of these kinds of technology, with India, Iran, Pakistan and Syria as the most eager customers.
"The Chinese provided a tremendous variety of assistance to both Iran's and Pakistan's ballistic missile programs," the six-page report said. 
"China was also the primary source of nuclear-related equipment and technology to Pakistan and a key supplier to Iran."
A group of analysts at the C.I.A.'s Nonproliferation Center, which includes experts from inside and outside the agency, tracks the spread of weapons and weapons technology through information gathered by eavesdropping, satellite surveillance, spies and other sources.
Its previously published work suggests that the Middle East and South Asia have become buyers' markets for ballistic missiles, and that free-trade zones plied by millions of container vessels make enforcing laws and international treaties against the weapons trade exceedingly difficult.
Iran is making "unrelenting" efforts to buy the technology to make sophisticated ballistic missiles and chemical weapons, and efforts by the United States to stop it have not succeeded, the report said. 
In 1996, China and Russia were Iran's main sources for missile technology, while China and India provided most of the chemical warfare equipment, the report said.
"Pakistan was very aggressive in seeking out equipment, material, and technology for its nuclear weapons program, with China as its principal supplier," the report said.
India, which has fought three wars with Pakistan over the past 50 years, also sought technology for nuclear warheads and ballistic missile "from a variety of sources," the report said.
In the Middle East, the C.I.A. said, Egypt and Syria both are developing the technology to build medium-range ballistic missiles with help from Iran, North Korea and Russia. 
Libya is still trying to import ballistic missile materials from Europe, Russia and Asia, despite a United Nations embargo, the agency said.
And Iraq, under tight surveillance from the United States and the United Nations, was not "observed" buying new sophisticated weapons, the agency said.
      
