
China's leaders have told the United States that they are willing to make further gestures on human rights to build more constructive relations. 
But they have asked for understanding on what they see as the need to clamp down on dissent and preserve "social stabilityI."
The importance of President Clinton's decision whether to extend China's preferred trading status, a decision that is expected next week, has prompted an extensive high-level dialogue, including the dispatch of a secret envoy from the White House.
According to a senior State Department official, the envoy, Michael H. Armacost, a former Ambassador to Japan and Under Secretary of State, was recruited for the mission by Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
The official said Mr. Armacost, in his talks with Chinese leaders, had reviewed "in painstaking detail" the seven areas in which Washington insists that Beijing improve its record on rights. 
He made progress in several areas, the official said, and Washington expects other gestures soon.
In addition to Mr. Armacost, other American experts on China have had conversations with Chinese leaders. 
These experts and diplomats here say the Chinese expressed deep concern about social unrest rising from widespread unemployment, inflation and rampant corruption.
Because of these real and perceived threats to stabilityI, China has clamped down on dissent, even as it has taken some steps to meet Washington's demands.
Thus China is pursuing these two goals at once:
*A stronger relationship with the United States, to protect $30 billion in export trade that is an engine of China's growth, and is desperately needed to satisfy the demands of a fast-growing population.
*The preservation of stabilityI at all costs, even if that means confronting Washington over a rights policy that some Chinese say is aimed at undermining Communist rule.
Diplomats say these contradictory goals account for the mixed signals China has been sending.
Prime Minister Li Peng, in remarks this week, urged the White House not to listen to dissidents and rights advocates who say Beijing's mixed record over the past year warrants canceling or restricting China's trade privileges.
"Foreign statesmen will surely make mistakes in their decisions if they base their understanding of China merely on the words or views of a tiny number of Chinese, and ignore the interests and wishes of all other Chinese people," Mr. Li said to Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter's national security adviser. 
Mr. Li's comments were reported by the New China News Agency.
Mr. Li voiced what has become a fundamental appeal from the Chinese leaders, as well as a warning: stable growth in China will contribute to world peace in the next century, and an unstable China could be a disaster for Asian security, the international economy and the environment.
"In the early period of establishing a socialist/market economic structure, it is of strategic importance to maintain social stabilityI," Mr. Li told party officials this week.
 
'Excruciating Dilemma'
Similar messages delivered to emissaries from Washington underscore the hard choices Beijing faces.
"China's leaders face an excruciating dilemma," said David M. Lampton, an American specialist on China who has just completed a week of discussions with party officials. 
"They cannot send a signal of accommodation to the United States without seemingly encouraging dissidents at home, and they cannot stifle dissent at home without further complicating relations with Washington."
Mr. Lampton is the president of the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations, a nonprofit foundation in New York that finances research and exchange programs with China.
On the one hand, China has released on medical parole the "black hands" behind the Tiananmen Square uprising in 1989, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, both of whom were serving 13-year sentences. 
The United States Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, has characterized their release as a "significant" gesture of progress on human rights.
 
Prisoners and More Prisoners
But on the other hand, security forces continue to make arrests anywhere dissent breaks out.
There are still at least 3,000 political prisoners in China, and more are discovered by rights organizations every day. 
Indeed, Human Rights Watch, based in New York, released a list of 500 political prisoners today who it says are still being held from the 1989 uprising.
At the same time, economic reforms begun 15 years ago by Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, are entering a new and decisive stage, pushing hundreds, perhaps thousands of state-owned factories into bankruptcy and forcing others to close. 
Millions of workers are being sent home, and there is no welfare safety net to rescue them.
"For the first time, the reforms are creating losers as well as winners," said Michel Oksenberg, a China expert traveling with Mr. Brzezinski. "The reform process is creating enemies as it never did before, and at the same time they are having to bring down the growth rate and deal with the problems of inflation," said Mr. Oksenberg, president of the East-West Center in Hawaii. 
"These are the reasons for their nervousness."
 
A Few Areas of Progress
As the grievances of millions of workers merge with those of political reformers into a wave of protest and strikes, party leaders have gone into a defensive crouch. 
Still, they continue to make some concessions.
This week, China agreed to begin "technical" discussions with the United States on ending the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts; President Clinton had asked for progress on that issue.
The Foreign Ministry has also responded to an inquiry from Washington about Wei Jingsheng, China's best-known dissident, who was re-arrested in March. 
The ministry said Mr. Wei was under investigation but was not facing "treason" charges, as one news report said this week.
Still, whether China's leaders can control all the forces turned loose by 15 years of economic reform remains an open question.
"The authority of the regime continues to erode," Mr. Oksenberg said in an interview. 
"As that authority erodes, there are more opportunities for testing the limits of the regime's control."
Chinese officials insist they are making steady progress on human rights, but they have told United States diplomats that this progress should not be confused with a willingness to turn lose dissident forces, especially when those forces are a threat to Communist Party rule.
The Politburo's fear of being overturned cannot be underestimated. 
With Mr. Deng's health in serious decline -- he will turn 90 this year -- the next generation of leaders is aggressively guarding its rights of accession.
Since March, when China gave Secretary Christopher a bruising reception, senior leaders have reiterated that they are willing to confront any Administration whose rights policy seems aimed at undermining Beijing politically.
These officials see the State Department's embrace of Mr. Wei, who says the Communist leadership is irredeemably tainted by its past repression, as the beginning of a destabilization campaign.
Mr. Lampton, of the U.S.-China committee, said a meeting in Beijing on Feb. 
27 between Mr. Wei and the State Department's top rights official, John Shattuck, "increased the level of suspicion and the Chinese elite's resolve to take a tough public line during Secretary Christopher's visit."
