
It was an odyssey, he said, that began more than a year ago, when he was forced to leave a coastal village in China for political reasons, and ended two weeks ago when what he hoped would be his boat to freedom ran aground on the Jersey Shore.
In between, he said, was a desperate, often difficult passage that included a prolonged, lonely stay in a humid country in South America and an unpleasant voyage aboard a large, rickety ship with about 200 other Chinese men bobbing through the rough Atlantic Ocean.
"It's been very difficult," said the man, 25, who spoke on the condition that his name not be used. 
"I am lonely."
The man is one of 23 from China who tried to enter the United States illegally on May 30 and are being held by the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service at a detention center here. 
The immigrants' lawyers say that the men will seek political asylum; the immigration service, though, has begun deportation hearings and is moving swiftly.
Information about the 23 men, whose predicament recalls that of the 286 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard the Golden Venture, a smuggling ship that ran aground in Queens in 1993, has been sketchy to this point. 
But today, one of the 23, the 25-year-old man, spoke briefly in an interview at the detention center about why he did what he did, casting some light on the conditions and hardships he and his fellow shipmates may have endured.
During the voyage, the man said, food was scarce. 
Uncertainty, however, was plentiful: uncertainty about whether he would be able to repay the $20,000 to $30,000 debt that his family had incurred to send him to America, whether he would survive the trip, and whether he would be caught and sent back to China, where his life, he said, would be in danger. 
"I was forced to leave China for political reasons," the man said. 
"I am afraid of being captured by the Communist Party."
The immigration service is trying to determine whether his account is genuine or the result of an effort to coach the man to say things that might improve his chances of staying in the United States. 
On Thursday and Friday, the 23 men made brief individual appearances before two immigration judges at deportation hearings to determine whether they should be released on bond. 
The hearings are scheduled to resume in two weeks, when relatives of some of the 23 are expected to offer testimony in support of their release.
One of the 23 Chinese men, Wang Wu Dong, was also aboard the Golden Venture in 1993. 
He failed to win asylum and was deported only months before Congress passed a law in 1996 that would have strengthened his case for asylum.
Today, Mr. Wang spoke briefly during an interview. 
But he politely declined to offer any details, saying only, "I've been through many hardships."
He referred all matters to his lawyers at the Porges law firm in Manhattan. 
He looked disheveled, with unkempt hair and bloodshot eyes.
But one of Mr. Wang's shipmates, the 25-year-old passenger who spoke on the condition of anonymity, did speak cautiously about his situation.
Speaking in Mandarin, the man said that he grew up as one of three sons in the small farming community of Minjiangko, not far from the city of Fuzhou in Fujian Province. 
His father recently retired as a laborer in a shipbuilding factory; his mother, he said, worked on a farm, planting rice and growing loquat, a small orange-like fruit. 
He studied through middle school, then found work, first as a painter, later as a clerk at a sundries store.
A few years ago, the man's older brother left home to go to United States. 
Why he did so was not clear; the man in the detention center said he knew little about his brother's current whereabouts. 
He also declined to elaborate on his own reasons for leaving, saying only that the political explanations would surface during his asylum hearings.
"I am worried about what might happen to me if I go back," he said.
He did say, however, that he was not married and that he was not a practicing Christian or a member of the pro-democracy movement.
He said that his relatives arranged for his trip, paying $20,000 to $30,000 to a smuggling group, and that he left home about one year ago. 
He traveled by plane to South America; it was a long trip.
Earlier reports in the Chinese-language media have said that the men flew to Suriname, in South America. 
The Asbury Park Press reported today that one of the 23 -- a man named Chen Da Xing -- stashed some mementos near the beach at Bay Head where the boat sputtered to a halt. 
These included a pair of pants, a jacket, a razor, a spiral-bound notebook with English phrases, and cigarettes made in Suriname.
The 23 were apparently not the only Chinese men who were in South America, waiting for an opportunity to sneak into the United States, the man from Minjiangko said.
After waiting for what might have been the better part of a year, the men left South America perhaps two or three months ago, boarding a big ship. 
There may have been 200 men, most of whom were from Fujian. 
But the man said he did not recognize a soul from his Minjiangko life, and he often felt lonely.
The voyage was difficult: sleep was but a dream, and food consisted only of rice porridge. 
At some point, the bigger ship discharged a group of about two dozen, who then were transferred to a smaller boat, the Oops II. 
But the Oops II lost its way in heavy fog and ran aground on the night of May 30 near the New Jersey borough of Bay Head. 
The immigrants jumped into the surf and headed toward the Victorian mansions that stood sentinel along the waterfront.
At first, the Immigration and Naturalization Service captured 22 of the men; a 23d was later found wandering around the town, hungry and wet. 
The 23d man also said that there were two other missing passengers who had been hiding; they have yet to be found.
Last Monday, the United States Coast Guard took custody of a freighter that was intercepted about 195 miles east of San Salvador Island in the Bahamas, and the authorities have said it may have been a so-called mother ship used in the Oops II smuggling operation. 
That ship, the Oriental I, reportedly discharged 24 Asian men -- 23 from China and one from Malaysia -- who were picked up by a speedboat and taken to the Bahamas. 
The men were later captured and, like the 23 in Elizabeth, are being detained as illegal immigrants.
Even so, the man from Minjiangko said he hoped that he would be granted asylum. 
"I've suffered a lot," he said. 
"I don't want to go back."
