
As they very publicly send the most outspoken democracy campaigners to prison, China's leaders have also quietly tightened the screws on liberal intellectuals, journalists and publications.
In the last few weeks the Communist Party's powerful Department of Propaganda has closed down an influential book publisher in Beijing and an adventurous newspaper in the southern city of Guangzhou.
It has sent stern warnings to some magazines and newspapers that strayed too far from the prescribed line, forced some editors and writers out of their jobs and halted distribution of several books that delve into political alternatives or embarrassing episodes in the history of Communist rule.
Although some writings and meetings that are relatively free by China's standards continue, the campaign reflects the leadership's concern for stabilityII as it confronts rising unemployment and protests by workers and farmers.
Officials may also be worried about dissent related to the 10th anniversary this June of the violent smashing of pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square and the 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China on Oct. 
1.
In the last year, liberals who want more open discussion of political alternatives have been testing the limits of public discourse. 
But in recent interviews, many scholars, magazine editors and journalists said they now sensed a shrinking of the boundaries.
None of those interviewed said they believed that China was in the throes of an all-out crackdown or a major shift in policy like the one in late 1989 that followed the suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests, when liberals were purged from many institutions.
Since many books, magazines and newspapers touch on sensitive topics these days, the repressive measures to date seem almost arbitrary. 
They have not been mentioned in the press here. 
But word spreads quickly, and the authorities may hope that by setting examples they will induce others to exercise new caution.
"I don't think there will be a general crackdown on liberal intellectuals," said one such scholar, Liu Junning, a political theorist with the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and editor of a journal on political thought. 
"But they may tighten up on publications, making it more difficult for people to get their ideas out."
Some intellectuals interviewed said that in today's China, with burgeoning outlets for publishing, so many intellectuals chafing to explore new ideas and so many eager readers, the Government probably lacked the ability to suppress debate altogether. 
The Internet and electronic mail, for example, have given many Chinese new access to unauthorized writing.
Even before the recent setbacks, writers could not directly discuss multiparty politics or the possibility of ending the Communist Party's monopoly on power. 
Still, the last year has been a relatively loose period, with more books frankly discussing issues like corruption, crime, the effects of different economic strategies and -- in a guarded, theoretical way -- the nature of democracy.
Such books, in turn, have served as the basis for seminars at universities and bookstores. 
Only a small number of those books that the Government sees as most objectionable have been directly curbed.
Many newspapers and magazines around the country have explored similar topics and exposed local corruption and policy failures.
The publications campaign is directed by the party's Department of Propaganda, under the leadership of Ding Guangen, a onetime bridge partner of the late leader Deng Xiaoping who has become President Jiang Zemin's chief ideological enforcer.
A joke that plays on the phonetic elements of Mr. Ding's name has been circulating among intellectuals, who say he has a talent for three things: "ding," which can mean "keeping watch"; "guan," which can mean "closing down," and "gen," which can mean "rooting out."
Perhaps the most far-reaching act was the suspension in early January of operations of one of China's boldest and most influential book publishers pending "rectification" of the staff. 
Two top editors at the company, China Today Publishers, have been ordered to write self-criticisms -- a time-honored Communist technique for forcing wayward individuals to acknowledge ideological errors -- said people familiar with the situation, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
China Today Publishers, based in Beijing and operating under the authority of an information unit of the Communist Party, issued several of last year's most widely discussed books, including "China's Pitfall," a withering analysis of corruption in the dismantling of state enterprises; "Crossed Swords," a strong attack on the remaining opponents of the country's move toward a market economy and looser social control; and "Political China," a collection of essays on political change by scholars and former officials.
In the case of "Political China," which quickly sold out its first printing of 30,000 last fall, the authorities forbade a second printing. 
Other books from the publisher have not been quashed in this manner.
But several books recently issued by other publishers, volumes of essays on politics or memoirs of past ideological battles, have been restricted, usually by barring new printings or distribution or even book reviews.
So far, at least, the suppression of liberal writing is not universal. 
Mr. Liu, the political theorist, edits a journal of political thought called Res Publica that has operated on the edge.
The latest issue of the journal, which has a circulation of 10,000, contains essays exploring the difference between direct democracy, in which top levels of government are elected by the people, and the kind of indirect democracy that the leaders in Beijing say China has. 
Mr. Liu said he had not heard any official complaints.
A number of other small journals and magazines explore once-heretical political and economic ideas, including one called Reading Tour that has just appeared in the southern province of Guangdong.
Its maiden issue includes articles with titles like "Freedom of Thought and Democratic Politics" and "The Loneliness of the Dissident," and an essay by the late anti-Communist philosopher Isaiah Berlin.
But a highbrow Beijing journal called Way, which under its mandate for exploration of the natural and social sciences has carried venturesome articles on politics and society, is under sharp pressure from the authorities, who have told its editors to stick to more scientific subjects or close down, people who have written for the journal say.
In an interview last week, Feng Xiaozhe, the editorial director of Way, which has a monthly circulation of 20,000, would only say: "We have not received any official written complaint from the Department of Propaganda."
In the absence of a formal complaint, he said, the journal will continue its efforts to promote "cross-disciplinary inquiry."
On Saturday more than 40 of the journal's editors, authors and supporters met to discuss the challenge, said one of those who took part in the meeting. 
While the group, including some eminent scientists, endorsed its current direction, the editors said future issues would include more articles related to science. 
Whether that will satisfy the authorities is unclear.
Officials have had special concern about some newspapers in Guangdong Province, which borders Hong Kong. 
It has a more advanced market economy and generally more freewheeling attitude than most of China.
An adventurous weekly, Cultural Times, published under the auspices of the Guangzhou Academy of Social Sciences and distributed in major cities around China, was shut down by the authorities on Dec. 
30.
In December the authorities ordered the dismissal of the chief editor and other senior leaders of another newspaper in Guangzhou, the provincial capital, called the Guangzhou-Hong Kong Information Daily.
A Communist Party circular said the paper, which concentrated on economic news, had interfered with the work of the country by reporting too critically on economic goals, among other issues, the Hong Kong newspaper Ming Pao repported.
A nationally prominent weekly in Guangzhou, Southern Weekend, which has a reputation for writing about ignored social controversies, has also felt the Government's sting. 
The authorities have ordered the paper to discipline some editors and writers and to dismiss a regular columnist who has written about corrupt and incompetent officials, journalists said.
But one of the affected scholars said this week, "We'll be trying in every way possible to keep writing and publishing and discussing."
"The public demand is huge" for new ideas about politics and economics, he said, "and the supply is limited."      
