
With Tibet emerging as a potentially serious obstacle in United States-China relations, Beijing issued a tartly worded attack today on a Congressman who recently traveled to Tibet and accused the Chinese authorities of strangling traditional culture in the Himalayan region.
In a long statement from the New China News Agency, a senior official from Tibet accused the Congressman, Representative Frank R. Wolf, Republican of Virginia, of deliberately trying to stir up trouble and lie about true conditions in Tibet.
"All people with a sense of justice, including the Tibetan people, are enraged by his actions," said the official, Raidi, who heads the local legislature in Tibet and uses one name.
Mr. Wolf, who traveled to Tibet from Aug. 
9 to 13 as a tourist without telling the authorities he was a Congressman, told reporters in Washington last week that he saw evidence of religious persecution and the obliteration of Tibetan culture and language by an influx of Chinese traders and merchants.
In response to those assertions, Mr. Raidi listed a series of statistics to show that Tibet's economy, agricultural output and foreign trade were all growing fast, and he insisted that 46,000 monks and nuns can worship freely.
But he defended the Government's tight control of unauthorized religious activities, which Chinese leaders often suspect of advocating independence for Tibet.
"The reason to crack down on activities by separatists who are acting under cover of religion is to protect the majority of the religious believers and insure that the religious activities are carried out in line with the doctrines," Mr. Raidi said.
"In line with the doctrines," as Mr. Raidi did not have to elaborate, means religious worship that submits to the authority of Communist Party officials, who generally ban any organized activity they themselves do not control.
Today's outburst came as Washington and Beijing prepare for a summit meeting in late October, when President Jiang Zemin travels to the United States to meet President Clinton, and each side is eager to bridge disagreements over human rights and nuclear nonproliferation.
However, concern over conditions in Tibet has been growing in Congress. 
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright recently agreed to name a special coordinator within the State Department to monitor conditions there and to urge China to negotiate with the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibet who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for peacefully campaigning for greater autonomy in his homeland.
Mr. Raidi, reflecting Beijing's frustration at being unable to limit the moral authority of the Dalai Lama, denounced the religious leader as a tool of imperialist forces trying to undermine China.
"He never concerned himself with the real life of the Tibetan people, and did nothing beneficial for Tibet," Mr. Raidi was quoted as saying. 
"The Tibetan people, thus far, are aware of his separatist theory and have long abandoned him."
Over the weekend, the New China News Agency also issued a series of statements quoting scholars who defended China's right to rule Tibet.
One argued that Tibetan culture can coexist alongside Chinese culture just as Eskimo culture can in Alaska, which like Tibet is a spacious and remote area where the culture of a minority population lives under a higher sovereign.
Mr. Wolf, a champion of religious freedom, said he had urged the Clinton Administration to press Mr. Jiang for the release of what human rights organizations estimate to be 700 prisoners of conscience in Tibet. 
He also argued that urgent action was needed to save Tibetan culture from being overwhelmed by Chinese settlers, who he said outnumbered ethnic Tibetans in Lhasa, Tibet's capital, by about 160,000 to 100,000.
Mr. Raidi, in response, argued that Chinese residents account for less than 3 percent of the official population in all of Tibet. 
He did not offer statistics for Lhasa, and it is possible that many Chinese businessmen are counted as temporary residents and do not appear in official tallies, the same as thousands of military personnel stationed there.
In his defense of Chinese rule, Mr. Raidi argued that Tibet had carried out democratic reforms beginning in 1959, the year the Dalai Lama escaped to exile in India after an uprising that might have led to his arrest.
Yet in the 1960's and 1970's, even official Chinese accounts concede, zealous Chinese officials and rogue factions of Red Guards destroyed thousands of temples, banned virtually all religious worship and imprisoned untold thousands of monks and nuns.
At the time, the Government insisted that Tibet was a happy place of progress, much as Mr. Raidi's statement today did. 
Today's statement was also notable for its strong nationalist tone.
"Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, Tibet experienced the most profound changes in its history during the last 40 years, particularly after the democratic reform," Mr. Raidi was quoted as saying.      
