
THE first book in a projected 75-volume series on Chinese culture being published by Yale University Press in New Haven is described by staffers there as an effort to pierce China's other great wall, that of Western neglect for the world's longest-lived culture.
"Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting," which hit book stores last month, provides an overview of pictorial art ranging from cave petroglyphs of sun priests to naturalistic depictions of World War II refugees. 
More than 300 color plates supplement a 354-page text authored by six leading scholars of Chinese art.
It also comes with a $75 price tag, which the Yale University Press director, John Ryden, hopes will not stop potential buyers of the series. 
Much depends on the commercial success of the first volume, not least of which is the continuation of an unprecedented, ambitious collaboration between the nonprofit publishing arm of Yale University and China.
"We're only beginning to take on board the immensity of it," Mr. Ryden said. 
"For too long, China has been a closed book to us in the West. 
Now there is a new willingness from China to open that book."
Indeed, when Chinese President Jiang Zemin came to the United States in late October, he had with him advance copies of "Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting" for President Clinton and Vice President Gore as well as Republican legislative leaders. 
Chinese scholars and publishers are excited as well, hoping it will break through the barrier Chinese authors come up against when shopping books to the West.
"Hopefully, this will make China more understandable," said the vice president of the Chinese International Publishing Group, Huang Youyi. 
A coalition of book and magazine publishers, the group counts among its members the Foreign Languages Press in Beijing, which is publishing the series with Yale.
Gracing a wall in Mr. Ryden's corner office is a brushwork scroll displaying a single Chinese character, that of the dragon. 
A gift during a visit to Beijing, it seems an apt symbol of the task Yale University Press has undertaken. 
No stranger either to art books or multi-volume collections, the Yale press faces what may well be an unprecedented challenge in its century-old history: 75 books in 25 years.
Can it be done?
By comparison, Yale University Press produced 48 volumes of the correspondence of Horace Walpole, starting in 1932 and finishing in 1983. 
A collection of Benjamin Franklin's papers, begun in 1959, has yet to be completed and is expected to top out at 45 books.
Many of the books in the Culture and Civilization of China series will be translations of great works of Chinese literature, some never before published in the West. 
Eight to 10 large-format original books now in the works, on subjects ranging from sculpture to Buddhism, will require the same sort of years-long scholarship and design work as did "Chinese Painting," a $500,000-plus investment for Yale.
An advisor to the series, James C.Y. 
Watt, calls the 25-year timeline unrealistic. 
In a recent interview, Mr. Ryden also called the 75-book total, a projection rather than a firm number. 
Yet he then started to talk about the possibility of producing a second series of volumes, to focus on particular types of Chinese painting and art.
For some, like its executive editor, James Peck, the series is ambitious because it must be: "We need to correct the historical imbalance. 
When you look at how little we know about a culture that goes back so long, then you view this as a modest step toward the kind of knowledge we need."
The project began life in 1985 in far different form and with a different publisher, Random House. 
Mr. Peck and Robert Bernstein, then-Random House chairman, worked out an exclusive joint publishing arrangement with China to produce various non-connected books, including a Chinese-English dictionary.
Mr. Bernstein was ousted from Random House in 1989, and Mr. Peck left shortly afterward. 
That same year, China imposed martial law as its soldiers fired on protesting students at Tiananmen Square. 
Suddenly, the future for a cooperative publishing venture seemed very dim.
Two years later, Mr. Bernstein and Mr. Peck were in Mr. Ryden's office, pitching the concept. 
"China wasn't interested in continuing at Random House," Mr. Ryden said. 
"Their allegiance was with Peck and Bernstein."
While the main idea appealed to Mr. Ryden, the books that Random House had worked on were not as interesting. 
"There were other reference books and children's books," he said. 
"That's not our kind of work."
So the project became transformed, into what will be if completed a comprehensive look at a civilization that took root more than 3,500 years ago. 
"And unlike the rise and fall of the Pharaohs, or Greece of the Golden Age, there has been a continuum," Mr. Ryden said.
Mr. Ryden initially worried that a link with the Chinese Government in the wake of Tiananmen might make Yale University Press appear an apologist in some eyes. 
But the more he thought about it, he said, the more convinced he became that the object of the series, that of explaining China and its culture to the West, was more vital.
"I think and hope that the people who encounter these books will see them as a legitimate effort to understand the people and the mind of China," he said. 
"What we are doing is saying that if you want to understand a people, you have to understand where they are coming from."
Mr. Ryden hastened to add that the Chinese Government has set no restrictions on series content. 
"It does not need or get any kind of seal of approval," he said.
What is in it for China?
For many of its people, both in and out of government, there is said to be a strong feeling that China is misunderstood by the West, which the series would help resolve. 
And then there is another potential benefit.
"An old Chinese proverb says that you can see a mountain better when you look at it from a distance than when you are standing at the top of it," Mr. Huang said. 
"China is very eager to see how Westerners interpret their culture. 
American authors pick up on things that are interesting."
As an example of this, Mr. Huang pointed to one of two introductions to "Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting," written by James Cahill, professor emeritus of art history at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Mr. Cahill wrote that Chinese painting follows different basic rules than its Western counterpart, intended not "to be read illusionistically as windows into another space" but rather as a visual reference to common themes and touchstones of Chinese culture.
For Mr. Huang, 25 years is not an overly ambitious time frame. 
In fact, he would like it completed sooner. 
Nothing less than the posterity of Chinese culture for its own people is at stake, he said.
"With the classical translations, the fact they were written in classical Chinese means fewer people today are able to read it," he explained. 
"The people working as translators now are in their 50's, 60's and 70's. 
In 15 years' time, it will be harder to find translators."
In an interview, Mr. Cahill noted that past scholarship of Chinese painting has focused on a comparatively small art collection at the National Palace Museum in Taiwan. 
"Most of the paintings are going to be unfamiliar, except to specialists in the West," he said. 
"There is quite a lot of new material, especially in the early period. 
A lot of that has been newly discovered."
For scholars like Mr. Watt, the Brooke Russell Astor Senior Curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan, the series is particularly valuable to the Western reader for the combination of Chinese and non-Chinese viewpoints. 
"This joint approach will be very helpful to the Western reader," he said. 
"There is no lack of interest in China in this country. 
The trouble has always been a lack of good books."
Much depends on the reception accorded "Three Thousand Years of Chinese Painting," which is being simultaneously published in France as well as China and the United States. 
Kirkus Reviews has called it "the Janson's of Chinese painting" and it is currently a Book-of-the-Month Club selection. 
But sales, as well as the excitement the book generates with foundations and other would-be donors, can have a tremendous influence on the speed with which the rest of the series is produced. 
That is one reason a book of painting was chosen to be first, as it would be "less exotic" and more marketable to Western tastes.
Three more large-format volumes -- on Chinese archeology, architecture and sculpture -- are scheduled to appear over the next 18 months. 
Mr. Ryden, Yale University Press's director since 1979, agreed the series, if completed, could be the crown jewel of his tenure.
"I spoke at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Oct. 
21 to launch the series," he said. 
"It was a big event, with many senior officials in attendance. 
I told them that our hope with this series is to create a university without walls. 
It is necessary to understand the long and complicated history of this people. 
A lack of understanding is a dangerous thing."
