
One of China's premier nuclear physicists and a designer of the country's first atomic bomb joined 44 other scientists and intellectuals today in calling on China's leaders to lift the "counterrevolutionary" verdict from those who took part in the 1989 pro-democracy movement at Tiananmen Square.
Thousands of Chinese lost their jobs, diplomas or freedom following the military suppression of the Tiananmen demonstrations on the ground that they had taken part in a "counterrevolutionary rebellion."
Adding his name for the first time to the list of intellectuals seeking the re-evaluation was Wang Ganchang, who is now 88. 
He led the elite group of Chinese physicists who developed and tested the explosive assembly and triggering system for the fission bomb that was detonated on Oct. 
14, 1964. 
Since then he has continued to play an influential role in China's scientific institutions and as a senior adviser to the Government.
His official biography says he was "one of the leading scientists responsible for the development of China's nuclear weapons."
In their petition, the intellectuals called on the Communist Party to "release all those who have been imprisoned because of their thoughts, religious beliefs or acts of speech, and boldly end the ignominious tradition of literary inquisitions that has persisted in our country since ancient times."
[Excerpts, page A12.]
The petition was signed by the largest and most prominent group of Chinese intellectuals since the pro-democracy appeals of 1989, when open political dissent led to the climactic confrontation in which troops fired on unarmed students, workers and bystanders the night of June 3-4, killing hundreds.
In a letter addressed to President Jiang Zemin and Qiao Shi, chairman of China's leading parliamentary body, the National People's Congress, the intellectuals called on the Government to treat all "political thought and religious belief with the spirit of tolerance and never again regard individuals of independent thought and independent views as 'hostile elements' and submit them to repressive attacks, surveillance, house arrest and even detention."
A cover letter identifies Xu Liangying, 75, as the drafter. 
Professor Xu is a translator of Einstein's collected works. 
He said the draft of his appeal "received the support" of many of his colleagues at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, including that "of my respected teacher," Mr. Wang, who served as a representative of China's scientists in the People's Congress during the 1980's.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Xu said separate letters to President Jiang and Mr. Qiao were posted today. 
Copies were being distributed to news organizations this week.
Mr. Xu said party officials had apparently become aware of preparations to issue the document as it was circulating for signatures. 
Mr. Xu said he received a summons on Friday from the Communist Party secretary of his research institute. 
"He asked me not to engage in any activities, and not do to anything that will affect social stabilityI," Mr. Xu said. 
"I told him what we're doing is good for social stabilityI."
A year ago, Mr. Xu was briefly placed under house arrest and later close surveillance after he and a half-dozen other intellectuals called on the Government to end its harassment of dissidents, including Wei Jingsheng, China's best-known political prisoner, who disappeared on April 1, 1994, and is being held without charge at an unknown location.
The new petition, following several others that were presented to the People's Congress in March, indicates that a significant body of Chinese intellectuals are seeking to press Communist Party leaders into opening a national debate on political reform as the country prepares for the death of the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping.
The timing is important because Mr. Deng, who is 90, appears to have lost the ability to speak on policy matters as his health declines. 
He has not been seen in public since February 1994. 
For the last six years, Mr. Deng's adamant opposition has prevented any official reassessment of the Tiananmen verdict, or the rehabilitation of those who were penalized by it.
By appealing to both Mr. Jiang and Mr. Qiao, the intellectuals are telegraphing the widely held view that the President by himself will not control the post-Deng policy agenda. 
Mr. Qiao was once a contender for the titles that Mr. Jiang now holds as party leader and head of state. 
More important, Mr. Qiao is the only member of the inner Politburo of 1989 who resisted the military crackdown and yet remained in power.
The petition follows an unusually blunt speech on Saturday by the United States Ambassador to China, J. Stapleton Roy, who admonished senior Chinese officials to move more quickly toward establishing the rule of law in China "as the most effective way of maintaining stabilityI and social order without resort to repression."
In remarks to an Asia Society meeting in Beijing, Mr. Roy questioned what he called Beijing's over-reliance on the need to maintain "social stabilityI" as a justification for continued repression of all forms of dissent.
The signers of the petition asked for a re-evaluation of the Tiananmen tragedy "according to the spirit of 'seeking truth from facts,' " an aphorism made famous by Mr. Deng, who emphasized pragmatic policies to unify the Chinese behind economic reforms. 
The appeal appeared to be timed to coincide with the sixth anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre next month.
Like earlier petitions, this one decries the corruption that has become like "a wind blowing through our country."
"It must be recognized that without the supervision of democracy, especially the supervision provided by independent public opinion, corruption cannot be eliminated," the petition says.
Among the signers are 18 current or former scholars of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China's largest and most prestigious research institute; a former president of Ningbo University as well as the former party secretary of China Northwest University; three former editors of People's Daily, the party's official newspaper; professors of physics, ethics, chemistry as well as prominent literary translators of Chinese classics and Western science and philosophy, and several former student leaders of the Tiananmen era, including Wang Dan and Liu Nianchun.
Also signing were two professors of philosophy at People's University, Ding Zilin and her husband, Jiang Peikun. 
The couple lost their 17-year-old son to a soldier's bullet the night of the crackdown.
