
Chinese officials today flatly rejected Secretary of State Warren Christopher's demand that Beijing improve its human rights performance and warned that stripping China of its trade privileges would backfire.
In a day punctuated by harsh and often acrimonious exchanges, the Chinese also accused the United States of breaking Chinese law by meeting secretly with a leading dissident last month.
Mr. Christopher's first visit to China as Secretary of State, initially planned as the culmination of the Administration's six-month-long strategy of intensive high-level engagement with the Chinese, has instead reduced China's chances of winning renewal of trade privileges that expire in June.
 
Internal Affairs Cited
This took place against a backdrop of heightened American demands for steady and substantive progress on human rights, and in large part they clashed with China's traditional resistance against being told what to do about its internal affairs and with the authorities' desire to maintain strict control as democracy advocates begin to become more assertive.
Mr. Christopher told Foreign Minister Qian Qichen this morning that China's actions toward its citizens, including the recent detention of a number of prominent dissidents, "suggest that China attaches relatively little weight to core human rights issues," the State Department spokesman, Michael McCurry, told reporters.
If that is so, the Secretary added, it "certainly bodes ill" for the chances of renewing the most-favored-nation trade status that gives China lower tariffs than those accorded to most American trading partners.
 
A Rancorous Exchange
The exchange was so rancorous that as he said goodbye to Mr. Qian after four hours of meetings that extended through lunch, Mr. Christopher made no effort to hide his frustration, saying, "I wish the meeting had been as good as the lunch," Mr. McCurry reported.
In an afternoon meeting, Prime Minister Li Peng seemed to reverse China's earlier pledges this year to try to make progress on human rights.
"China will never accept the U.S. human rights concept," Mr. Li told Mr. Christopher, according to a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin. 
"History has already proven that it is futile to apply pressure on China."
Mr. Christopher's aides have acknowledged that they are both shocked and bewildered by the Chinese decision to greet Mr. Christopher's arrival with a sweeping crackdown on dissidents instead of conciliatory gestures on human rights.
But at the same time, it was impossible to judge whether the sudden Chinese belligerency was a tactical rebuff to Mr. Christopher, who has been publicly scolding the Chinese for not making enough progress, or a tough, new overall attitude on human rights. 
Only a month ago, President Jiang Zemin told American Congressional leaders in very conciliatory tones that China would make an effort to respond to Mr. Clinton's demands.
In taking a tougher line than at any time since the Clinton Administration took office, the Chinese appear willing to gamble that Washington has too much to lose by revoking the trade privileges, a policy they see as driven by anti-China lawmakers in Congress. 
Both Mr. Qian and Mr. Li warned Mr. Christopher today that the United States would suffer more than China if its trade privileges were revoked.
 
Boast of Self-Sufficiency
China is nearly self-sufficient economically, Mr. Li boasted, adding that if the United States were to revoke its trade status, "it means the United States would lose its share of the big Chinese market."
He said Chinese imports were growing at a rate of 9 percent a year and would reach a trillion dollars by the turn of the century.
But Mr. Christopher, the highest Clinton Administration representative to visit China, told his hosts that reports in China that the United States had already decided to extend preferential trade privileges or would accept only modest improvements in human rights to extend them were "unambiguously wrong," Mr. McCurry quoted Mr. Christopher as saying.
In an extraordinary allegation that prompted a strong response from Mr. Christopher and his aides, the Chinese accused John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, of breaking Chinese law by meeting late last month with Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent dissident, whom Mr. Wu described to reporters as "a criminal on parole."
The official New China News Agency quoted Mr. Qian as telling Mr. Christopher, "A top U.S. 
Government official came to prepare for Christopher's visit, and in disregard of Chinese laws, the official took actions interfering in China's internal affairs."
 
U.S. Refuses Diplomatic Limits
In reply, Mr. Christopher was quoted as saying the United States "cannot accept any limits on the ability of its diplomats to meet with foreign citizens."
Although Mr. Christopher chose not to speak publicly today about his first day of meetings, Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, chastised his hosts. 
He told reporters that the Chinese assertion that the United States was poisoning the well in advance of Mr. Christopher's visit because of human rights was "really Alice in Wonderland," and "an extraordinary leap of chutzpah."
Mr. Lord, a former Ambassador to China, tried to put the best face on the trip, saying, "Let's hope the next couple of days are better."
But Mr. Christopher's aides conceded in private that any real progress would have to come after the meeting is over.
 
Two and a Half Months Left
The Chinese still have two and a half months before the Administration must decide whether they have made enough progress in improving their human rights record to warrant annual renewal of their preferential trade privileges. 
And despite Mr. Christopher's threats to revoke China's trade privileges, the United States has no intention of abandoning its strategy of high-level diplomatic engagement, Mr. Lord told reporters.
Still, there is deep concern on the American side that China may do too little too late in meeting the requirements of a 1993 executive order linking extension of the trade benefits to China's progress on releasing political prisoners, ceasing the jamming of international broadcasts, carrying out the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, protecting Tibet's cultural and religious heritage, permitting the right of emigration and opening Chinese prisons to international relief groups.
The executive order was the result of intensive consultations with Congress, which has pressed for deeper concessions from China on human rights.
In an unusual departure from Chinese hospitality and courtesy, Mr. Wu, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, acknowledged to reporters that the Chinese had suggested that Mr. Christopher postpone his trip because it coincided with the opening of the National People's Congress, but that when the Americans said they could not change their arrangements, "in the end we have accommodated the Secretary."
