
China is closer to becoming only the third nation in history to launch humans into space, a feat that could come as early as next year, say international space experts.
After years of saying it would "one day" or "soon" put people into space, and initiating and postponing efforts to do so, the Chinese government has finally embarked on a serious program to make it happen, these experts believe.
"I think evidence of a manned space program in China is very real and that they are serious," said Charles Vick, a space issues expert with the Federation of American Scientists, a Washington policy group.
According to specialists following Chinese space developments, Chinese officials had hoped to put two astronauts into space by October to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Communist takeover of China. 
But, they said, delays in developing a new rocket for lifting heavy payloads, and problems with other equipment, make such a crewed flight unlikely until at least next year.
Nonetheless, the first flight in the program, an unmanned test of the new rocket and spacecraft, could still come in October.
"Assuming there is no major failure during the first unmanned flight of the system, I would expect a Chinese manned flight a year to 15 months afterwards," said Phillip S. Clark, a British space consultant who closely follows the Chinese program. 
"Only the United States and Russia have the capability to send people into space and China seems ready to become only the third nation to join this exclusive club."
Lynn Cline, the official in charge of external affairs at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, said the space agency had no detailed knowledge of China's plans. 
"For many years, they have set as a goal building a manned spacecraft, and earlier said they wanted to make a manned flight this year," Ms. Cline said. 
However, she said, the agency has heard that this flight has been delayed for unknown reasons and that there will be an unmanned mission instead this year.
Renewed interest in human spaceflight by China flared last month when pictures said to show the Chinese spacecraft and rocket suddenly appeared on the Internet from an anonymous source. 
The pictures depict a spacecraft based on the Russian Soyuz design atop a large rocket with four booster motors attached to the sides.
Mr. Clark, in an article to appear next month in the British magazine Jane's Intelligence Review, describes the rocket as the Chang Zheng 2F, an upgraded version of one of China's largest satellite launchers, the Long March CZ-3E. 
The new version is capable of placing a 10 metric-ton payload into low Earth orbit, he said, while the Chinese manned spacecraft weighs about 8.4 metric tons.
The spacecraft itself resembles the Russian Soyuz, which is built in three sections -- a propulsion section, an orbital section and a return module -- but it is larger and carries two pairs of solar-power panels instead of one set as the Russian craft does, Mr. Clark said. 
The central orbital module, instead of being spheroidal like the Soyuz, is more cylindrical, he said. 
The Chinese version is designed to make docking with other craft and transferring crew members easy.
The detailed color photographs were supposedly taken by a construction worker at China's Jiuquan launching site near the Gobi desert. 
They show a completed rocket and spacecraft being rolled out of an assembly building to a gantry and firing pad.
The new building looks a lot like NASA's giant Vehicle Assembly Building at Cape Canaveral, Fla., where Apollo moon rockets, and now space shuttles, were put together for missions. 
The rocket is on a mechanical crawler with tank-like treads that slowly move it to a launching pad, just as American shuttles are transported. 
Previously, Chinese space rockets were assembled from components on the pad before launchings, not transported there ready to fly.
Initial discussion about the pictures focused on whether they were clever fakes. 
Some spacecraft experts questioned whether the pictures were of small-scale models or images put together with computer-aided drawing and photo manipulation software. 
After carefully examining details in the pictures and calculating the size and positions of elements in the images, most experts now believe they are authentic, for the most part.
"There's too much detail there to be faked," Mr. Vick said.
However, Mr. Clark and other experts said the image of the large assembly and integration building where the rockets are prepared may have been enhanced in some way. 
The pictures taken by the worker are supposed to be from a promotional brochure created for the construction company that put up the building, and that company may have been trying to emphasize its work in the images, Mr. Clark said.
Some experts also question the relatively close proximity of the assembly building to the launching pad, compared with the arrangement at Cape Canaveral, as evidence of possible photo manipulation. 
But Mr. Vick noted that the launching arrangement for the new European Ariane 5 rocket also has the service building and launching pad similarly close together.
China launched its first satellite in 1970 and has maintained an active space program that includes launching commercial satellites for clients in other countries.
Chinese officials began discussing sending humans into space in the late 1970's and reports of astronaut training began emerging in the 1980's. 
Talk of manned spaceflight then ended for several years, partly because of social upheaval in China, and revived in the early 1990's.
The push toward the current manned flight effort, dubbed Project 921, began in March 1995, when China made a deal with Russia to acquire space technology, including information on life-support systems, docking mechanisms for spacecraft and spacesuits. 
In October 1996, two Chinese astronauts and more than a dozen trainers and support workers arrived at the Russian cosmonaut training center outside Moscow and stayed for about a year, experts said. 
At about the same time, Beijing announced plans to fly a manned spacecraft for the nation's anniversary celebration, but has said little about the program since.
Officials and scientists questioned about the program in China give conflicting answers, with many declining to comment on possible dates for manned flights until the government announces them.
But one thing Chinese scientists and outside experts agree on is that most of the technology being developed is Chinese, even though some is an adaptation of Russian ideas and equipment.
Dr. Joan Johnson-Freese, an instructor at the Asia Pacific Center for Security Studies in Honolulu, and author of the book, "The Chinese Space Program: A Mystery Within a Maze" (Krieger Publishing, 1998), said the Chinese always have multiple agendas. 
China wants to prove that it is a technically sophisticated nation and a great power that does not need outside help, she said.
Recent investigations by Congress and the Pentagon that accuse China of stealing secrets and benefiting from American companies illegally transferring rocket and satellite information to China have embarrassed the Chinese and given them something to prove, she said.
"There is no economic payback for a manned space program," Dr. Johnson-Freese said. 
"The manned space club is very exclusive. 
It's all for the prestige."
China is willing to spend part of its limited funds to develop technology that is distinctly its own for sending humans into space, she said.
"This way, China can say: 'This is not U.S. technology. 
This is not Russian Technology. 
This is very much Chinese technology,' " she said. 
"It's saying, 'We don't need to steal your secrets and expertise -- we have our own.'
"
