
China's "family car" project, an idea that got Western auto makers salivating when they were invited to submit prototypes last year, is likely to be delayed until well into the next century, a senior Chinese official said today.
In the first public comments on the family car by a senior member of China's car bureaucracy since last fall, Huang Fuheng, general manager of the China National Automotive Industry Sales Corporation, said that making family cars salable would be a "very long and very complicated" process.
"It's going to be 10 or 15 years before a family car becomes feasible in China," Mr. Huang said in an interview. 
"It's a complicated process, not something that we can do in a day."
When Beijing held an exhibition for 20 leading foreign car makers last September, some officials suggested China would choose a single model, and could start producing them within five years.
Ford Motor Company recommended a model from its Fiesta line in Europe. 
Mitsubishi of Japan offered a mini-van while General Motors pushed a Corsa model from Adam Opel, its German subsidiary.
But Chinese auto officials fell silent after the exhibition, causing confusion among car makers. 
Mr. Huang's comments, coming shortly after an internal Government meeting on the family car project, indicated that car officials are divided about how to proceed.
"There are some people in our planning departments who favor a single model," Mr. Huang said. 
"My idea is that the family car should not be done in one factory, or in one model. 
There are several different kinds of cars needed in China."
He also conceded that it would be hard to meet the original demands set out by Chinese car bureaucrats: that it will be modern, with air-conditioning and anti-lock brakes, be fuel-efficient and cost less than $10,000.
"If you make a car that's too old a model, no one will want it; if you make it fully modern, it will be too expensive," he said.
The vast majority of the 1.4 million vehicles made in China last year were trucks; passenger cars totaled only 250,000, and most of those were purchased by Government work units, which can afford a $30,000-$50,000 sedan for their senior officials.
Chinese officials said last year that they want to consolidate the domestic market -- now composed of 120 or so small, inefficient plants making trucks -- into a handful of large companies that can push total production to 3 million by 2000, with more than a million of them cars. 
By 2010, they said, China should be producing 8 million vehicles, making it the world's second-largest auto market, after the United States.
Their comments, and China's booming economy persuaded several foreign auto makers that it was time to enter the Chinese market seriously. 
Yet the market they are entering is plagued by a poor supply network, an inexperienced labor force, and high tariffs that limit imports of autos and parts.
Foreign auto executives said today that Mr. Huang's comments clarified a situation they had already begun to sense: that priority is likely to be given to building a car component industry, and that plans for several new passenger car projects will be pared down.
"The family car is definitely way down the line," said Stephanie Hallford, a Ford executive in China. 
"For him to say that is not really out of context from what we've understood."
