
China plans to put four leading members of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement on trial on Sunday. 
The move is the most significant prosecution since the government outlawed the group five months ago, a rights group in Hong Kong said today.
Relatives of the four members were formally notified today of the trial and told that each defendant could have one relative present at the No. 1 Intermediate People's Court here, the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said. 
The background of the defendants -- Li Chang, Wang Zhiwen, Ji Liewu and Yao Jie -- underscores the reach of Falun Gong, the government's fear of the group and the difficulties in suppressing it. 
All four were Communist Party members with positions of some influence in government or business.
The news about the trial spread late today, and the court did not answer calls. 
The court is expected to sentence the four to 20 years or more in prison for "using an evil cult to undermine the implementation of laws" and other crimes, the Information Center said.
The trial may also spark renewed protests here by Falun Gong members. 
Members in the United States, who have previously helped mobilize followers in China by e-mail and other means, confirmed that a trial has been set for Sunday, citing family members of the accused.
Two times this month -- on Dec. 
4, when the trial was to have originally started, and again on Dec. 
18 -- followers gathered outside the courthouse in western Beijing, and the police arrested 20 of them, the Information Center said. 
Followers have embarrassed the government and the police by repeatedly staging peaceful acts of protest in defiance of the ban, on July 22, and a crackdown that has seen thousands detained and pressured to recant their beliefs.
Falun Gong advocates a mixture of traditional meditation exercises and ideas drawn from Buddhism, Taoism and the group's founder, Li Hongzhi, a former government grain clerk who lives in New York. 
Practice is said to promote health and morality and in the seven years since the group was founded it has attracted millions of followers here. 
Chinese leaders say the group had caused the deaths of more than 1,400 people by discouraging them from seeking conventional medical care. 
In outlawing the group, the government called Falun Gong a menace to public welfare and a threat to Communist rule.
The state-run media have accused one of the four defendants, Wang Zhiwen, an engineer for a materials company in the Railways Ministry, of having organized a protest on April 25 by 10,000 members at the Communist Party leaders' compound here.
Mr. Wang, 50, and the other three were arrested on July 20, two days before the ban. 
According to the information center, Mr. Li, 59, was a senior official in the computer bureau of the national police; Mr. Ji, 36, managed a subsidiary of a Chinese nonferrous-metals company in Hong Kong; and Mr. Yao, 40, headed the party committee of a large Beijing real-estate company.
All four have been charged with undermining laws. 
In addition, Mr. Wang, Mr. Li and Mr. Yao were accused of illegally gathering and disseminating state secrets. 
Mr. Yao and Mr. Ji were also accused of involvement in illegal business, the information center said.
The center said Mr. Wang, Mr. Li and Mr. Yao had already been tried behind closed doors on the state-secrets charges and that the trial on Sunday would focus on the other charges.
