
A four-day meeting of the Communist Party's top leaders ended today with a reaffirmation of China's commitment to reorganizing state-owned enterprises and making them competitive in the global marketplace.
The plenary meeting of the party's 189-member Central Committee also gave Vice President Hu Jintao a symbolically important new position as a vice chairman of the Central Military Commission. 
That adds to the evidence that Mr. Hu, at 56 the youngest senior leader, is President Jiang Zemin's choice as a successor in several years.
In a statement this evening, the Central Committee called the overhaul of state enterprises "an important and urgent task."
But it mainly restated problems and goals set out repeatedly in the last two years and said that reforms had "reached a crucial stage, and some deeply rooted problems need to be dealt with" -- suggesting that progress has been ragged.
In sometimes vague and contradictory language, the statement called for modern management of state enterprises and, in a break with tradition, to offer direct performance-related financial incentives to top managers of larger state companies. 
But it also called for improved "ideological and political work" in such companies.
Combined with much language about markets and preparing industries to meet "fierce global competition," the statement at several points stressed the need for Government to retain control over pivotal industries, including emerging high-technology industries.
China is struggling with a huge number of money-losing, inefficient and redundant state enterprises, some dating from the Mao Zedong era and others built up even as the country started introducing market forces in the 1980's and early 90's. 
By wide agreement, they are a serious drain on the economy, and their huge debts imperil the banking system.
In 1997, Mr. Jiang Zemin, also the Communist Party chief, called for a major reorganization of larger industries, including bankruptcies, mergers and new stockholding schemes. 
Smaller companies were to be left to sink or swim. 
Last year, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji vowed to turn around the sinking state sector within three years.
The shake-up of coddled state enterprises is closely linked to China's drive to join the World Trade Organization, because membership would require reduced tariffs on imports and additional opportunities for foreign businesses to compete in China.
But the ailing state-run companies also provide jobs and welfare to millions of people and power to industrial ministries and local politicians. 
The backlash of threatened interests, corruption in the dismantling of companies and Chinese leaders' concerns about the political and social effects of layoffs have all hampered change.
From the statement today, it was unclear whether conservative forces had blunted a drive for more sweeping and rapid change or triumphant reformers had assuaged the opposition with bromides about preserving state control.
In a typically convoluted sentence, filled with the code phrases suggesting opaque bureaucratic battles, the statement said: "The strategic adjustment of the layout of the state sector of the economy needs to be combined with optimization of and improvements in the industrial and ownership structure, sticking to advancement in some areas and retrenchment in others and refraining from some things in order to do others, so as to increase the ability of the state sector to control the economy."      
