
China said today that a Saudi-American inspection team had completed a thorough search of suspected containers on a Chinese freighter in the Persian Gulf and found they contained none of the illicit chemical weapons cargo that United States intelligence agencies and the Clinton Administration earlier asserted.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin, in a news briefing here today, said, "personnel dispatched by the United States Government" to the Saudi Arabian port at Damman "took part in the whole process of inspection as technical advisers to the Saudi side."
"The inspection," he continued, "on all the cargo on the ship loaded at a Chinese port, including that transshipped from Hong Kong destined for Iran, showed that the ship did not carry at all the two chemicals of thiodiglycol and thionyl chloride, thus proving the repeated clarifications made by the Chinese side to be true."
[American officials, however, challenged Beijing's account. 
"The cargo that's inspected so far from the Yin He has not found any evidence of chemical weapons precursors, but the inspection itself has not been completed," said the State Department spokesman, Michael McCurry. 
"We expect that there'll be a full report on this when the inspection is completed. 
But again, that's going to take at least several more days."
[Though the Chinese Foreign Ministry indicated the search was over, The Associated Press, in a dispatch from Bahrain, said it had reached by radiotelephone an unidentified crew member aboard the ship who said the inspection was not finished and could last several more days.]
 
Could Prove Embarrassing
For the Clinton Administration, the inspection results, if indeed final, will prove an embarrassing denouement to the high-tension voyage of the freighter Yin He. 
The Pentagon last month mounted an agressive pursuit and surveillance of the vessel while the State Department demanded through diplomatic channels that China forgo delivering to Iran two dozen suspect containers on the vessal.
The handling of the inspection proved to be a diplomatic bonus for Saudi Arabia, which was able to undertake a delicate mission both for the Clinton Administration and for Beijing, in which Beijing was saved the embarrassment of any discovery. 
Beijing has become a critical weapons supplier for Saudi Arabia in recent years, giving the desert kingdom its first medium range ballistic missile, the Chinese CSS-2, capable of striking any capital in the region.
At the same time, the Saudis were also able to accommodate American insistance that its technical advisers on chemical and biological agents should be allowed to assist in the inspection.
For its part, the Clinton Administration, though it appears to have come away from the inspection with no proof, has more than reinforced its determination to hold China to the terms of anti-chemical weapons conventions.
The assertion today by the Chinese Foreign Ministry that China has been vindicated by the search comes in the face of a rising series of disputes between Beijing and Washington, which last week blocked the sale of $1 billion in high-technology equipment from American companies to China as punishment for China's sale of ballistic missile technology to Pakistan.
The Chinese leadership reacted by summoning the American Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, for the same kind of verbal lashing it had given him two weeks earlier over the American Navy's hot pursuit of the Yin He.
Even as Chinese officials verbally attack the resident American diplomats, they are calling for a new dialogue with Washington, as Mr. Wu did today when he admonished Washington to lift the just-imposed sanctions "so as to facilitate the improvement and development of Sino-U.S. relations."
American officials in Washington said they suspected Iran had been importing the chemicals for the production of mustard and nerve gas agents that could be used on the battlefield. 
Western officials in Beijing said they believed that the Chinese leadership might have been deceived by its own military about the nature of the cargo. 
Still, the Chinese Government from the outset has said its vessel was the victim of "utterly unjustifiable bullying" by the United States and was not carrying illicit cargo to Iran.
Saudi Arabia was pressed into the role of playing host to this week's inspection, one official familiar with discussions between the two governments said, and may have sought assurances from Beijing that no unpleasant discoveries would be made on board the ship before agreeing to allow the freighter into its port. 
At least one other American ally in the gulf, Kuwait, apparently refused to play such a role.
Officials with knowledge of the Yin He episode have been warning for days that the inspection was unlikely to confirm the original intelligence that Washington had acted upon since there have been ample opportunities for the crew of the Yin He to dispose of any illicit cargo it might be carrying.
