
President Jiang Zemin today told a Congressional delegation led by the House majority leader that China "is going to make an effort" in coming months to meet President Clinton's concerns about the country's human rights record.
Mr. Jiang repeated Beijing's objection to linking human rights with China's trade relationship with the United States, as Mr. Clinton has done by making China's favorable trade status contingent on improvement in human rights. 
But the delegation took the Chinese President's positive tone as an encouraging sign.
Mr. Jiang's remarks to the majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, and five other House members came at a crucial time, just before the release of a State Department human rights report that is critical of China and could affect its trade status as a most favored nation. 
His remarks also came in the middle of important talks with Washington on China's textile imports.
 
An Unusual Response
Although Mr. Jiang did not present any detailed course for improving China's human rights record, his remarks were significant in that Chinese officials almost never respond directly or positively to any admonition from foreigners about their human rights record. 
In public statements, Chinese officials uniformly reject American intercessions on human rights as interference in China's internal affairs.
In Washington, a State Department official said today that Mr. Jiang's comments, as reported by the delegation , were "very, very encouraging."
The official said that several recent developments suggested that China understood Western concern about its human rights practices. 
But he said the United States was looking for more evidence.
 
'Let's See What Happens'
"Today's meeting was quite positive and encouraging, but let's see what happens," the official said.
At a news conference, Mr. Gephardt praised the extensive diplomatic engagement that is under way with China and said he hoped that it would lead to a resolution of disputes.
"We are hoping for progress on human rights," Mr. Gephardt said. 
"To date there has not been sufficient progress, but we are not at the end of the process. 
We have another six months to go."
 
Chinese Seriousness Seen
After the news conference, Mr. Gephardt said the most positive aspect of his visit was that he felt for the first time that the Chinese leadership was "really serious" about resolving its most contentious issues with the United States, beginning with human rights.
"We have a number of important differences," Mr. Gephardt said, "but we are working hard to resolve those differences."
The delegation members, who said they were in Beijing at Mr. Clinton's request, also met with China's economic czar, Zhu Rongji.
The visit is part of the torrent of diplomatic contacts between Washington and Beijing aimed at averting a confrontation later in the year over China's poor human rights record.
China has until June to demonstrate "overall, significant progress" in human rights or Mr. Clinton has threatened to end China's most-favored nation access to the American market, which entitles Chinese companies to export their goods to the United States at very low tariffs.
Human rights abuses also played a major role in the rejection of China's bid to be the host of the Olympic Games in the year 2000, despite a vigorous campaign by Beijing.
In case the Chinese did not get the message from Mr. Gephardt, the White House is sending Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen here this week.
 
Bush on Private Visit
The sometimes blunt exchanges with Mr. Clinton's emissaries were overshadowed in the Chinese press by coverage of former President George Bush's private visit to Beijing.
"I think the U.S.-Chinese relationship is very, very important," Mr. Bush told the Chinese President. 
"It's very important to stay on track."
Officials at the United States Embassy said they were unaware of any coordination between Mr. Bush and the White House over his visit, though former Presidents as a matter of courtesy often carry messages and report on the results of their trips.
American officials said that before leaving the United States, Mr. Bush was briefed by the State Department and the staff of the National Security Council, but that he is carrying no official messages.
Mr. Bush also met with the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, whom most American officials avoid because of his role in ordering the military crackdown that led to the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989.
Mr. Clinton issued his conditions for continued favored trade status in a May 1993 executive order, and Mr. Gephardt's visit to China is part of the "midterm" review of its progress on human rights.
In deciding whether to extend China's trade privileges, American officials said they would use criteria specified in Mr. Clinton's executive order. 
At a minimum, there must be greater freedom of emigration and less use of prison labor. 
In addition, the Administration will consider whether China has made progress on other human rights issues, including respect for the religious and cultural heritage of Tibet.
A member of Mr. Gephardt's delegation, Representative Norm Dicks, Democrat of Washington, and the American Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, both described Mr. Jiang's statement to the delegation.
Mr. Roy said the Chinese leader's remarks were consistent with other recent positive responses senior Chinese officials have been making to American officials regarding the human rights abuses that routinely occur at the hands of China's security services and the judicial and prison authorities.
 
Talks With Red Cross
Chinese officials also told the Congressional delegation today that China would begin detailed discussions this weekend with the International Committee of the Red Cross on a program that could allow the first Red Cross visits to Chinese political prisoners in the history of Communist rule.
Western diplomats here said the release this week of two Tibetan human rights campaigners was also an important development indicating that the Chinese leadership is taking some early steps on Tibet, where larger issues of autonomy and freedom of expression are proving very difficult to solve.
American officials saw the release as a good-will gesture coming before Secretary of State Warren Christopher meets with China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, in Paris on Jan. 
24 and 25, but some human rights groups cast it as a move timed to coincide with the State Department's annual human rights report. 
A draft of the report, which is to be released in the coming week, states that China has not made substantial progress on human rights.
The remarks also coincide with last-minute talks to prevent a trade war over a threat by Washington to cut Beijing's textile export quota by 25 to 35 percent. 
China has said it will strike back if the United States proceeds with the plan.
Besides Mr. Dicks, the House members accompanying Mr. Gephardt here are George Miller of California, Mike Synar of Oklahoma, Chet Edwards of Texas and Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut, all Democrats.
 
'Mixed Message' Possible
Mr. Gephardt acknowledged that some members of Congress are opposed to canceling China's trade privileges at a time when American companies are seeking new markets in China's booming economy, and he said the Chinese leadership might be receiving a mixed message from Washington.
"Anyone who observes the United States for any period of time will always be able to get a mixed message," Mr. Gephardt said, but he added that "it would be a grave mistake for anyone to think" that China's trade privileges "could not be stopped."
The delegation also delivered a list of 19 political prisoners who are reported suffering from medical problems and asked that they be released on parole.
