
The way Wayne Chang saw it, it was one thing to go to a Chinese medicine clinic for acupuncture or herbal treatments, quite another for a medical procedure.
"I would go to a straight-up American doctor for Western medicine," Mr. Chang, a Flushing resident, said as he stared down the block at the New York Beijing Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, a clinic that investigators shut down on Tuesday after charging its staff with practicing unlicensed medicine. 
"But a lot of people around here don't care. 
It's cheap."
Clinics that specialize in traditional medicine fill a niche in communities of Chinese immigrants. 
Illegal immigrants, people who cannot speak English and those who cannot afford insurance or uninsured hospital care often turn to them for medical attention. 
Few people care if the clinics are licensed. 
Dozens thrive in the neighborhood.
There is a strip of the clinics on the second floors of buildings along 41st Avenue near Main Street, said Cheng Wang, a Flushing truck driver who seeks massage therapy for back pains. 
And on that block, at least three shops sell pungent herbal medicine from sidewalk stands. 
Sometimes the clinics are run from the back rooms of apartments.
"The one thing that concerned me when this was brought to me," said Richard A. Brown, the Queens district attorney, "was if I moved forward on this, will I be keeping people from medical attention that they otherwise might not be able to get?"
The investigation began in May after Mr. Brown's office learned of a lawsuit filed by a patient, Chunxi Qiao, who contended that the clinic had botched the removal of an intrauterine device. 
The authorities have charged six unlicensed practitioners at the clinic, including its owner, Shou Dong Wang.
Hugh H. Mo, a lawyer for the defendants named in the civil lawsuit, said his clients were disputing that they gave improper treatment.
Many Flushing residents do not see a problem with most of the traditional medicine clinics. 
Mr. Wang, the truck driver, said he had gone to three different clinics for back pain until he found one on Roosevelt Avenue that could relieve his suffering with a $35 massage.
But the problems come when the clinics practice Western medicine, which they sometimes do for relatively low prices, several Flushing residents said. 
"They're not doctors," said Sprinz Chou, the manager of a hair salon next to the shuttered clinic. 
"I think people are crazy to go there."
Ms. Chou, who moved to the United States 30 years ago, said that she had a customer who complained two months ago about treatment she had received at the clinic.
"I said, 'If it's not so good, why did you go?'
" she said. 
"She said she wanted to check it out after a friend recommended it."
Ms. Qiao, the woman who sued the clinic, said in an affidavit that she first went there last November for neck pains. 
But, according to her affidavit, clinicians botched the aftermath of a subsequent IUD removal.
That took place on Nov. 
13, lasting 10 to 15 minutes. 
Afterward, Ms. Qiao said, the clinic gave her herbal medicine for her recovery.
That afternoon, Ms. Qiao said, she took the medicine. 
For two days, she experienced stomach pains and other symptoms.
On Nov. 
15, a frightened Ms. Qiao went to the clinic, where she discovered that a doctor had mistakenly switched her medicine with that of another patient, she said. 
She was given another medicine, but her symptoms continued, she said. 
The next morning, she went to Flushing Hospital, where doctors put her on intravenous medication. 
She filed a lawsuit with the State Supreme Court for medical negligence in January.
"No one should have to go through such pain like I went through," she said in her affidavit. 
"No one should have to feel as I do now."
