
Officials from China and Taiwan signed an agreement today intended to end a recent string of hijackings from China. 
Diplomats on both sides described the accord as a breakthrough in the relationship between the two old rivals.
The agreement was welcomed because the hijackings had undermined Beijing's latest air safety drive and threatened its tourism industry. 
But more importantly, the accord represented a first step in cooperation between the two Governments, which have no formal diplomatic relations. 
Both describe themselves as the sole legitimate authority in all of China.
China, which considers Taiwan to be one of its provinces and has long threatened to reclaim it by force, appeared to make most of the major concessions. 
For the first time, China has agreed to recognize Taiwan's authority to decide which hijackers should be returned to China, and which are political refugees who may remain.
Under the accord, China also will recognize Taiwan's authority to patrol fishing in the Strait of Taiwan.
The pact sets up a framework for the return of hundreds of illegal Chinese workers being held in Taiwan.
In the statement signed today in Taipei, the two sides also committed themselves to "increasing communication" that will "eliminate misapprehensions, reduce differences and nurture trust."
China was apparently willing to compromise on the issue of returning air pirates in the hope of ending the hijackings, which kept reminding the world that some citizens found China so oppressive that they would do almost anything to get out.
Taiwan is holding all 16 Chinese citizens involved in the 12 hijackings since April 1993. 
All the hijacking suspects but one have been convicted of air piracy and sentenced to prison. 
The 16th is awaiting trial. 
Under the accord, it is not clear if Taiwan is willing to send any suspects back.
Most of the hijackers were seeking political asylum, apparently fearful that the recent talks would close their last escape route.
China had initially demanded that the hijackers be returned unconditionally for trial in China, where they would have faced the death penalty.
Officials on both sides hailed the agreement, which they described as the most important step toward closer ties between the two Governments since their first landmark meeting 16 months ago in Singapore.
"You can say there has been a major breakthrough," said Chiao Jen-ho, secretary general of Taiwan's semi-official Strait Exchange Foundation, which handles relations with Beijing in the absence of formal ties.
But Taiwanese officials were reported to have warned that the accord did not indicate that the two countries had moved closer to reunification. 
Taiwan has moved in the last few years to acknowledge the Communist Government's de facto authority over the mainland, increasing Beijing's fears that Taiwan would eventually seek recognition as an independent nation.
Mr. Chiao's counterpart, Tang Shubei, secretary general of China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait, was quoted in news reports as agreeing that the accord, reached Sunday in Taiwan after eight days of talks, was a breakthrough.
Mr. Tang was the highest-ranking official from the Chinese mainland to visit Taiwan since the Nationalists fled to the island in 1949 and banned official contact with Beijing. 
His association acts on behalf of China's Government on issues involving Taiwan.
While trade and tourism between the two countries have increased rapidly in recent years, diplomatic relations remained ice-bound until the Singapore meeting last year, which produced little beyond a schedule for further contacts. 
Relations deteriorated rapidly last March when 24 Taiwanese tourists were killed in an arson attack on a pleasure boat on Qiandao Lake in southern China.
The killings, and efforts to cover up their cause, set off a wave of anti-Chinese sentiment, with polls showing increasing support for Taiwan to declare itself independent.
