
KOWLOON TONG
By Paul Theroux.
243 pp. 
Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
$23.
Like Graham Greene, Paul Theroux generates forward momentum in his novels by displacing people: the not-quite-public-school fix-it Englishman on the fringes of both white and Chinese society in the Singapore of "Saint Jack," the Massachusetts handyman in the Central American jungle of "The Mosquito Coast," the academically endowed prostitute in the London of "Half Moon Street."
But no one has been more displaced than the Mullards, mother and son, of Hong Kong in "Kowloon Tong."
Aging Betty Mullard, who likes to take "just a flutter" on the races at Happy Valley and Sha Tin, is an old Hong Kong hand, assiduously British in an early post-World-War-II manner. 
No shift of history has ever caused her to refer to the local people as anything but "Chinky-Chonks," and she takes it as a given that apart from Mr. Chuck, her late husband's partner, they are perverse in tastes and politics and simply crazy in motivation. 
Though a Hong Kong resident for 45 years, she has never since the opening of China in the early 1970's had enough curiosity to take the one-hour train ride from Kowloon into Shenzhen on the mainland. 
Nor has she ever tasted Chinese food. 
"Not a chance," she announces. 
"I don't eat that muck."
But now she is facing "the Chinese take-away," as she and her son call it -- the return of Hong Kong to the Chinese Government. 
"They could make us take Chinky-Chonk nationality," she realizes, the scales falling from her eyes.
Neville (Bunt) Mullard, her son, is even more on the margins of time and place. 
At 43, not only has he never been to China but, except for one vaguely remembered childhood visit, he hasn't been to England either. 
But China is now coming to him, and Bunt Mullard is bright enough to know that it might wash him away from neat Albion Cottage on the Peak back to a Thatcherite England better imagined than lived in. 
Mr. Theroux defines the Mullards' impasse with his typical piquancy: "They had been liberated by Hong Kong, they had money and a sense of the exotic, they were superior here. 
Going home meant defeat -- snubs and meagerness and middle-class making do. 
The trouble was that the idea of England was easier to sustain the farther they were from the place."
In the last year of British rule in Hong Kong, Bunt and Betty do their best to ignore these realities. 
They do not listen to the "take-away" news on their British-made bakelite radio and gratefully eat the bacon and eggs and roast beef that Betty has taught their Chinese servant, Wang, to cook. 
Bunt drives off in his father's 1958 Rover to Imperial Stitching, the family factory in Kowloon Tong, which the Mullards own with a Chinese-hating Chinese entrepreneur named Mr. Chuck. Typically, it will take a Chinese mainlander to let Bunt know that "Kowloon Tong" is Cantonese for "Nine Dragons' Pond."
"Everything means something," Bunt sniffs, with the dragon's breath already on him.
Before the late George Mullard and Mr. Chuck chose the site for Imperial Stitching, they had a geomancer check the feng shui, the balance of elements, of the place, and proclaim it propitiously located. 
But in this last British year, the feng shui is driven crazily out of balance. 
As the novel opens, Mr. Chuck has perished in uncertain circumstances, leaving his share of the business to Bunt. 
What at first seems to enlarge Bunt's prospects now enlarges him as a target. 
A man named Mr. Hung, with "a soldier's way of walking and an officer's arrogance," turns up in that supremely British institution, the Hong Kong Cricket Club, and makes Bunt an offer on Imperial Stitching -- that is, on Bunt's very identity. 
Mr. Hung admits that his job is "the acquisition of strategic sites for the People's Liberation Army," and Bunt is appalled to find that Betty has already given her assent to the sale.
Until now, Bunt has noticed with some contempt that all around him the apparently British residents of Hong Kong are seeking alternative identities. 
The British-born family lawyer, his very name Brittain and his background Jewish, has become an Austrian citizen. 
"Monty, you're a Kraut?" asks Bunt bemusedly. 
Others talk about Canadian, Tongan, Cayman Island, Belizean and Panamanian citizenship. 
"I've got a Guinea-Bissau passport," boasts an American, who may work for the C.I.A. or merely want to stay, but for whom an American passport might not be convenient after the takeover.
On the floor of Imperial Stitching, as in the Cricket Club, people have a sense of time running out. 
Thus a charming seamstress, Mei-ping, an illegal immigrant from China, shyly accedes to Bunt's sexual overtures. 
Bunt, like his father before him, is a habitue of the "blue hotels" around his factory in Kowloon Tong. 
"A big, needy gweilo," he drinks beer and eats the sandwiches his mother has packed for him, then goes off to one of the rooms with a girl. 
Sex is what has most powerfully assimilated Bunt into Hong Kong. 
He knows the four characters that proclaim sun-dou-bak-mui ("new girl from north"), and he is well aware that yet lau, yet feng means "one room, one phoenix" -- that is, one working girl without a pimp. 
He has had sex only once with a European, a Portuguese prostitute in Macao.
Sniffing out Bunt's every weakness, Mr. Hung becomes a relentless pursuer of Imperial Stitching. 
"If you do not sell," he warns, "you will not be happy next year."
He forces Bunt to go out with him for a meal, where Bunt watches him devour chicken feet and paw two girls from the factory. 
When Bunt agrees to sell and then equivocates, his employees begin to vanish.
Hong Kong on the eve of the take-over is itself a major character in this book, possessing both a Chinese and a British substance, and Mr. Theroux brings to it his gift for aphorism: "Whoever said the Chinese were enigmatic might have met one Chinese person but had not met two. 
. . . They carried on their lives in whispers and their business in shouts."
Mr. Theroux's considerable charm as a narrator will keep his readers engaged to the end. 
But this is one of those books about which people say of the central character, "I would like to give him a good shake."
The threat of Mr. Hung might have the whole weight of China behind it, and Bunt seems to give way to that threat at every turn. 
He walks out of confrontations at the stage where the next question begs to be asked. 
"He was glad to go," Mr. Theroux writes of Bunt at the end of a particularly challenging scene, yet Bunt's habitual tactic is flight.
Betty is a wonderful character, vulgar-genteel, and in her way as toughly determined to survive as Bunt's Chinese adversary. 
Mr. Hung, with impeccable English and the uncompromising manners of a talented but brutal peasant, is a credibly menacing figure. 
But Bunt is the passive center of all the plot's movement. 
We are given occasional glimpses of why Bunt -- who detests Mr. Hung and has half a mind to stay in Hong Kong, who believes in British institutions -- does not report Mr. Hung to the police. 
But they do not add up to a full motivation for Bunt's aimlessness. 
To give one example that may help make the point without betraying the novel's denouement: when Bunt takes a terrified Mei-ping to Macao, books a room and then accidentally encounters his mother at a gaming table, it takes just one command from Betty -- "Stop faffing around and come along. 
You too, duckie" -- to bring the lovers meekly back to Hong Kong. 
The tension inherent in weak men in novels derives from our sense that they will ultimately be tempted to defiance. 
In Bunt's case, that tension is never exploited. 
If the point is that he is so displaced that he has no core, then one wonders why the author gives him so many highly dramatic chances to transcend himself.
Whatever the problems with Bunt, Mr. Theroux's astringent misanthropy and narrative momentum are powerful propellants. 
And since the tale is told from within the consciousness of the Mullards, China in the person of Mr. Hung possesses an ominousness that fills the horizon. 
The takeover is so close, and yet no one can predict with any certainty what it will mean for the Bettys, Bunts and Mei-pings of the city.
As one character says, "Hong Kong is an accident of history that is about to be rectified."
Hong Kong was first taken by gunboat diplomacy. 
Its present boundaries were finally established by Britain's strong-arming of a weak Manchu dynasty. 
If Paul Theroux's novel can be believed, the mainland Chinese are retrieving it in the same spirit in which it was taken.
