
Claiming both diplomatic and commercial victories today, Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown said he had won a commitment from Chinese leaders to resume a high-level dialogue with the United States on human rights.
At the same time, Mr. Brown said that his trade mission to China had led to the signing of agreements totaling $4.9 billion with Chinese Government industries.
Mr. Brown, who is leading a delegation of 24 American executives on a six-day Chinese tour, said that if all the agreements reach the final contract stage, more than $2 billion of the total would go to American firms participating as equipment sellers or joint-venture partners.
 
A Modest Step
The resumption of the human rights dialogue, broken off last March after a stormy visit to Beijing by Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher, is regarded as a modest but important step by Western officials concerned about the deterioration of human rights conditions in China during the last three months.
Since Mr. Clinton announced May 26 that he would no longer link progress on human rights in China to the annual renewal of Beijing's trade privileges, Chinese security agencies have continued to clamp down on political dissidents and religious activists. 
Beijing has also broken off talks to open its prison system to visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
At a news conference this afternoon, Mr. Brown said the success of the delegation's visit "speaks volumes about the wisdom of the policies President Clinton has pursued" in dealings with China.
"There hasn't been a meeting in which we haven't raised human rights issues," Mr. Brown said. 
"But we haven't tried to bludgeon them about it."
Mr. Brown said the first positive indication that China was ready to resume a human rights dialogue came from Prime Minister Li Peng in a meeting Monday. 
Mr. Li said China was willing to have a dialogue on human rights, but only on an "equal footing" and with "mutual respect."
Mr. Brown said he raised the issue today in a meeting with President Jiang Zemin, and an aide in Mr. Jiang's office telephoned later to advise that China was ready to resume the dialogue with a meeting between China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, and Mr. Christopher in Washington in late September. 
At the same time, the State Department's top human rights official, John Shattuck, will meet with a senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official in New York.
