
Until recently, officials of this port city famous for its Tsing Tao beer and its German architecture boasted that they were investing heavily in basic infrastructure as part of their strategy to attract more foreign industries.
Last fall, Deputy Mayor Min Xiangchao could hardly contain his enthusiasm when he told an interviewer that "the pace of growth of Qingdao is difficult to hold back now" because the city had won approval from the central Government in Beijing to build a subway system, a cross-harbor tunnel connecting the city's industrial zone with its downtown area, which are on opposite sides of Jiaozhou Bay, and a 10-mile bridge to span the bay.
"These will be the engines of growth in later years," he predicted.
Today, however, these projects have been suspended for lack of financing.
What has happened here in the last 12 months is happening all over China: basic transportation projects, especially mass transportation, are being canceled or cut back dramatically for lack of capital and as Beijing's leaders debate the best way to move 1.3 billion Chinese from one place to another in the next century.
While money is a key issue, basic issues of transportation policy also remain unsettled.
Although most Chinese still walk, bicycle or ride a farm animal to get around, the migration by millions of people to urban centers is creating a transportation crisis.
Where there is public transport, bus and train fares stay frozen for years, part of the cradle-to-grave subsidy system under socialism that has undermined new investment. 
Meanwhile, in dozens of large cities, traffic gridlock is threatening the very growth that must occur to meet the transport needs of tens of millions of new job seekers arriving in the cities over the next five years.
In large part, the policy debate centers on whether scarce money should be directed more toward better roads for the swelling number of automobiles, or toward mass transit. 
Which way China goes will have enormous environmental consequences not only for urban residents here, already choking in smoggy air, but for the whole world -- a vast new fleet of cars in China would use up so many resources and add to the problem of planetary warming.
The debate over how to manage this crisis has pitted the powerful Ministry of Machine-Building Industry and its two million workers in dozens of automobile plants against China's scientific establishment and many municipal authorities, who see their streets descending into a choking paroxysm of traffic and pollution.
The ministry is busy implementing the "pillar industry" strategy formulated in 1994 by China's State Council under Prime Minister Li Peng. 
Its aim is to create a half-dozen giant Chinese automakers in partnership with General Motors, Volkswagen and other foreign companies to feed the growing demand by newly rich Chinese for cars.
The ministry wants China's central and local governments to divert more money into highway and road construction to support an automobile-based economy.
But China's scientific community, in a major report last summer, began a campaign to challenge this policy.
"It would be inappropriate for China to encourage the use of family cars on a large scale in the next few years because of the country's serious shortage of land, oil and other resources and its huge population," the scientists' report said. 
It recommended "a public transportation network that is convenient, complete and radiating in all directions."
As it is, China's relatively small road network is already under strain. 
For every one million Chinese, there are only 541 miles of roads, most of them unpaved and rutted. 
By comparison, there are 15,195 miles of paved road per one million Americans, 5,457 miles per one million Japanese and 1,070 miles per one million Indians.
One of China's leading physicists, Prof. He Zuoxiu, who worked on the country's first atomic bomb, has thrust himself into the transportation debate by trying to persuade the Communist Party leadership to get behind mass transit.
Ticking off the problems of China's future energy supplies, worsening pollution and the shortage of land, Professor He said in a recent interview in Beijing that "China just simply cannot sustain the development of a car economy."
Professor He said that he fears that Government policy is being driven by a desire to keep two million auto workers employed. 
In addition, many top officials in Prime Minister Li's Cabinet come from the auto industry. 
Even President Jiang Zemin got his start as a Soviet-trained electrical engineer.
"Right now, the Government still has no clear policy and so this issue is still very much under debate," Professor He said, even though "almost every scientist in China favors the development of mass transit systems."
As the debate rages, many experts say other factors are influencing China's choices, notably the country's inability to attract the kind of capital needed to construct a modern transport system.
Limits set by Chinese authorities on rates of return foreigners can earn on long-term investments in power plants and toll highways in China have engendered a wariness in world capital markets about making long-term commitments here.
Still, there is a sense of urgency.
China's infrastructure bill includes the Yangtze River's Three Gorges Dam, the largest hydro-electric project in the world, and dozens of major power plants that must be completed to meet electrical demand and stop the blackouts that idle many industries.
In addition, money must be found for an aquaduct system to save northern China from perpetual drought, for new rail networks to open China's internal markets, for oil refineries, an updated telecommunications system and dozens of new airports and shipping terminals.
The central Government's budget revenues, chronically weak, cannot hope to pay for such a prodigious agenda, estimated by the World Bank to cost $300 billion or more during the 1996-2000 period.
"China's needs today are enormous and immediate," concluded a recent study by Nicholas Bradbury of The Economist Intelligence Unit in Hong Kong. 
"Without dramatic improvements to its infrastructure, and foreign expertise to implement them, China's economic progress will stall."
In December, China's State Council, or cabinet, issued orders to shut down subway and light rail projects in Qingdao and three other major cities -- Nanjing, Shenyang and Tianjin. 
The order was not made public until late March.
"Funds needed for metro construction are beyond the means of the central and local government and operating expenses are too high," the semi-official China Daily newspaper quoted a Cabinet statement as saying.
The latest estimates show that the cost of subway construction have soared in the last decade and now range from $53 million to $91.5 million per kilometer.
"These programs are extremely capital intensive," said Robert S. O'Neil, president of De Leuw, Cather & Company, a Washington, D.C., subway design and consulting company now working on Shanghai's subway system. 
"They don't pay for themselves," he added.
Wang Yuexian, a senior transportation planner at the State Planning Commission in Beijing, said that under the cabinet edict, only subways planned for Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou would go forward, and even in these cities, schedules would be stretched out and work limited to a single line.
"A total of 17 cities have applied for subway financing," said Jiao Ying, a senior engineer at the Ministry of Railways, who has stayed behind in Qingdao to complete a test tunnel section should the project ever be revived. 
"But the Government only considers three or four of them important, and the rest will have to wait," he added.
In Beijing, a new eight-mile subway line that was to open in 1997 will now be delayed another 10 years. 
Shanghai will be allowed to complete a new 16-mile line and Guangzhou will complete an 11-mile line.
The central Government edict has done little to dampen enthusiasm in Qingdao.
Xue Liai, the vice director of the city's Major Projects Office, said in an interview that "we still hope we can build the subway because every citizen here wants it."
Construction crews had nearly completed the largest station on the first 10-mile segment of the Qingdao system when the order to stop work came in December. 
City officials quickly shifted their plans and persuaded the Miramar Hotel group from Hong Kong to convert the station into an underground shopping mall.
Now, where the trains should be running, there is an endless line of boutiques, and above ground on the streets -- gridlock.
