
China's new economic program may or may not succeed in bringing down inflation, but it is already having one far-reaching effect: it is making many ordinary workers spitting mad.
When millions of Chinese collected their June salaries, they found most or all of their pay docked. 
The money went to purchase Government bonds, which nearly all urban citizens have been forced to buy.
"We asked the boss how we can live for the next month if we don't get paid, and he said we can use our savings," a 40-year-old factory employee complained. 
"But a lot of people don't have savings. 
They depend on their salaries to live from month to month, and now all of a sudden they have nothing."
 
Prices Have Jumped
The widespread grumbling reflects a general apprehension about the Government's efforts to cool down the economy by taking money out of circulation. 
In the first six months of this year, China's gross domestic product was 13.9 percent higher than a year earlier, and industrial output jumped 25.1 percent.
Prices in 35 large cities rose 21.6 percent at the end of June from a year earlier. 
Measuring the price increase in June alone and annualizing it, inflation would be much higher, fueled by high consumer demand and what economists consider to be a surplus in the money supply.
There have already been a few scattered protests over the Government's economic crackdown, and some officials fear that strikes or peasant riots could become more frequent as austerity measures take hold.
Some provincial government offices and companies are already running out of cash, forcing them to pay employees with i.o.u.'s. 
Any tightening of the money supply may also mean that rural offices will run out of cash to pay for the grain they buy from farmers.
 
Optimism for the Long Term
In strictly economic terms, China's difficulties are short-term and reflect the boom-bust cycle that has marked China's growth for the last dozen years. 
Many foreign and domestic economists are still enormously optimistic about the country's long-term prospects -- but they now sound just a bit more defensive than they did a few months ago.
In the last few weeks, the Communist Party leadership has taken tougher steps to rein in the economic growth. 
Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji has been put in charge of the clampdown, and the leadership is circulating a secret memo, Central Committee Document No. 6, with a 16-point plan to cool the economic pace to a more sustainable level.
Three years ago a similar clampdown also caused widespread resentment, but then workers kept mum, remembering all too well the firing of machine guns at protesters in the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement. 
These days, people are far less afraid of the Government, and rising anger and diminishing fear could be a volatile combination.
In the Government's nightmare scenario, the clampdown would take hold in the coming months and stir growing unrest -- and just at that moment Deng Xiaoping, the frail senior leader, who turns 89 next month, would die. 
It's the kind of possibility that sends tremors down the spines of party officials.
 
Docked $20 to $100
As economic problems go, China's are not so bad: the worry is not that growth has stalled but that it is careering out of control. 
In economies as in cars, most people prefer one with a sticky accelerator to one that will not start. 
But the resulting drive can be pretty hair-raising.
The forced purchases of the bonds was one of the first of the 16 points to be carried out and -- from the point of view of ordinary Chinese -- one of the most infuriating. 
Most workers were docked the equivalent of $20 to $100 for June, representing up to a month's wages, and some private vendors were forced to buy almost $400 worth of bonds or face harassment and loss of their commercial licenses.
This technique for bond distribution, a marriage of capitalist instruments and Communist methods, reflects China's difficulties in making the transition to a market economy.
Two years ago, the Government announced that it would stop requiring people to buy bonds and that it would henceforth adjust interest rates and rely on voluntary purchases, as other countries do.
That worked fine as long as inflation was low and interest rates were high. 
But this year, the three-year bonds pay only 13.96 percent annually, so voluntary purchasers bought only 13 percent of the bonds by the original May 1 deadline for sale of the securities.
 
Force Pays Off
The process went much more rapidly once the Government decided to use compulsion. 
A few days ago, the authorities cheerfully announced that they had met the target of selling $5.2 billion worth of bonds.
"Nobody wants the bonds," complained a manual laborer in his late 20's. 
"In the last couple of years, they paid a high interest rate, and so the leaders bought all the bonds for themselves. 
But now they hardly pay anything, and the leaders don't want them. 
So we have to buy them."
Another crucial element of the 16-point plan is a 20 percent cut in Government spending, which no one seems to think is likely to be achieved. 
On Tuesday Finance Minister Liu Zhongli announced that in the first half of the year, Government revenues rose 3.5 percent from the similar period in 1992, while expenditures rose 12.5 percent.
Mr. Liu acknowledged that the Government had much less money available at the end of June than in June 1992. 
That could be an indication of cash shortages in the coming months.
 
Ban on New I.O.U.'s
One of the 16 points is a ban on issuing more Government i.o.u.'s to the peasants. 
But the plan does not explain how the Government is to avoid giving out i.o.u.'s, and its proposals to raise revenue by cracking down on tax evasion sound dubious.
The plan emphasized that banks must call in unauthorized loans, and work teams have been sent to the provinces to audit financial institutions to insure that they obey. 
The plan also tries to curb real estate speculation by weeding out development zones and taxing capital gains on real estate.
The plan calls for scaling back capital investment and public-works projects and for a virtual ban on automobile imports in the second half of the year. 
To slow inflation, the liberalization of most prices will be suspended for the rest of the year.
Some of these measures -- like the ban on auto imports and reductions in Government purchases -- could aggravate trade tensions with the United States, whose trade deficit with China is already larger than that with any country except Japan.
 
Big Political Risks
Mr. Zhu, the new economic czar, faces enormous opportunities and risks as he takes charge. 
If he manages a "soft landing," he may be rewarded with the job of Prime Minister. 
That post is now held by Li Peng, who had a heart attack in April and has since been mostly out of sight.
On the other hand, if Mr. Zhu is less than entirely successful in cooling the economy, he could make a convenient scapegoat for other leaders. 
Mr. Zhu, sometimes known as "China's Gorbachev" because of his openness to political and economic liberalization, has plenty of enemies -- hard-liners distrust him as a closet capitalist, and many high officials hate him because of his tendency to humiliate those who spend more time drinking tea than solving problems.
"Zhu Rongji is in a very dangerous position now," said a senior economic official who is rooting for Mr. Zhu to succeed. 
"He's like a man trying to stop a horse cart that is running out of control down a hill. 
He could just get run over."
The challenge for Mr. Zhu is twofold.
On the one hand, he must discipline local leaders and curb inflation. 
Some officials warn that if the Government cannot cool the economy soon, China could face inflation of 100 percent or more.
 
Cash Shortages May Come
On the other hand, if the Government tightens monetary growth and investment too much, unemployment will rise and cash may be short.
Already, a few factories and government offices are running out of cash to meet payrolls. 
In Hubei province, in central China, the employees at a county-run guest house complain that they have not been paid for several months. 
They get free food and lodging, but their salaries are in i.o.u.'s.
Considering how well China's economy is doing by international standards, it is striking how disgruntled many Chinese are about economic issues. 
In private, workers often complain bitterly about rising prices, rent decontrol, restrictions on health-care reimbursements, layoffs and the forced bond purchases.
"The market is ruthless and it believes in no tears," The People's Daily warned this month, apparently in an attempt to caution the public that the slowdown may mean more pain ahead. 
The newspaper said some state-owned factories would be forced into bankruptcy because there was simply not enough money to go around.
"Even if funds could come from the heaven like the water of the Yellow River," the newspaper declared, "there would hardly be enough funds to fill all of these bottomless pits."
