
American companies eager to win allegiance from China's 1.2 billion people are fighting an uphill battle, according to a comprehensive new poll of consumer attitudes on the Chinese mainland that was released yesterday.
Six of the top 10 foreign brands identified by the survey's respondents were Japanese, even though those surveyed were asked to pick from a list containing twice as many American as Japanese names. 
Four of the Japanese brands -- Panasonic, Hitachi, Toshiba and Toyota -- were also the ones the respondents said they held in highest regard.
Coca-Cola was the most widely known American brand, finishing second with 62 percent recognition, just behind Hitachi's 65 percent. 
The next closest American finishers were Mickey Mouse, which is a distinct brand in China and was the seventh-most-recognized name, with 54 percent, and Marlboro, which was eighth, with 51 percent.
"U.S. multinationals have their work cut out for them," said Richard W. Burkholder Jr., director of worldwide operations for the Gallup Organization, which conducted the poll.
The survey showed that brand loyalty was relatively weak in China, where consumers are chiefly concerned with the price and quality of the goods they buy and where Chinese manufacturers are still favored in the countryside.
The poll was conducted to promote Gallup's entry into China and was partly financed by the Japan Management Association. 
Gallup said the survey was the first truly representative sampling of the habits and attitudes of Chinese adults.
Gallup representatives fanned out across China from May 2 to Sept. 
15, asking more than 400 questions of a single individual in each of 3,400 households. 
In especially remote areas, like the Gobi Desert, Mr. Burkholder said, Gallup interviewers traveled on horseback or by camel.
The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 2.8 percent, he added.
"We're comfortable that these results project what all people in China would have answered if we could have asked each one of them," Mr. Burkholder said.
In a country buffeted by fierce political winds over the last five decades, the survey shows how deeply the free-market policies introduced in the late 1970's by Deng Xiaoping have permeated the national psyche.
Asked their personal philosophy, 68 percent of those polled said it could be summed up by the phrase "work hard and get rich."
Only 4 percent summarized their personal belief with a Maoist credo: "Never think of yourself. 
Give everything in service to society."
The survey also shows a country that has grown relatively affluent, especially in urban areas. 
More than 90 percent of the homes in China's nine largest cities now have both a color television set and a refrigerator. 
That compares with 40 percent with color televisions and 25 percent with refrigerators nationwide.
China's distribution network is not sophisticated enough to allow most foreign companies to sell consumer products beyond the biggest markets around Beijing, Shanghai and in Guangdong province, near Hong Kong. 
So, changing tastes in those urban areas can be a barometer for what may develop throughout the country. 
For example, instant coffee was found in only 6 percent of the households nationally, but in 37 percent of the households surveyed in the country's nine largest cities.
Over all, the consumer items most likely to be owned in a Chinese home were a bicycle, an electric fan, a radio, a television set and a rice cooker. 
The most popular planned purchases were a color TV, a washing machine, refrigerator, tape recorder and videocassette recorder.
Those polled were about equally divided when asked if they were satisfied or dissatisfied with their jobs, income and the quality of their food. 
But a larger number expressed dissatisfaction when asked about the furnishings in their homes and their general standard of living.
"Clearly this is a very materialistic society, and not all the aspirations are being met, particularly in rural areas," Mr. Burkholder said.
The poll found that the habits of drinking alcohol and smoking were heavily dominated by Chinese men. 
More than 80 percent of the men said they smoked "regularly" or "occasionally," while the national average for women was 11 percent.
On the other hand, only 66 percent of the respondents said they drank alcohol, a lower percentage than was found in any Western country except the United States (53 percent) and Spain (64 percent).
