
In a major blow to international efforts to force North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program, China announced today that it opposed the imposition of any sanctions against North Korea.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, speaking at his annual news conference, said that his Government not only opposed sanctions but also was against bringing up the matter before the United Nations Security Council.
North Korea announced earlier this month that it was withdrawing from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons and would not allow international inspections of suspected nuclear weapons laboratories. 
The United States and other Western countries hope to pressure North Korea to reverse its position.
Because Beijing has a veto in the Security Council, today's announcement means that there is little chance of using the Security Council to coordinate an international response. 
And without China's cooperation, sanctions would have little meaning, as it is one of the few countries that still trades with North Korea.
"We support patient consultations to reach an appropriate solution," Mr. Qian declared. 
"If the matter goes before the Security Council, that will only complicate things."
 
Quiet Pressure From China?
China may be applying quiet pressure on North Korea to return to the nuclear pact and give up its nuclear aspirations, which have alarmed the entire region. 
But if there is no threat behind the pressure, it is unclear that China's pressure will be successful.
For several years, Beijing has apparently been urging North Korea not to develop nuclear weapons. 
However, Western experts believe that the hard-line Communist Government in North Korea has quietly continued its program and is near to building a nuclear bomb or may already have constructed one or more.
China is North Korea's most important friend left in the world, and even Beijing has been clearly annoyed by North Korea's actions lately. 
Mr. Qian did not endorse North Korea's position, and he reiterated China's view that nuclear weapons should not be introduced to the Korean Peninsula. 
China itself is a nuclear power.
Mr. Qian's opposition to international pressure on North Korea is almost certainly linked to China's discomfort with the idea that international bodies can tell sovereign nations what they can and cannot do. 
Western countries have frequently accused China of human rights violations, of making destabilizing arms sales, and of brutal repression in places like Tibet, and China's standard answer is that no nation has the right to interfere in another's internal affairs.
In his news conference, Mr. Qian also said that the time was not right for a meeting with the British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, about the dispute between China and Britain over Hong Kong, which is to revert to Chinese control in 1997. 
Mr. Qian disclosed that Mr. Hurd had suggested a meeting, but he added that "conditions are not ripe."
But Mr. Qian did not rule out negotiations at some point in the future, and he did not issue quite as fierce a denunciation of Great Britain as some other Chinese leaders have in recent days.
