
China's Minister of Public Health has proposed national legislation to halt the birth of "abnormal" children, using Government-ordered sterilizations and abortions if necessary.
The Minister, Chen Minzhang, has presented draft legislation on "eugenics and health protection" to the National People's Congress and said China is in "urgent need of adopting such a law to put a stop to the prevalence of abnormal births," the official New China News Agency reported.
In an appearance before congress leaders, he cited statistics showing that China "now has more than 10 million disabled persons who could have been prevented through better controls," the agency reported.
The minister said the program would be administered under strict conditions and training. 
Intervention would be approved "by the authorities at the county level and above," the report said.
 
Review Panel Planned
Pregnant women diagnosed as carrying infectious diseases or abnormal fetuses would be "advised" to terminate the pregnancy, the report said.
A spokeswoman for the Public Health Ministry's policy and law office said today that if the Chinese congress passes the legislation this spring, a panel of experts would be named to decide and define what birth defects and infectious diseases would be considered and the rules under which state intervention would be warranted.
The proposed legislation is likely to lead to an outcry from human rights groups and other international organizations that fear the Chinese authorities will start down a road of increasing reliance on sterilization and abortion. 
China's one-family-one-child population policy has been under sustained assault for its use of coerced abortions to end second or third pregnancies.
The legislation could also complicate the Clinton Administration's decision on whether to certify that China is making progress on human rights.
An earlier alarm over eugenics legislation in China arose five years ago when authorities in northwestern Gansu Province said a high proportion of babies born with mental defects had compelled them to pass regional legislation prohibiting the mentally retarded from having children.
Any mentally retarded woman found to be pregnant was subject to mandatory abortion and the provincial authorities were said to be seeking to sterilize as many as 260,000 women.
One Western official said his organization approached central authorities in Beijing at the time and inquired about the Gansu measures. 
"We were told that there would not be national legislation," the official said.
Today, the spokeswoman for the Health Ministry said that the "serious situation" in Gansu Province "is now a serious problem all over the country" and therefore national legislation is warranted.
 
Doctor Defends Parts of Law
A Western doctor advising China's health agencies said today that some aspects of the legislation might be well founded, like delaying the marriage of women who carry the hepatitis virus until they can receive treatment.
But the same doctor, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said he had seen training videos within the Chinese health establishment advocating the sterilization of deaf people before marriage to prevent the possibility of transmitting deafness to a succeeding generation.
"The video showed a woman who was deaf holding up the papers showing that she had been sterilized and then she was granted permission to get married," the doctor said, adding that he did not know whether the video was a reflection of any official policy to sterilize the deaf at the time.
The doctor pointed out that any justification for sterilization on the grounds of deafness would be scientifically insupportable. 
"Part of this is based on stupid ideas and part of it may do some good, such as preventing the vertical transmission of hepatitis," he said.
The United States has in the past permitted eugenics laws. 
In the early part of the century, as many as 16 states authorized the sterilization of the mentally retarded, epileptics and those judged insane. 
Some laws included confirmed criminals, alcoholics, syphilitics, moral degenerates and prostitutes for sterilization.
