
Chinese companies are helping Iran develop chemical weapons, and the Clinton Administration is having only mixed success in getting the Chinese Government to halt such cooperation, a Pentagon official said today.
"Chinese firms have provided some assistance, both in terms of the infrastructure for building chemical plants and some of the precursors for developing agents," Bruce Reidel, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, told a House committee.
"We continue, when we become aware of such incidents, to raise them with the Chinese Government," he added.
But Mr. Reidel conceded that efforts to discourage the Chinese from entering such deals "have some success sometimes, not always."
"China's chemical industry is very rapidly growing at this time, and not all facets of it may be under the fullest scrutiny of the Chinese Government," he said.
Under pressure from the United States, China recently said it was suspending a deal to supply two nuclear power plants to Iran. 
The Clinton Administration declared that the deal was canceled, but the Chinese said it was only suspended.
Similar pressure has been applied to Russia in an unsuccessful effort to get it to cancel the sale of a nuclear power plant to Iran.
Mr. Reidel and Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff appeared before the House International Relations Committee, which is considering legislation to impose sanctions on foreign companies that help Iran develop its oil industry.
Mr. Tarnoff said the Administration supported the idea of putting more pressure on foreign companies, but had "some concerns" about details of the proposed legislation. 
He said that the measure would be difficult to monitor, particularly since other countries were unlikely to cooperate and that it could lead to "a state of acrimonious international litigation with our closest trading partners."
The State Department official further said the Administration would work with Congress to find an mutually acceptable approach to cracking down on Iran.
In a sharp exchange with Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, Mr. Tarnoff declined to publicly list countries that are refusing to cooperate with American efforts to curtail Iran's nuclear program, but said that he would provide the information at a closed session.
"The American people are entitled to know which of our friends and allies or other countries are unwilling to cooperate with us in putting restraints on Iran," Mr. Lantos said, questioning the State Department official. 
"I see no national security interests being involved in terms of keeping this private."
Mr. Tarnoff responded, "I must respectfully disagree."
He also conceded that there was little chance other nations would join the United States in halting all commercial transactions with Iran.
      
