
China and the United States made new progress today in resuming a program of high-level military contacts by agreeing to an exchange of visits of their top military officers next year.
But American defense officials visiting here this week reported that during private conversations they encountered trenchant rhetoric and signs of unrelenting determination by Beijing's military and civilian leaders to undermine the rule of the President of Taiwan, Lee Teng-hui.
In recent days, China has restated its intention to use all means, including military intimidation and force if necessary, to end what Beijing considers a drive by Mr. Lee to achieve independence for Taiwan.
Mr. Lee insists he is only seeking greater international recognition for the island, which has been estranged from the mainland since the Nationalists fled there after their defeat by the Communists in 1949.
As three days of talks ended, the Pentagon was receiving reports that China had begun a new military exercise off its southeastern coast near Taiwan, military officials here said.
It followed a Taiwanese drill earlier in the week intended to demonstrate the island's ability to repulse an invasion from the mainland.
The visit of the American delegation led by Joseph S. Nye, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, was the first by American military officials since the diplomatic rift that followed a White House decision to allow Mr. Lee to make a private visit to the United States in June.
And it demonstrated that United States-China relations are recovering at a time of unremitting military tension across the Taiwan Strait that could lead to another rupture in relations and, perhaps, military conflict.
"The Chinese have a military operation starting right now," an official traveling with Mr. Nye said tonight. 
"And what is clear is that China is brushing off military plans and operational contingencies that they haven't thought about since the 1950's. 
This is an issue we are very concerned about."
Mr. Nye and officials traveling with him said that communication between China and the United States is improving in some areas, but "there was no give whatsoever" on Taiwan, one official said.
"Every single person referred to Taiwan, and their point was that every Chinese is united on this question," the official said.
"It was interesting because they made a comparison with our system. 
They said you may have differences in your Congress, but in China we are all united that there is only one China and Taiwan is part of China."
Chinese military leaders, during extensive closed door talks with the American delegation, engaged in "subtle exploration" of how the United States would respond in the event of a military crisis over Taiwan, one official said.
But the American officials refused to discuss United States contingency planning. 
"We stand for peaceful resolution of disputes across the Taiwan Strait," Mr. Nye said at a news conference today.
Any use of force by China against Taiwan "would be a serious mistake" and, he added, continued military exercises near Taiwan "are not helpful."
Mr. Nye announced that the Chinese Defense Minister, Gen. Chi Haotian, would visit Washington next year and that Gen. John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would pay a reciprocal visit to Beijing.
Visits by American and Chinese warships to each other's ports will also resume, Mr. Nye said.
