
When Jiang Wen's powerful wartime film, "Devils on the Doorstep," won the Grand Prize in Cannes in May -- second only to the festival's Palme d'Or -- the word was that he faced trouble with China's film censors.
Two months later, that seems an understatement. 
His film languishes unscreened, officially condemned for political reasons that seem drastically out of kilter with China's increasingly buoyant, sophisticated society.
He has also fought with his investors over their demands, on commercial grounds, to shorten the 2-hour, 40-minute movie.
And now Mr. Jiang, one of China's most acclaimed actors as well as a second-time director -- he starred in Zhang Yimou's classic "Red Sorghum" in 1987 and the recent hit television series "Beijingers in New York" -- sounds utterly despondent.
"It's all too much like a Hitchcock thriller," Mr. Jiang, 37, said in an interview. 
"There's terror all around me, but I can't see what's going on."
Strangely, Mr. Jiang said, he personally has never been officially notified of the long list of demands made by the notoriously conservative Film Bureau. 
The bureau vets all scripts of films made in China and then must approve the finished product for release, often nit-picking scripts and nixing topics that can be broached in newspapers, magazines and books.
Mr. Jiang said the film's producers, the Asia Union Film and Entertainment Company of Hong Kong and the China Film Co-production Company, a required government-run partner that ushers foreign companies through the bureaucratic maze, had been told not to show him the Film Bureau's document.
More ominous, Mr. Jiang and his friends have heard repeated rumors that the Film Bureau plans to bar him from making or acting in films for many years. 
He said he had tried to meet with the authorities to discuss the matter but had been repeatedly rebuffed.
An official of the bureau's film censorship committee, Zhou Jiandong, said today: "The film hasn't been banned. 
It just hasn't passed the inspection process."
"This film has lots of problems," Mr. Zhou said in a telephone interview. 
"It was shown at a film festival abroad without prior approval, which is a clear violation. 
This film is at odds with a number of regulations concerning film content and distribution."
Asked about the rumors that Mr. Jiang might be barred from making new films, the official would only say: "We're still dealing with the matter. 
I can't say how they will resolve these problems."
"Devils on the Doorstep," which features Mr. Jiang as an actor as well as director, tells the story of a wounded Japanese soldier held prisoner by Chinese villagers in the last winter of World War II, as the Japanese invasion is crumbling.
In a story replete with ironies and cultural misunderstandings, most of the villagers treat the man well for a time, before they decide to trade him back to the Japanese for grain.
The rapacious Japanese occupation of China is a deeply sensitive historical topic here, a source of persistent personal bitterness and of frosty exchanges between the Chinese and Japanese governments.
This has led to contradictory attacks on Mr. Jiang. Long before the film was completed, government censors, not known for their appreciation of irony, began demanding that he change the title, apparently worried that characterizing the Japanese as devils might cause a furor. 
His producers, too, urged him to find a new title, worried about alienating potential Japanese viewers as well as about Beijing's approval. 
But Mr. Jiang would not budge.
Virtually all of the points raised by the censors in their review of the finished movie, though, involve its failure to paint every character in politically correct colors.
Copies of the April 21 appraisal have been faxed around Beijing, and it has even appeared on the Internet. 
It reads almost like a parody of censorship from the heyday of Mao's Cultural Revolution in the 1960's.
"The Japanese military anthem is played many times throughout the film," the letter says. 
"This signifies the strength of the Japanese military and severely hurts the feelings of the Chinese people."
"The Chinese are called 'chink pigs' by the Japanese many times throughout the film," it says. 
"This severely damages the image of China."
More generally, this "Official Opinion From the Film Censorship Committee of the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television" complains that too many Chinese in the film behave in a friendly manner toward the Japanese, "creating the impression that Chinese civilians neither hated nor resisted the Japanese invaders."
Mr. Jiang is berated for changing previously approved scenes and for failing to make previously demanded changes.
"There is a shot of a naked female," the letter says. 
"In general the style of the film is too vulgar."
The film's producers are invited to resubmit the film after complying with a lengthy list of demands for cuts and changes, and so far the matter remains at an impasse. 
But given the sweeping condemnation, it is hard to see how Mr. Jiang could make the film acceptable even if he tried.
"I feel pulled in all directions, and my will has been completely exhausted," Mr. Jiang said today.
"I'm just a filmmaker," he said. 
"I wanted to show how people react under extreme danger, how Chinese and Japanese responded and how in the middle of a war, people can lose all humanity.
"I never expected it would become so tangled up and politicized."
Mr. Jiang's plight is hardly unique. 
Since the mid-1990's the Film Bureau has if anything tightened its grip on filmmaking, causing anguish and humiliating choices for many directors and sending some abroad, leaving others to stick with innocuous topics.
The bonds of convention, prudery and ideological correctness imposed on domestically made movies seem all the more outdated considering some of the Hollywood films that are approved for showing -- and which are clobbering domestic films at the box office.
Most of the up to 10 foreign films allowed in each year are the likes of "Gladiator" or "Titanic," adventures and romances. 
But one of this spring's biggest hits in China was "The General's Daughter," which features a woman's corpse, naked and spread-eagled on the grass, and references to kinky sex that would never be allowed in a Chinese film.
"It's all right to portray Americans as decadent," one movie fan here explained with a laugh.
