
With animosity toward China growing on the right and left in Congress, President Clinton's national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, said yesterday that it remained "an open question" whether Congress would vote to revoke China's normal trading status.
Mr. Berger spoke as the Republican leadership in the House rescheduled this year's vote on the trading status for late June, a month earlier than expected, to assure a vote before the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule on July 1.
Mr. Berger said that even a close vote that preserved China's status could prove "corrosive," undercutting the Administration's efforts to deal with China's leaders on a variety of issues, from the environment to the spread of weapons.
"It is difficult for us to move this relationship to a new level where we have a greater chance of solving problems if we don't have a national consensus behind the policy," Mr. Berger said in an interview in his office at the White House.
The trade arrangement is called "most favored nation" status, although it is the normal trading arrangement accorded most countries by the United States. 
China's status is currently subject to yearly review, and advocates of renewal this year have been concerned that any problem in the handover of Hong Kong, especially televised protests that could provoke police reaction, could jeopardize passage.
One Republican aide said yesterday that the vote was being moved up to deny opponents the opportunity to rally support. 
That suggested confidence that the House will preserve the status but concern that opposition could be stronger than it has been in recent years.
In a speech delivered in New York at the Council on Foreign Relations, Mr. Berger said that the fight to revoke China's status was the "one development" that could undercut American policy toward China and "do grievous injury to the interests of the United States."
In his speech, Mr. Berger defended the Administration's policy, which seeks to engage China through trade and economic development, while making clear American objections to violations of human rights, among other things. 
He also said the United States would monitor how China takes control of Hong Kong to insure that its traditions and freedoms thrive, but that punishing China by revoking its trading status would only isolate Hong Kong.
"The goals of the opponents to normal trading relations with China are ones we share -- advocating human rights and religious freedom, promoting fair trade, strengthening regional and global security," he said in his speech. 
"But the method they have chosen -- destroying our economic relations with China -- is profoundly misguided."
In the interview, Mr. Berger said the Administration was articulating what he called a "clear and coherent" policy toward China as Congress moves toward what is expected to be a pitched fight.
The Administration hoped this year would bring calmer relations with China, culminating in a summit meeting between President Clinton and President Jiang Zemin in the fall. 
Last year's debate ended quickly, as members in the House voted solidly -- 286 to 141 -- to renew China's status.
But this year the debate has flared, driven by a lack of improvement in China's human rights record, the impending takeover of Hong Kong and the controversy over campaign finance.
Mr. Berger argued that critics of China had chosen the wrong way to register their outrage. 
He said that the United States had "an arsenal of tools" to punish China, including more targeted sanctions, like those imposed last month on two Chinese companies for helping Iran develop chemical weapons.
As for Hong Kong, he said the United States expected China to abide by the agreement reached with Britain in 1984 to maintain Hong Kong's freedoms under autonomy. 
The United States would gauge that, he said, by seeing whether elections for a new legislature take place soon, the civil service and judiciary continue to work unmolested, the economy remains open, and freedom of religion, speech and association is maintained.
"Living up to that pledge is as much in China's interest as it is in Hong Kong or in ours," he said in the speech.
"A smooth reversion will promote China's international prestige," he said. 
"Handled badly, the transition will tarnish China."
He did not, however, specify what steps the United States would take if China at some point in the future violated those standards.
