
Exploding economic growth is introducing new wealth and values in China and even eroding the bedrock of society, the family. 
Consider the Gao family of Nanjing, a city of 2.2 million residents about 200 miles from the mouth of the Yangtze River. 
The father, Gao Made, 76, is a professional painter, and the mother, Chen Ruqing, 70, is an art designer. 
As artists and intellectuals, they have benefited from the economic changes.
"After 1949, painting had to serve the people -- workers, farmers, soldiers," says Made, whose paintings of opera characters sell for as much as 6,000 yuan -- about $720. 
"During the Cultural Revolution, I was not allowed to paint. 
Now life is good. 
One can draw what one wants."
The couple's elder son, Gao Huan, 40, is also an amateur painter, but he has little time these days for artistic pursuits. 
One of a growing number of relatively wealthy entrepreneurs, he runs a factory that makes electronic components for the credit card industry and employs 20 workers. 
Weeknights and weekends are spent on his cellular telephone, paving the way for his next venture: a cement factory, which he hopes will thrive on a Yangtze River dam project.
Like an increasing number of urban Chinese, Huan is divorced, and he has remarried. 
He has a daughter from his previous marriage, Gao SinSin, 12, who lives with her maternal grandmother, and a second daughter, Gao Gage, 3, with his wife, Si Hui. 
(The one-child policy is relaxed in some cases, including divorce.) By law, Huan must pay child support. 
He initially gave SinSin half his earnings, which several years ago totaled 40 yuan a month. 
These days, he says, he gives her much more -- thousands of yuan at a time -- and hopes one day to send her to college.
It is a moral and constitutional obligation in China to support one's parents. 
Although a growing number of children have reneged on this contract, Huan has not: he shares his home with his parents as well as his wife and their daughter. 
His sister, Gao Qing, 46, lives nearby with her husband and 20-year-old son, a photography student. 
Although a heart ailment keeps her at home, she has achieved moderate success as a cartoonist for a children's magazine.
Inevitably, however, the new China is proving inhospitable for some. 
In 1992, Huan's younger brother, Gao Duo, 38, quit a longtime teaching job and, using money from his father, opened a restaurant in Nanjing. 
It quickly went bankrupt. 
He now works the late shift as a designer at a state-owned newspaper in Nanjing, a job gained through family connections. 
Though he earns a respectable salary -- about 1,000 yuan a month, or $120 -- Duo is burdened by a sense of failure. 
Divorced, he still lives with his former wife. 
Last year he tried suicide. 
His parents offer emotional support and he visits them every evening before work, but he has few friends. 
"Forging ahead now is difficult," he says.
Huan, meanwhile, is busy with his latest investment: a stud farm outside Nanjing, the first in the region. 
Though it has yet to turn a profit, it offers him a respite from his usual stress and provides a creative outlet.
"When I was young, I envied the democratic freedom of the West, their sexual liberty," Huan says. 
"Now I envy their horses."
