
AMERICA'S gastronomic weather vane is increasingly twisting southward, toward the homey regional fare of the coastal Carolinas and extending all the way to Louisiana and Texas. 
And some of the most vibrant restaurant scenes are found in South Florida, specifically Miami and Miami Beach.
Trying to keep up with restaurant comings and goings, particularly in Miami Beach, sometimes seems like counting ocean waves. 
A mighty Darwinian struggle is raging among restaurateurs to capture the renascent tourist business and the growing year-round trade of Miamians. 
Many are doing so by offering a unique and diverting cuisine that melds traditional American fare with products and techniques from the Caribbean.
Some chefs have rather grandiosely begun calling it New World Cuisine. 
No matter. 
When this fusion cooking succeeds, it can be exhilarating; when it flops, however, it goes down like a screen-bottomed sailboat.
Following are four greater Miami restaurants that are not only afloat but making waves.
 
Nemo
At the south end of Miami Beach is a winsome cafe called Nemo that looks like too much fun to serve good food -- but it does. 
Under Michael Schwartz, a self-taught chef, the small open kitchen turns out an impressive array of stagey creations that are as delectable as they are architectural. 
Mr. Schwartz reaches into the Caribbean pantry to invigorate his cooking but also borrows liberally from Japan and Southeast Asia.
Nemo's main dining room is as multihued and radiant as the islands themselves, with a bleached blue ceiling, terra cotta walls, color-splashed banquettes, high-tech copper lanterns dangling overhead and a spacious outdoor terrace framed by palm trees. 
The small open kitchen is so close to diners that from certain tables you might be privy to the romantic woes of the fellow who debones chicken breasts. 
Two other sizable rooms bring seating capacity to about 200.
A good way to start is with thick cubes of polenta fries that are crisp and greaseless outside and almost creamy at the center, served with spicy ketchup -- close to a meal in themselves. 
As a counterpoint, two friends and I sampled dainty garlic-cured salmon rolls cushioned with filaments of alfalfa sprouts and served with a mild wasabi mayonnaise. 
Big meaty prawns gift-wrapped in shredded filo were nicely cooked but sorely needed a dipping sauce.
This chef loves to stoke the jalapeno fires, so ask the waiter about B.T.U. levels in dishes described as spicy. 
A Vietnamese beef salad -- strips of skirt steak layered over a mound of sliced sweet peppers, onions, mung bean sprouts, and peanuts -- made my point. 
Within this innocent looking dish, on the beef itself, was an incendiary salsa that had nearly everyone at my table gulping water -- not really the Vietnamese style of seasoning. 
A safer bet is the mixed green salad with shaved Parmesan and crispy rings of cleanly fried calamari in a Caesar-style dressing.
Typical of Mr. Schwartz at his best is an entree of wok-charred salmon, rosy in the center, flecked with toasted pumpkin seeds -- a wonderful marriage of texture and flavor. 
It was sitting atop a salad composed of four kinds of sprouts (you see a lot of these here) and sweet peppers tossed in a cleansing soy-lime vinaigrette. 
At lunch one day we tried a hefty sandwich of roasted duck, aromatic with tamarind, on a roll along with melted fontina cheese -- the duck was actually good enough to have carried the show without the cheesy understudy. 
It came with fragile, crisp homemade potato chips.
The desserts by Hedy Goldsmith, the pastry chef, were a highlight of the tour of Miami restaurants. 
Strikingly beautiful but not contrived, they are marvels of texture and balance. 
Among her many memorable creations are malted milk flan ringed with tangerine caramel and orange, served with a chocolate-almond biscotti, Key lime napoleon with a Caribbean fruit salsa, and Jamaican ginger cake with tamarind-pineapple chutney and macadamia brittle ice cream.
Nemo's offers a wide and eclectic range of wines, including a number of relative unknowns. 
Prices start in the $20 range but escalate fast.
 
Norman's
About half an hour's drive down the coast in Coral Gables is one of the hottest new dining spots in Greater Miami, called Norman's. 
The owner and chef, Norman Van Aken, has been on the scene for more than a decade with several restaurants, most recently a Mano. 
His exuberant approach to Caribbean-American cooking, which includes hints of Asian and Mexican flavors, is carried out with intelligence and visual flair.
Just reading the exacting menu at Norman's is an event. 
Here's an example from the dinner menu: "Pork Tenderloin with Haitian Grits, 21st Century Mole, Smoky Plantain Crema and a Red Onion, Black Bean and Sweet Corn Salsa."
We couldn't ascertain what made grits from Haiti superior to others, nor could our server enlighten us about the chronological reference to mole -- but it was fun trying. 
All this scholarship was in vain anyway, for the wood-fired pork was dry and tough -- the only disappointment in an otherwise exciting and illuminating meal.
Norman's is a big, airy place done in terra cotta and stucco, with Moorish arches, two capacious wood-burning ovens, and flattering lighting.
Because we had made an accidental detour into what seemed like part of the Everglades and arrived 45 minutes late, we had to wait at the bar until a table opened upstairs. 
While the balcony tables are pleasant, you would be better off asking for a table in the festive main dining room (and read your map carefully).
As for the food, several appetizers alone are worth hitchhiking down to Coral Gables. 
Conch chowder is a brilliant combination of long, exceptionally tender strips of conch in a saffron-tinged cream with hints of fresh orange, star anise and coconut. 
The season's first soft shell crabs were terrific when dusted with cornmeal, perfectly cooked, and set over citric lime butter along with purple potatoes and red onions. 
Bacalao (cod) fritters were cleanly fried and meaty, not as peppery as they might have been, but satisfying with a dipping sauce of aioli enlivened with ancho peppers.
The array of main courses is daunting. 
Seafood is certainly a high point as judged by the beautifully sauteed yellowtail snapper in citrus butter with asparagus spears and wonderfully chunky mashed potatoes. 
Also excellent are the grilled "diver-harvested' scallops perched on fluffy mashed sweet potatoes, fresh corn and a lemon-vinaigrette holding chunks of salty pancetta -- quite a mouthful, but it works.
One creation that sank under its own weight was a ravioli filled with a mass of tiny shrimp and blue crab along with portobellos, leeks, tomatoes, mustard cream and balsamic vinegar.
Among many delectable dishes was the unremittingly rich loin lamb chops in a lustrous reduction of lamb shank ragout, wild mushrooms and red wine.
Servers at Norman's have a challenge keeping up with the chef's fancy footwork, but they try hard. 
On Saturday night service was slow and scattered.
And a restaurant of this caliber should know better than to print its wine list in eye-straining small agate type. 
The international selections are mostly big-name standards with prices starting in the mid-$20 range and going up.
Desserts are as polymorphic as the rest of the menu. 
Try the vertical strudel filled with dates paired with ginger ice cream and a thyme-honey sauce; the banana-rum flan with caramelized bananas and a crunchy spiced cookie; and the sharp-sweet cinnamon poached Granny Smith apple with gianduja (a chocolate hazelnut flavoring) ice cream.
 
Chef Allen's
That a kid from Brooklyn, trained at a local technical college and apprenticed at the classically oriented Le Cirque in Manhattan would find his way to Florida and become a pioneer of Caribbean-American cuisine might seem peculiar -- but Allen Susser believes that his unconventional road has been an asset.
"If you know the basics of French cuisine then you can build on it or modify it," said the genial, soft-spoken chef while making the rounds recently in his innovative restaurant, Chef Allen's, in Aventura (formerly North Miami Beach).
Mr. Susser, who succeeds as much as or more than most, infuses his food with the sunny flavors of mango, papaya, starfruit, mamey (a sweet, football-shaped fruit with a granular texture), coconut, and tangerines. 
Other products that are common on his menu include wahoo and cobia (two local fish), mussels and shrimp, pompano, and conch. 
While the notion of combining fruit with seafood might seem about as appealing as mixing gin with milk, Susser has built his ever-changing menu around such unlikely juxtapositions.
"A lot of the fruits have high acid levels, and that balances the sweetness," said the soft-spoken Mr. Susser while making the rounds of his Art Deco dining room. 
"It's all a question of balance."
Chef Allen's 120-seat, pink-toned, neon-accented dining room with well spaced tables facing a glass-enclosed working kitchen seems an appropriate place for this kind of fare. 
Our menu got off the mark nicely with a mound of rich tuna belly tartare crowned with beluga caviar and set over shaved fresh coconut and a puddle of semisweet coconut cream -- surprisingly, the coconut did not bully the tuna and caviar, but rather provided a sprightly, sweetish foundation. 
Less successful, however, was seared foie gras paired with boniato (a root vegetable) and a sweetish mango ketchup -- flavors were scattered in every direction.
Charred red snapper, an especially delicate fish, was wonderful over a sweet-tart fresh corn vinaigrette and black bean salsa. 
A surprising side dish was refreshing slaw of calabaza (a winter squash), which has a crunchy texture and semisweet flavor. 
If soft shell crabs are in season try the version coated with pine nuts in an Indian River orange sauce.
Another palate-popping creation is called "spicy citrus-blasted local calamari with baby fennel, blood orange and Bermuda onions."
This is a salad, and the combination of hot spice and sweet orange, followed by cooling fennel, is memorable. 
So is the tangerine-barbecued duck with cranberry-orange preserve, a deft balance of sweet and tart.
Mr. Susser has assembled an earnest and unpretentious service staff who understand the boss's food and convey it with authority. 
The international wine selection is broad and well chosen, but expensive.
 
China Grill
About a year and a half ago one of Manhattan's more popular cross-cultural restaurants, China Grill, a Cal-Asian hybrid, transported its dramatic, family style dining to South Beach -- and judging from the crowds you would think they were giving away Broadway theater tickets with each order of dumplings. 
Actually, the reason China Grill is so mobbed is because the food is light, inventive and invigorating.
The cavernous, theatrical dining room has the nightclub look with a black ceiling, artsy, saucer-shaped lanterns hanging from above, black tiled walls, penitential pop music, a giant circular bar, and an immense kitchen populated by enough cooks to operate a moderately sized Carnival Cruise liner. 
But the strategy works, for food emerges from the kitchen quickly and absolutely fresh and hot.
Our server informed us that the food at China Grill was served "as soon as it is ready," not necessarily when the customer is ready. 
"O.K.," we shrugged. 
"We're good sports."
The food here could not be defined as New World or New Floridian (I would call it Gulf Stream Cuisine), but its Asian approach incorporates many tropical products. 
The first dish to arrive was stir-fried sesame-citrus noodles, as good as they sounded -- citric, with a touch of soy, and faintly crunchy. 
Lobster pancakes were a delight, too, thin, scallion-flavored crepes holding sweet chunks of lobster cooked in coconut milk with shiitake mushrooms, scallions and enough red chilies to give a kick. 
One of the best dishes overall, and a copious one, is the Peking duck salad -- a mountain of mixed greens tossed in a lovely citric dressing supporting crispy strips of duck meat and skin as well as meaty, succulent duck legs.
Some of the main courses are equally intriguing. 
A dish of charred Szechuan beef -- marinated in sake, soy and cilantro -- was cooked perfectly, medium rare with a slightly salty, barbecue flavor. 
We ordered mashed potatoes, which were fluffy and moist and had a lingering bite of wasabi mustard.
Another dish to try is rosy barbecued salmon swabbed with a Chinese mustard sauce and accompanied by stir-fried greens. 
The only low point of the meal was the listless grilled shrimp over bland black fettuccine.
The expensive, mostly California wine list focuses appropriately on sharp, high-acid wines that can stand up to these flavors.
For dessert, the pleasant apple cake was paired with harsh, bitter cinnamon ice cream. 
Go instead with the crazy-sounding wasabi tiramisu with chocolate espresso sauce -- unauthentic, but who cares when it's this good?
 
Diner's guide
 
All four restaurants accept major credit cards. 
Unless otherwise noted, the prices below are for a three-course dinner for two, including a glass of wine each, and tax.
 
Nemo, 100 Collins Avenue (at First Street), Miami Beach; (305) 532-4550. 
Open daily for lunch (they call it brunch on Sunday) and dinner. 
Smoking is allowed in the open-air sections of the dining rooms. 
$100.
 
Norman's, 21 Almeria Avenue, Coral Gables; (305) 446-6767. 
Open Monday to Friday for lunch, Monday to Saturday for dinner, closed Sunday. 
Smoking allowed in the bar. 
$100.
 
Chef Allen's, 19088 Northeast 29th Avenue, Aventura (formerly North Miami Beach); (305) 935-2900. 
Open for dinner daily. 
The dining room has a smoking section. 
$95 to $105.
 
China Grill, 404 Washington Street, at Fifth Street; (305) 534-2211. 
Open for lunch and dinner Monday to Friday, dinner only Saturday and Sunday. 
Smoking allowed in most of the restaurant. 
$90 to $110.   B.M.
