
I USED to avoid Singapore, dismissing it as a somewhat sterile, westernized city that had little to offer in the way of authentic Asian cooking. 
Instead, I traveled to Hong Kong, for years Asia's leading culinary mecca.
But times have changed: Move over Hong Kong and make room for Singapore. 
About 10 years ago, I spent four days in Singapore, and was stunned by the eclectic selection of dishes. 
That was the beginning of a love affair, and I now return each year.
In Singapore, as in much of Malaysia, there is an overwhelming supply of delicious food that reflects the cooking of its residents who are Malaysian, Chinese, Indian, European, Thai and Vietnamese. 
Some years back, once the government realized that tourists were interested in ethnic delicacies, the restaurant scene began to thrive -- with refined places to eat as well as the countless hawker stalls.
And since the city government rules over sanitary codes with an iron fist, tourists can safely eat off the street.
 
Au Jardin Les Amis
On a trip last December, the city was abuzz over a new, small restaurant. 
I resisted going, since the idea of a fancy European restaurant in the heart of Asia really put me off. 
But Au Jardin Les Amis, in a charming, colonial-style bungalow smack in the middle of the lush Botanic Gardens, is positively enchanting.
Justin Quek, the shy but charming native Singaporean chef, first started cooking in 1982, but his formal training began three years later, in Singapore, Bangkok, then Europe. 
There he worked in such notable restaurants as the Hotel de Crillon in Paris and L'Oasis on the Cote d'Azur. 
While Mr. Quek has been inspired and influenced by his mentors, he uses local Asian ingredients to create his own innovative, distinctive style of cooking.
A superb, three-course tasting lunch (which cost about $35 a person, not including wine, at 1.6 Singapore dollars to the U.S. dollar) began with a carpaccio of tuna served with a smoked eel parfait. 
The clean, fresh flavor of the paper-thin fish slices contrasted beautifully with the satiny texture of the savory mousse. 
My companion's appetizer was equally delicious: circles of watermelon flesh topped with a tomato "jelly" and drizzled with aged balsamic vinegar and olive oil. 
We ravaged a plate of tender ravioli stuffed with celery root, sprinkled with truffle shavings served on top of a perfectly poached egg yolk, mopping up with freshly baked French bread. 
Meltingly tender smoked salmon slices were dotted with roe and drizzled with a touch of mirin (sweetened rice wine). 
My lunch entree of braised veal cheeks with a black truffle sauce was slightly heavy, but memorable.
The meal ended on a high note of refreshingly cold ice, flavored with vodka and fresh lime, served with a soursop (a tangy local fruit) mousse. 
The menu changes each week. 
The wine list is extensive with 900 offerings.
 
The Imperial Hot Wok
I have long been singing praises of the Imperial Herbal restaurant, one of my favorite Singapore haunts, where Chinese master chefs collaborate with a traditional herbalist to create superb food. 
Now the Imperial Herbal has spawned a cousin, the Imperial Hot Wok, a casual Chinese bistro in the heart of the newly restored financial district known as Far East Square. 
The decor may remind you of Soho, but the menu offers unfailingly authentic Hakka, Beijing, Sichuan and Cantonese specialties.
The favorite dish of our group of four (and the house special), which I had never tasted outside of a Hakka home, is the Hakka village rice special set. 
We were first given a large bowl of fragrant jasmine rice, lightly seasoned with chopped shallots and dried shrimp. 
It was accompanied by stir-fried vegetable side dishes including tofu seasoned with leeks, chopped, cooked long beans, and minced pickled radish. 
Each customer then helps himself, starting with a bowl of rice and adding spoonfuls of the cooked vegetables with chopped peanuts. 
The end result is a bowl of delicious-tasting custom-made fried rice, but the flavor is much better.
We also tried the succulently tender steamed herbal chicken, which was stuffed with red dates, wolf berries, other (unidentifiable) Chinese herbs and lightly seasoned with a rich oyster sauce. 
Steamed sea bass was unusual -- but delicious -- with its Thai-influenced tangy lime dressing, and the boiled garlic chive and shrimp dumplings were satisfyingly homespun. 
For dessert, we shared spoonfuls of freshly made coconut ice cream with a sumptuous, sweetened red bean topping and calamasi sherbet made from a pungent local lime.
Prices are extremely reasonable. 
There is a decent selection of moderately priced wines, mainly from Australia. 
My drink of choice is the Hawthorn Spritzer, a tart fruit and soda water drink.
 
Blue Ginger
To taste the true food of Singapore, you must sample home cooking, but the next best thing is to eat is at Blue Ginger, a bit of a local institution, with two locations. 
Some Singaporean friends claim that the food can be inconsistent, but on a good evening the kitchen (especially at the older restaurant on Tanjong Road) can turn out very good nonya specialties.
Nonya is the the local, high-bred cuisine, which originated when Chinese traders settling in Singapore, Penang and Malacca took Malay wives; it reflects a melting pot of many different cultures. 
The Chinese, who were from southern China, were accustomed to robust foods cooked with dark soy sauce, leeks, garlic and onions. 
The Malaysian influence is apparent in the use of ingredients like coconut milk, tamarind, screw pine and fresh lime leaves. 
Indian seasonings such as cumin, cardamom and curry mixtures are as prevalent as Thai flavorings like lemongrass and shrimp paste. 
The abundant use of chili peppers, both fresh and dried, impart a fiery brilliance.
Traditionally, the food is cooked by women, and this custom is preserved at Blue Ginger where Vivien Lian, who is the niece of a famous nonya cook, Leong Yee Soo, has developed a menu that reflects the best aspects of the nonya style.
The Tanjong Pagar Road restaurant, which I visited recently, is like stepping back in time to colonial Singapore. 
Antique wooden door panels, vibrant folk-art paintings and gilt mirrors give Blue Ginger an elegant but cozy atmosphere.
We started with a simple, traditional soup, bakwan kepeting, garnished with plump chopped pork and crabmeat balls and thin bamboo slices. 
The broth was light and flavorful and the pork balls were tender. 
Another unusual and delightful appetizer is kuah pie tee, small homemade pastry cups filled with a mixture of shredded bamboo shoot and turnips seasoned with garlic and bean paste and topped with a slice of shrimp and a sprinkling of chilies.
Stewed pork shoulder (babi pong tay) was succulently tender and redolent of star anise. 
My Singaporean friend insisted that we try another beef dish, beef randang, made of braised cubes of meat rich with the flavors of lemongrass, ginger, curry and coconut milk. 
Another classic, ayam buah keluak, a stew made with chicken and stuffed keluak nuts, which are seasoned with lemongrass, galangal and turmeric, was slightly heavy, but de rigueur for a nonya meal. 
The fish cakes, steamed in banana leaves (otak otak), were nicely flavored with turmeric and lime. 
We also tried ikan goreng chili garam, a gorgeous, crispy-fried sea bass topped with a fiery chili paste and then squeezed with fresh calamasi lime juice.
For dessert, I cast caution to the wind and ordered durian chendol, sweetened red beans and jelly surrounded by coconut milk, topped with a durian puree. 
Durian is infamous for its odor, and the flavor is definitely an acquired taste. 
But the puree is made with palm sugar so the taste was similar to caramel. 
When paired with the coconut milk and red beans, it was sublime. 
Another winning dessert was longan pulot itam, a traditional recipe made with black rice cooked with dried longans, then topped with coconut milk. 
There is a decent wine selection, but we opted for beer and glasses of freshly squeezed calamasi juice.
 
The Seafood International Market Restaurant
Have you ever dreamed of a restaurant where you walk in, grab a grocery cart and fill it with all the ingredients of your dinner, fresh from a produce bin and row on row of fish tanks?
You then hand the fresh food over to a chef, tell him whether you want it cooked a la Thai, Vietnamese, Chinese or Malaysian and, shortly, the dishes are delivered to your table.
Well, this is no fantasy; it's the way it's done at the Seafood International Market Restaurant near the airport. 
No matter how many times I visit, I still feel a child's delight at the process of selecting the food and watching the chefs cook it.
The decor is definitely no frills bordering on funky. 
Diners are given the choice of eating in air-conditioned comfort inside or outside on a huge veranda-type room. 
(Since Singaporean nights can be pleasantly balmy, I generally opt for the fresh air.)
Forget the decor; the attraction is fresh seafood.
My Singaporean friends and I have our favorite dishes: usually we start with tom yam kung, a Thai hot and sour seafood soup garnished with plump shrimp and generously seasoned with lemongrass, kaffir lime leaves, hot chilies, fish sauce and cilantro. 
The Seafood International version is heavy on the chilies, leaving your taste buds slightly numb.
If I'm being treated, or feeling expansive, I order the lobster sashimi -- so fresh and simple that it's quite amazing -- especially with the presentation: The head is placed at the front of the platter and usually the antennae are still twitching (not for the fainthearted). 
Drunken prawns are another winner. 
The shrimp or prawns are brought out to the table in a plastic bag, freshly plucked from the tank, and cooked tableside with some Shaoxing rice wine, similar in flavor to a very dry sherry. 
The shrimp steam in their own juices. 
You eat them with your fingers.
Other special dishes are the Singapore chili crab served with a spicy tomato-based sweet and sour sauce that is generously seasoned with garlic and ginger. 
I love to mop up the sauce with an order of garlic toast, a custom I learned from one of my native buddies. 
The crab or lobster is stir-fried simply in the Cantonese manner with scallions and ginger.
For the end of the meal, there is a table of wonderful Thai desserts. 
Most are sumptuous and slightly heavy, but the sweet rice pudding flavored with coconut milk, the coconut tapioca pudding served with cooked yam or taro, and the mango pudding are delicious.
Beer, wine and soft drinks are offered.
 
The Banana Leaf Apollo Restaurant
In the heart of Little India on Racecourse Road, the Banana Leaf Apollo Restaurant can be combined with a visit to this part of the city with its spice shops, clothing bazaar and stalls where cooks make wonderful Indian breads and snacks.
After a recent renovation, the Banana Leaf is now rather stylish with gleaming granite floors and air-conditioning. 
The restaurant is only a step up from cafeteria style, but the food is quite delicious, inexpensive and well worth a trip.
Once seated, customers are given large banana leaves instead of plates. 
Steaming-hot white rice or fragrant biryani rice flavored with saffron and turmeric is spooned into the center. 
You then choose a type of main entree, which includes a number of curries as well as fried chicken and mutton. 
The most famous dish is the fish head curry, the head and meat served in a fiery red curry sauce redolent of turmeric, ginger, cumin, chili powder, coconut milk and tamarind.
My companion, who has a rather unadventurous palate, ordered the tender tikka chicken, a classic Indian dish marinated in salt, pepper, chili peppers and fresh lime juice, then baked in a tandoor oven. 
I preferred the chicken masala with its sumptuous sauce flavored with an abundance of spices and thickened with cashews and almonds.
Other enticing entrees are spicy fish sambal and mutton curry. 
The meal also comes with assorted side vegetables -- cabbage, long beans and "lady fingers" (an Asian vegetable with a texture similar to okra).
A delicious, filling meal is easily under $10 a person.
 
Bill of fare
Au Jardin Les Amis is at the EJH Corner House in the Singapore Botanic Gardens, Cluny Road; (65) 466-8812, fax (65) 466-8227. 
Open for lunch and dinner. 
An eight-course degustation dinner is $65 a person, not including wine. 
Reservations are not easily come by since the restaurant has only 12 tables, but they can be made up to a month in advance (for Saturday night the restaurant suggests calling three weeks ahead).
The Imperial Hot Wok Restaurant is at 01-01 Far East Square, 72 Telok Ayer Street in the financial district; (65) 438-8918, fax (65) 438-8919. 
Lunch costs about $12 a person; dinner, $20 to $25 a person, not including wine or beer. 
Reservations for lunch (when tables are packed with financial district workers) and dinner are recommended.
Blue Ginger has two branches: at 260 Orchard Road, 05-02C The Heeren, (65) 835-3928, and at 97 Tanjong Pagar Road, (65) 222-3928, fax (65) 222-3860. 
(I prefer the older restaurant on Tanjong Pagar Road.) Prices are quite reasonable: about $12 a person for lunch and $18 to $20 for dinner. 
Reservations should be made a day ahead, especially for weekends.
The Seafood International Market Restaurant is at the UDMC Seafood Center at 902 East Coast Highway near the airport; (65) 345-1211-13, fax (65) 440-9703. 
The average cost per person for dinner with a selection of three different seafood courses (not including lobster), vegetables, rice and dessert is $25 to $30 a person. 
Reservations are usually not necessary since the restaurant is so big.
The Banana Leaf Apollo Restaurant is at 54/56/58 Racecourse Road in Little India; (65) 293-8682, fax (65) 293-6410. 
Rice plates are $6 to $7 apiece. 
The fish head curry, which feeds four to five people, is $17.
