
On a lush hillside here is a museum that has it all: Torture Cave with iron rods heating ominously in a fire, an American-inspired concentration camp, grisly photographs of corpses, and a riveting sound-and-light show of Communist heroes being massacred in 1949.
The museum is a reminder that the Government stays in power not only by constructing prisons, but also by building history.
This is one museum your Chinese tour guide is unlikely to take you to. 
It used to be called the "Museum of the Crimes of America and Chiang Kai-shek," but city officials politely changed the name in 1984 to "Martyrs' Memorial."
The museum recounts the imprisonment and eventual massacre of underground Communists by the previous Government -- supposedly with American connivance -- in the years before the Communist revolution of 1949. 
But more broadly, the aim is to win young people's hearts and minds.
"Our task is to use historical facts to provide a revolutionary education for young people, especially students in elementary and high schools," said Li Hua, the director of the museum.
 
A Dangerous Process
The museum here is a redoubt of the Government forces in a broad conflict over modern Chinese history. 
In a society where there are no meaningful elections, history is called upon to provide legitimacy for the rulers.
Naturally, this is a dangerous process, and the history books here are stuffed in the same way that ballot boxes are in other countries. 
But scholars are increasingly daring in investigating and writing about the Communist Party's dirty laundry, and for the first time in this struggle for control of history the party itself seems to be on the defensive.
Even here in this museum, Mr. Li acknowledges some difficulties. 
"A lot of kids aren't interested in revolutionary history," he said. 
"They're interested in Hong Kong pop stars, in Western films."
The United States does not come out very well in this museum, which two million people are herded through each year.
The factual starting point for the museum is that China and the United States operated a cooperative center from 1943 to 1946 to train Chinese police and intelligence agents. 
Chongqing, then known as Chungking, was the wartime capital of China, and the Communists and the Nationalists were in an uneasy partnership against Japan.
After the Americans withdrew from the center in 1946, the Nationalists used it as a political prison. 
That is the basis for its name -- on signs and pamphlets -- as the "Chinese-American Cooperation Center Concentration Camp."
In the museum, one photograph shows an American training a Chinese Nationalist policeman how to handcuff a person by pinning his arm behind his back. 
The caption reads: "Training in murder."
Photographs of American police officers training Chinese police are interspersed with gruesome pictures of the corpses of Communists who were killed years later in a 1949 massacre of 200 prisoners.
In a Chinese-language booklet written by Mr. Li, he refers to the "Chinese-American Cooperation Center concentration camp, where American and Chiang Kai-shek reactionary elements brutally suppressed the revolutionaries."
The aim seems to be to tar the United States and at the same time to burnish the credentials of the Communists for standing up to the Western imperialists.
Asked if the museum is trying to blame the United States for China's own atrocities, Mr. Li looked rather hurt. 
He said that the museum had always acknowledged that the American role ended before the torture and killings began. 
"We don't have an anti-American view," he insisted.
The purpose, Mr. Li and other museum officials said, was not to vilify the United States or the Nationalists, but to build patriotism and give young people heroes they could respect.
But in a larger sense, the party has not built its history museums to promote family values so much as to stay in power. 
The leadership's survival strategy is multi-pronged -- other major elements include silencing dissent and raising living standards -- but one important dimension is to control history.
That is becoming more and more difficult, however, as China becomes a more open, porous and pluralistic society.
Among the writers who are challenging the official version of history, none is more feared by the Government than Dai Qing, a 51-year-old who grew up as the adopted daughter of a Chinese marshal.
 
'I Tell the Truth'
Ms. Dai wrote about Wang Shiwei, a young Communist who during the 1940's lived in the party's prerevolutionary base at Yanan. 
Mr. Wang mildly protested the practice of giving special favors to the leaders, and for this he was executed.
The essay was a revelation to many Chinese who know that today's Government is repressive but who had believed that the Communist Party at least started off in a more tolerant spirit.
"Why do they hate me so much?"
Ms. Dai asked the other day. 
"Because I explain what our history really was like. 
I tell the truth."
Correction
