
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came under fire today both by lawmakers who oppose sanctions against China over its human rights record and those who favor tough measures to pressure Beijing.
In a visit to Capitol Hill, Mr. Christopher indicated that President Clinton would adopt a middle-of-the-road approach, signaling that the Administration would renew China's favorable trade status, while at the same time pinning some lesser sanctions on China.
At a meeting with Senator Max Baucus of Montana and other opponents of trade sanctions, Mr. Christopher was urged not even to impose partial trade sanctions, such as denying favorable tariffs to products made by state-owned companies.
After the meeting, Mr. Baucus and several other legislators sent a letter to Mr. Clinton asserting that partial sanctions were "likely to prove unworkable."
Last June Mr. Clinton issued an executive order saying that China's most favored nation trading status would be renewed only if Beijing made substantial overall progress on human rights.
In his letter, Mr. Baucus said that revoking the special trade benefits "for goods produced by 'state enterprises' does not seem even theoretically possible," adding: "China has no sharp distinction between 'public' and 'private' sectors.
"We hope you will avoid a political compromise that is very likely to prove unworkable."
The letter was also signed by Senator John Danforth, a Missouri Republican, Representative Robert Matsui, a California Democrat, and Representative Jim Kolbe, an Arizona Republican.
Mr. Christopher also met with Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat, and others who support strong measures to pressure China to improve its human rights performance.
In an interview, Ms. Pelosi said she told Mr. Christopher, "China has not made overall significant progress and therefore hasn't complied with the President's executive order."
She said it would be wholly inadequate for Mr. Clinton to punish China, as some lawmakers have suggested, by only banning sales of Chinese handguns or semiautomatic weapons.
"That wouldn't be sufficient, not even close," she said. 
"Let's get real about this. 
It is important for us to have sanctions that are real and that pressure the Chinese."
She said she supported partial sanctions that would end favorable tariffs for China's state-owned industries or those run by the Chinese military.
Late this afternoon Mr. Clinton's top foreign policy and economic advisers met to discuss what decison to make on China. 
Some Administration officials say he will announce his decision in the next few days.
At a news conference today, Mr. Clinton said he had an idea where his China decison was going, but added 'there are a number of things that still have to be resolved."
