
Calling the battle for human rights and democracy in China a "long-term struggle," the Clinton Administration today condemned the harsh sentence meted out to a former student leader, Wang Dan, but said Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to China in mid-November would go ahead as scheduled.
American officials acknowledged that the timing of the verdict was embarrassing, coming only hours after a midlevel American delegation sent to prepare for Mr. Christopher's visit left Beijing after discussions that included human rights and Mr. Wang in particular.
Abuses of human rights in China, and Mr. Wang's case, will be an important topic for Mr. Christopher, and for President Clinton when he meets the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, in Manila on Nov. 
24.
But the senior American officials added that other issues were also important, including North Korean belligerence, nuclear nonproliferation and arms sales to Pakistan and Iran, Chinese concerns about an American-Japanese security treaty and continuing tensions between India and Pakistan.
The Administration is trying to build a relationship with China that will not be hostage to any particular issue, the officials said.
Denying that they were playing down human rights, the officials said they were looking ahead to a possible visit to Beijing this year by Vice President Al Gore, followed by an exchange of summit meetings between Mr. Jiang and Mr. Clinton, probably in 1997 and 1998.
Moreover, the United States is talking to the Chinese about a larger "package" on human rights that could include the release or medical parole of noted dissidents, prison visits to Chinese detainees by the International Committee of the Red Cross and a "more structured channel" to raise human rights concerns with Beijing.
In exchange, the United States might be willing to drop its co-sponsorship of an annual United Nations resolution condemning Chinese human rights practices. 
The United States has failed to win support for the resolution for the last seven years, and some American officials regard the exercise as increasingly sterile.
"But if we are going to back off on the resolution, we need real systemic progress on human rights," a senior American official said today. 
"If we get enough of a package to pass the red-face test, then some in the Administration would favor it."
This topic was among those discussed with the Chinese by the American officials who left Beijing just before the Wang verdict.
Beijing also cares deeply about the presidential visits themselves, a permanent renewal of the most-favored-nation trading status for China, making yearly or biannual renewals unnecessary, and Chinese membership on favorable terms in the World Trade Organization.
Stanley Roth, formerly Asia director of the National Security Council and now at the United States Institute for Peace, said that the Chinese also wanted stronger military-to-military relations, including access to some American technologies, and that most of these benefits "just won't be doable without some real improvement on human rights" and regional issues, like Taiwan.
Good relations "are not just about good feelings," he said. 
"Both countries have to benefit."
A senior American official said that the Chinese have been unresponsive on human rights issues no matter what the American strategy, a stand he attributed to political and economic uncertainty in China, where competing factions cannot show weakness on questions of national security and sovereignty.
"Human rights remains on our agenda," the official continued. 
"We try to approach this in a productive way and so far they're not responding. 
We know they want better relations, and we've made it clear the full scope of our relationship cannot be realized so long as we have this sorry performance on human rights."
Criticism of the American policy was muted. 
Bob Dole's campaign did not comment on the Wang case. 
Even Human Rights Watch/Asia, which has long urged a resolute response to human rights abuses in China, said the Wang verdict made it more vital that Mr. Christopher go to Beijing. 
Its Washington director, Mike Jendrzejczyk, said that human rights should be "a top issue on his agenda and that he make it clear that any possibility of a presidential summit is dependent on China making serious progress on human rights both in China and Tibet."
"The Chinese read the Administration as downplaying human rights in the relationship," Mr. Jendrzejczyk said.
James R. Lilley, a former Ambassador to China, said: "The major motive is to take a high-profile dissident and break him as a message to other dissidents that they will pay a high price. 
The second message is, 'Don't count on the Americans to help you.'
And the security apparatus wants to tell Christopher that 'importuning is unwelcome, you Americans are living in a different world and we have support in Asia for our policies.'
"
Michael D. McCurry, Mr. Clinton's spokesman, deplored the verdict today, saying, "We continue to stress that we believe that freedom of expression as recognized by the Declaration on Human Rights is the hallmark of any civil society."
He was referring to a 1948 United Nations human rights accord.
Asked if Mr. Clinton could point to any demonstrable gains on human rights issues from his policy of constructive engagement with the Chinese, Mr. McCurry said:
"It's been very tough going in the area of human rights. 
There has not been progress that the President would see as sufficient. 
But the struggle for human rights, for freedom and for democracy is clearly one that is a long-term struggle when it comes to societies that are having a hard time adjusting to the realities of the world we now live in."
      
