
Citing national security, China's Government announced on Tuesday night that it would further restrict the flow of information into the nation by more closely regulating international agencies that supply financial news to China.
International wire agencies selling economic information in China -- namely Reuters and Dow Jones -- will now be "supervised" by the official New China News Agency for the content of their reports as well as the subscriptions they sell to Chinese customers.
While the full ramifications of the decision may not be clear for days or weeks, it appears to have been prompted by concern among Chinese leaders about growing access to information from abroad, both from international news agencies and from the Internet, although the Internet is not yet used widely in China. 
At the very least, the decision seems intended to intimidate foreign news organizations.
"Foreign economic information providers will be punished in accordance with the law if their released information to Chinese users contains anything forbidden by Chinese laws and regulations, or slanders or jeopardizes the national interests of China," said the announcement, as reported by the news agency itself. 
It described the decision as having been issued by China's Cabinet in the form of a circular.
In addition to the Government's desire to limit information it deems unwelcome, however, a driving force in the decision was apparently the New China News Agency's desire both for hands-on control over information networks and, perhaps even more, the right to charge fees to users and sellers of information.
An American news media executive in Beijing said the Chinese news agency has been "trying to do this for months."
"I can't believe the Government finally went along with it," the executive said. 
"It's this current climate of paranoia that allowed it to happen."
If the New China News Agency stands to gain, Chinese banks and securities firms that trade currencies, commodities, stocks and bonds may suffer badly, if their access to market information is blocked or slowed.
Although the announcement did not spell out how the New China News Agency intends to vet all the market information, company news and analysis that are available from news organizations each day, it implied that adding a new layer of "supervision" may involve delays.
Of the many issues left fuzzy and uncertain by the announcement, perhaps the largest is whether the news agency will actually try to vet all the market news that Reuters and Dow Jones report each day. 
Although both news services are oriented toward financial news, they also include political coverage that reaches subscribers.
Access to international news in China has grown steadily in recent years as the fax machine and international travel became common, but there remain strict controls on what can be broadcast or printed within China. 
Reuters quoted an unidentified Chinese official early today as saying that the new restrictions would not mean a slowdown in up-to-the-minute financial news, and would not constitute censorship.
On Tuesday, executives at Dow Jones and Reuters expressed great surprise at the announcement, in part because it runs counter to a steady trend of allowing more financial information to be available, and allowing agencies to sell freely to Chinese institutions.
"The open flow of economic information is good for China," said James McGregor, who is both chief representative for Dow Jones in Beijing and president of the American Chamber of Commerce. 
"Abundant information makes markets stable."
A Reuters executive in Hong Kong read from a prepared statement, saying: "On the face of it, this has extremely serious implications for Reuters, as well as for many other organizations active in China."
In recent years, Reuters and Dow Jones have each won thousands of customers among China's banks and securities firms that use up-to-the-minute market information to trade on international and domestic capital markets. 
Neither company will say exactly how much it earns in China, but one executive said it was in the tens of millions of dollars each.
The financial information business boomed along with China's securities markets in 1993 and 1994, but has fallen since then, in part because a series of scandals led to tighter Government regulation. 
Bloomberg, a supplier of financial information in much of the world, has just begun to enter China.
"This certainly runs counter to the grand objective of making Shanghai an international financial center," John Pinkel, chief representative of H. G. Asia, a Hong Kong-based securities firm, said on Tuesday. 
He also questioned whether the official news agency's monopoly on financial information would allow its staff to use it to their advantage.
Other Western executives questioned whether members of China's Cabinet fully understood how damaging their decision could be.
Nor does the decision bode well for Hong Kong, the vibrant financial and trading center over which China will resume control on July 1, 1997.
"I am afraid this latest move will only send the signal that Chinese leaders still do not understand how the freedom of information underpins economic success," Martin C. M. Lee, leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, told Reuters.
The announcement did not specify when supervision would begin, but said that foreign wire services already in China would have to apply to the news agency within three months for permission to continue.
Although the announcement was couched in political terms, saying the overall aim was to "safeguard state sovereignty," much of it was concerned with controlling the business side of news distribution. 
It specifies, for example, that international wire services will no longer be able to sell services directly to customers, and must determine subscription rates together with the New China News Agency.
Part of the reason may be that the agency, which retains considerable political clout, has watched its revenue fall in recent years because of its heavy reliance on Government funding. 
In contrast, state-run television stations and newspapers that sell their own advertising during a booming economy are doing far better.
Yet another issue raised by the announcement is how badly it might affect China's bid to enter the World Trade Organization. 
Although Chinese leaders are determined to join, they have been blocked so far because efforts to open their economy have only gone partway.
In the long run, even if China's leaders somehow succeed in limiting information that is available from financial news organizations, it is hard to imagine how they could prevent freer communication via the Internet. 
Though the Internet craze has not hit China yet, when it does, it will be far harder to control.
"It's a lot easier to control a commercial service, because they're trying to keep track of you so they can charge you," Esther Dyson, chairman of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, an independent group in New York, said on Tuesday. 
"They can't control the Internet any more than they can control what people say in their own homes."
Chinese leaders are still grappling with how to control information over the Internet. 
Last week, one media executive said, all of China's Internet providers were called to a meeting with Government officials, who lectured them on the dangers of pornography on the Internet.
"They're well aware of the Internet, and they're scared," said Ms. Dyson. "In the long run, there's nothing they can do about it."      
