
LAST MONTH, ON THE VERY DAY Deng Xiaoping's death was announced, some of us were at Carnegie Hall learning that "xiao" can also be the name for a kind of flute, and that a number of xiaos, together with erhus, pipas, shengs and other instruments, can make a kind of orchestra. 
We were learning, because here was something new to us: this concert by the National Traditional Orchestra of China, based in Beijing, was the first given by such a group on the Carnegie stage, though a similar ensemble from Hong Kong played at Alice Tully Hall last season.
Orchestras of this sort are also pretty new to the world. 
In this respect, the "traditional" in the Beijing outfit's title should be understood as advertising rather than fact. 
The Carnegie program book, a masterpiece of prevarication, deftly eluded the question of how deep into the past the group can trace its history, but the answer seems to be "not far."
The 1949 revolution precipitated an energetic effort to adapt Chinese traditional melodies and instruments to Western norms, as understood by Soviet advisers. 
Before that period, Chinese culture was blissfully ignorant of the notion of orchestral performance, and though the idea rapidly took off in Taiwan and Hong Kong, one must regard the National Traditional Orchestra as an expression of that strange hybrid of patriotic and international cultural strategy typical of Communist states. 
It has about as much authenticity as the Red Army Choir.
Indeed, one doesn't have to delve into origins to sniff an esthetic problem here: it is enough to listen, and to look. 
The National Traditional Orchestra of China is, on the face of it, so preposterous a parody of the Western orchestra as to be a little sad, a little charming. 
The musicians adopt every ritual of the philharmonic but two: they wear long silk robes, and they don't tune up, for the elementary reason that they don't intend to play in tune.
Their instruments, though based on Chinese prototypes, shamelessly take over functions from the West. 
As in Vienna or Cleveland, the orchestra's foundation is a large complement of strings, but with erhus in different sizes instead of violins, violas, cellos and basses. 
Similarly, xiaos replace flutes and suonas stand in for oboes. 
Lacking an indigenous alternative, the orchestra finds its timpani in timpani. 
Shengs -- portable organs played by means of a mouthpiece, including one instrument the size of a small tree -- are among the few instruments without a clear Western counterpart.
Then there's the music. 
Perhaps the only evidence still surviving of the Sino-Soviet friendship of the early 1950's is in the Russian flavor of the Chinese "traditional" repertory, which seems to consist entirely of folk tunes harmonized and colored with all the skills Rimsky-Korsakov knew, of picture postcards in the manner of Glinka and Borodin, and of symphonic poems as graphic as those of Tchaikovsky. 
But where those 19th-century Russian composers were concerned with the exotic, here are people who really are Chinese making a musical portrait of themselves as outlandish. 
Weird.
What listeners heard was Chinese chinoiserie. 
The pentatonic tunes, lively or soulful, were no doubt home-grown, as were the nasal sonorities and the sudden changes of rhythm. 
But the arrangements estranged all these things, and in that sense the National Traditional Orchestra is as far from any notion of tradition as it is possible to be. 
Within a tradition, people speak of what is theirs, which they can then communicate to others, whereas here an alien medium, the orchestra, was dividing people from their own. 
Listeners were asked to gaze but not touch, or be touched. 
That is the way of movie music.
But hold on a moment. 
Before we write off the National Traditional Orchestra of China as a wholly synthetic institution, we should take a closer look at Western musical culture. 
An Arab or Persian visitor to a concert in Europe around 1700 might have felt much as a Western listener does today when confronted with this newly traditional Chinese music, though for opposite reasons. 
That visitor would have found familiar instruments (string instruments and oboes came out of the Islamic world) used to unfamiliar purposes, whereas the Chinese ensemble shows us unfamiliar instruments in an entirely familiar context. 
That visitor might also have felt as shocked, amused, despairing and curious as we do at the spectacle of cultural miscegenation.
THOUGHTS OF THE EARLY days of the Western orchestra were aroused specifically by the rowdiness of the Chinese group. 
Its instruments may be adapted to the same scale, and to that degree homogenized, but they fight against concord. 
They sound much the way period-instrument orchestras did in the 1970's, before experience began to tell, and no doubt the way period-instrument orchestras did in the 1770's, when no music stayed around long enough for anyone to gain experience in playing it.
The National Traditional Orchestra of China may, therefore, be traditional after all, but situated at the start of a new tradition, as the Western orchestra was two or three centuries ago. 
Everything of human devising must start out as a ramshackle experiment: in the case of the Western orchestra, an assembly of instruments from different sources, meant for different uses, including strings from Islamic courts, horns from the hunting field and, lest we forget, gongs from China.
Time has given this miscellany the patina of reputability, but it has not given us the right to be sniffy about parallel developments that we catch in an earlier phase. 
The distinction is not between the fake and the genuine but rather between new fakes and old ones.
