
A group of 55 democracy advocates from around China called on President Clinton today to meet with a prominent Beijing dissident during his visit to China next week as a visible symbol of commitment to human rights.
In a letter to President Clinton faxed to foreign news agencies and to the American Embassy, the group said the planned official welcome for Mr. Clinton "on the bloody red carpet on Tiananmen Square," where the military crushed student-led demonstrations on June 4, 1989, was "a source of great grief."
After meeting President Jiang Zemin, the letter said, Mr. Clinton should meet with Xu Wenli, a veteran of democracy activities from the late 1970's who spent 12 years in prison. 
Mr. Xu has recently re-emerged as one of the most active dissidents in the country, making public demands that the Communist Government allow free labor unions, multiple political parties and an independent human rights monitor. 
In the last few months he has been briefly arrested several times and warned to curtail his activities.
"We hold that meeting with Mr. Xu Wenli, or at least strongly demanding to meet with Mr. Xu Wenli, is a way to indicate that you are genuinely concerned about the cause of democracy and human rights," the letter said. 
If Mr. Clinton does not make the effort, it said, "we will not be able to believe that your trip to Beijing will have any significance other than helping the Chinese Government to cast off the diplomatic shadows of June 4 in exchange for your own political interests."
In Washington, Stanley Roth, an Assistant Secretary of State, said. 
"At this point, I don't believe we're going to have dissidents on the schedule."
He said that a meeting might lead to penalties against dissidents, in which case "instead of advancing the cause of freedom and democracy and human rights, you'd end up worsening it."
Diplomats here said it was extremely unlikely that Mr. Clinton would want to provoke the outrage of the Chinese Government by seeking a meeting with an outspoken critic like Mr. Xu.
Mr. Clinton has said he will firmly press the cause of human rights during his visit, from June 25 to July 3. 
But overall, the trip has been carefully scripted to cast light on China's growing diversity and progress, in keeping with the desire of both Governments to cement smoother ties.
Since Mr. Jiang's state visit to the United States last year, China has sent from prison into exile its two most famous dissidents, Wei Jingsheng, a contemporary of Mr. Xu's, and Wang Dan, a student leader of 1989. 
But rights monitors abroad say that thousands of people remain in jail or labor camps for publicly advocating democratic change.
Today's letter was written by Wang Zechen, a lawyer in Liaoning province. 
Most of the remaining signers are, like him, little known but are part of a network of people who, in the face of steady police harassment, are communicating by E-mail and fax to call for major political change.
Earlier this year Mr. Xu, with the best known among the signers of the new letter, Qin Yongmin of Wuhan, started faxing out reports on arrests of dissidents and other rights developments. 
But the reports recently ceased after both men were detained overnight and their fax machines and computers were confiscated.
American officials are hoping that China will offer at least one nod to rights concerns during Mr. Clinton's visit, by announcing a firm date for signing the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
When China said in March that it planned to sign the international convention, which calls for free speech and assembly, the American Government said that it would stop pursuing resolutions critical of China's human rights policies in an annual United Nations meeting.
China did not say when it would sign or how soon after signing that it might ratify the convention, nor did it say what reservations it might make that would exempt it from selected obligations.
When China does join the convention, American officials argue, it will be subject to inspections and probing reports, a useful way to nudge legal improvements here. 
But in the years before that occurs, both countries will avoid confrontations over rights in the United Nations forum.
