
For American companies eager to crack the vast but frustrating Chinese market, it was a big deal when Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown announced on a trade mission to China in 1994 that he had secured an agreement for the Entergy Corporation of New Orleans to help build a $1 billion power plant 250 miles north of Beijing.
"The public sector-private sector partnership envisioned by President Clinton is working well," Mr. Brown said at the time, hailing his department's willingness to use its muscle to pry open opportunities for American business abroad.
The deal collapsed, unheralded, six months after Mr. Brown's announcement, yet another victim of the political, economic and cultural difficulties that plague foreign companies trying to obtain a toehold in China.
China never bought the $450 million worth of parts and supplies from the United States that the deal called for, and Entergy never received its 20 percent, or $37.5 million stake, in the power plant, in Datong.
The project has another legacy. 
Entergy's partner in the project was the Lippo Group, the company controlled by the Riady family of Indonesia, which has been at the center of questions about whether the Clinton Administration traded access and influence over policy for campaign contributions.
Around the time that the Commerce Department was working to win agreement on the deal from the Chinese Government, businesses controlled by the Riadys employed Webster L. Hubbell, the former Associate Attorney General and a close friend of Mr. Clinton.
Mr. Hubbell had left office to face criminal charges that stemmed from the Whitewater investigation. 
The Whitewater independent counsel is now examining Mr. Hubbell's 1994 income to determine whether his employment by the Riadys and others with ties to Mr. Clinton were intended to discourage him from cooperating with investigators looking into the Clintons' finances.
Mr. Hubbell, who recently completed an 18-month prison sentence, has denied that his employment after leaving the Administration played any role in his dealings with prosecutors during the case. 
And Mr. Clinton has said he does not think that there was any improper influence on Mr. Hubbell or the White House from the Riadys.
Entergy, which also owns the electric utility that serves Mr. Clinton's home state of Arkansas, has been among the most active American companies in China. 
It is involved in another power plant in Taishan, in Guangdong Province in southern China, and it is considering other investments.
A spokesman for Entergy, Patrick Sweeney, said the Commerce Department's involvement in the deal had been minimal. 
He said the company had been ready to sign the formal memorandum of understanding before the trade mission led by Mr. Brown in August 1994, but held the signing ceremony with Chinese officials during the mission because the chairman of Entergy, Edwin A. Lupberger, had signed up to travel with Mr. Brown.
"The trade mission was coincidental," Mr. Sweeney said. 
"There was nothing that happened because of the trade mission that would not have happened anyway."
Commerce Department officials said the Entergy project had not been high on Mr. Brown's priority list on the trip, which centered on trying to help bigger companies like the Chrysler Corporation and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
Entergy's involvement in the failed Datong project dates from well before Mr. Hubbell announced his resignation from the Justice Department on March 14, 1994.
Entergy said it signed a nonbinding agreement to work on the project that month, and Commerce Department officials said the nonbinding pact was reached a month earlier.
A spokesman for the Commerce Department, Jim Desler, said the American Embassy in Beijing had provided some help to Entergy before Mr. Brown's trip. 
But Mr. Desler said he did not know whether the assistance began before the signing of the nonbinding accord in March 1994.
Mr. Brown died in a plane crash in Bosnia a year ago.
Within months of the signing, the deal went awry. 
Mr. Sweeney said the main problem was that not enough water was available to cool the plant, causing the project to collapse for engineering reasons. 
Commerce Department officials said their understanding was that the Chinese authorities did not feel that the deal would be profitable.
"The project is dead," Mr. Sweeney said, "and as far as Entergy is concerned it's dead for good."
