
Even before President Clinton's return from China, many prominent Republicans concede that the trip has been a political success that could deprive their party of a potent election-year issue.
In a series of interviews Republicans said they still had serious questions about the wisdom of Mr. Clinton's policy approaches toward Beijing.
But as a political matter, there seems to be a consensus among Republicans that, at least for now, Mr. Clinton has overcome fears among Democrats that the trip would expose the President to damaging attacks on issues like human rights, the exporting of satellite technology to China and campaign finance irregularities.
"I think it was a huge success," said Jack F. Kemp, the Republican Vice Presidential nominee in 1996, who faults the President for seeming to side with China against Japan. 
"That presents a problem to those Republicans or conservatives who want to make it an issue. 
I can't imagine that there's any great political benefit to be derived, because the President handled himself very well."
James R. Lilley, the Ambassador to China in the Bush Administration, put it this way: "Clinton got control of the agenda. 
He ran it like a campaign. 
And he made it into a political success story."
Republicans say the President gave a polished performance throughout the trip and avoided gaffes. 
His defense of human rights, and criticism of the 1989 crackdown at Tiananmen Square, at a news conference with President Jiang Zemin, struck the right note, the Republicans said. 
Mr. Clinton also defended religious freedom in China and Tibet, as well as economic liberalization.
Mr. Lilley said he had advised Republican Congressional leaders to hold their fire and rethink how to handle China as a political issue. 
"I've counseled them to pull back on this one. 
Don't hit Clinton at his high point -- or it's going to sound like sour grapes."
But Mr. Lilley did say he thought that the President had "swept under the rug" the issue of Chinese military modernization."
Weeks ago, House Speaker Newt Gingrich called on Mr. Clinton to postpone the trip until the Justice Department had determined whether two American companies gave sensitive missile information to Beijing in 1996.
But speaking to reporters on Wednesday in San Antonio, where he was attending a Republican fund-raising event, he praised Mr. Clinton. "I think the President did a pretty good job talking on Chinese radio and TV," Mr. Gingrich said. 
"It's less expensive to be friends than to be enemies."
Rich Galen, a phrase maker to the Speaker, said: "They set the bar so low for success that the arrival ceremony looked like a limbo dance, and he did better than expectations. 
You have to say this has been a successful trip for the President."
One explanation for Mr. Gingrich's praise is that he has been trying to repair relations with corporate executives who have soured on giving money to Republicans, and who have championed intensified trade with China.
The positive notices from Mr. Clinton's trip have already affected Republican legislative strategy. 
The Senate had been expected to vote next week on a package of amendments sponsored by Senator Tim Hutchinson, Republican of Arkansas, that among other features would deny visas to Chinese officials involved in forced-abortion policies and prohibit new American-backed international loans to China.
But today Senate officials said that the vote had been put off by at least a week, partly out of concern that the amendments might not win a positive reception in the afterglow of the summit.
The upbeat reaction even led White House officials to take the unusual step of pointing out an editorial on Tuesday in The Wall Street Journal, whose editorial page is better known for harsh rebukes of the President. 
The White House communications director, Ann F. Lewis, said she was so stunned by the unexpected praise that "I looked again -- it did not say April 1."
The editorial said, "So we may break convention among the President's critics by saying we think Mr. Clinton has been doing well in China."
The Journal backed off today in an editorial, accusing Mr. Clinton of "kowtowing" to China over Taiwan.
Many Republicans, and Democrats, say they do not expect the relative silence on Mr. Clinton and China to last. 
Several Republicans said that would depend in part on what polls show about the public reaction to the trip.
And some Republicans may be more willing to speak out against Mr. Clinton after his arrival in Washington -- he is due back early Saturday morning -- out of a tradition that it is inappropriate to denounce a President while he is overseas.
Although most polling organizations are waiting until the end of the trip to question Americans about whether it was a success, surveys beforehand showed wide public support for the trip. 
A New York Times/ CBS News Poll early last month found that about half of Republicans and two-thirds of Democrats said that Mr. Clinton should go to China.
Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, the Republican of Middletown, N.Y., who heads the International Relations Committee, said it was too early to know how the trip would play politically.
"The opportunity to talk to the Chinese people without any restrictions and focusing on the rights of individuals was a plus," Mr. Gilman said. 
"The key question is how much else was accomplished?
The Chinese achieved a number of important goals at our expense."
The chairman of the Republican National Committee, Jim Nicholson, said he believed that Republicans could eventually score political points over China.
"It will take time for the splash of the trip and the media coverage to wear off and for the real substance of what went on to surface," Mr. Nicholson said. 
"As that happens and people begin to see the way he gave away the store, they're not going to like it."
Mr. Nicholson said he was deeply concerned by the President's comments about Taiwanese reunification with China, the fund-raising scandals, Mr. Clinton's failure to meet dissidents and the laxity of China's agreement not to point nuclear missiles at the United States. 
"It was all carrot and no stick," he said.
Still, as with many other Republicans, Mr. Nicholson's language was tamer than before the trip, when he said the President would "walk on the blood of those brave pro-democracy protesters."
Gov. Roy Romer of Colorado, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, countered that Mr. Clinton's performance had exceeded his expectations. 
Mr. Romer had been particularly concerned, he said, about how the President would be perceived at the arrival ceremonies at Tiananmen Square, site of the Government's bloody crackdown in 1989.
"I didn't know how he would perform personally," Mr. Romer said. 
"There was tension with the Tiananmen Square thing. 
I was apprehensive."
But he said of Republicans: "I think they've lost it as an issue. 
People understand that one-quarter of the world's population is sitting in the middle of that Asian economy. 
We've got to know them better, and they've got to be partners of ours."
A Republican media consultant, Michael Murphy, predicted that the trip would provide nothing more than a short-term boost for Mr. Clinton, saying: "It's not unlike the proverbial Chinese dinner -- short-term in its splendor. 
It was a successful photo op, which is what they wanted."
