
His hometown is marking the first anniversary of its return to China on July 1, but Loon Wai-ting is in no mood to celebrate. 
Mr. Loon has spent the year without a job. 
On a recent sauna-like afternoon, in the teeming neighborhood of Mong Kok, he stood before a government labor office, fruitlessly searching a bulletin board for job listings.
"When the British were here, there was a lot of business in Hong Kong," said Mr. Loon, a 51-year-old merchant seaman, whose deeply lined face bespeaks both a lifetime at sea and a worrisome year as the unemployed father of four. 
"When the British left, the business left with them."
Of course, Britain's exit from Hong Kong has had little to do with the economic downturn of its former colony, which sits at the crossroads of a becalmed Asia and has suffered along with its neighbors. 
But Mr. Loon speaks for many Hong Kong people, who are being ravaged by rising unemployment, a 20 percent drop in the stock market and a 40 percent decline in the property market in the last six months.
For this embattled outpost of commerce, celebrating the passage of a year under Chinese rule seems almost beside the point.
Hong Kong is staging a flurry of events on Wednesday, including a flag-raising, a cultural pageant and back-to-back visits on Wednesday and Thursday from the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin, and President Clinton. 
But the government has scrapped gaudier elements of last year's celebration, like the laser and fireworks shows, because they seem ill-suited to these hard times.
The subdued tone of Hong Kong's anniversary is all the more notable because until six months ago, the government here would have had much to crow about. 
Politically, Hong Kong has scarcely changed in the year since this capitalist bastion became part of a Communist empire. 
Defying predictions by experts here and in the West, Beijing has left Hong Kong largely untouched.
Since last July 1, Hong Kong voters have turned out in record numbers to elect a new legislature, enjoyed a lively news media and marked the ninth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre with a huge, candlelight vigil -- one of more than 1,400 protests against everything from human rights abuses in China to the plummeting value of apartments in Hong Kong.
But there are rumors that Chinese officials are seeking to influence Hong Kong's leaders through hints delivered in back-channel conversations. 
And the government recently raised fears about the integrity of Hong Kong's legal system by amending laws in ways that seem to favor Beijing. 
But fears about wholesale meddling or the muzzling of the media have so far proved unwarranted.
"Hong Kong is a graveyard for political prognosticators," said Daniel R. Fung, the Solicitor General of Hong Kong and a defender of the government. 
"Everybody predicted we'd have a bumpy ride politically but the economy would take care of itself. 
Exactly the opposite has happened."
Mr. Fung said Beijing delivered on its promise of "one country, two systems," a political arrangement that guarantees Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy as a special administrative region of China. 
That agreement was secured in years of often-rancorous negotiations between Britain and China.
But while the British colonial government was laying the groundwork for Hong Kong's political future, it was also presiding over a spectacular inflation of the colony's property market -- creating an Asian Xanadu with more billionaires and Rolls-Royces per square mile than any other city in the world.
When the financial crisis tore through Asia last fall, it devastated Hong Kong's exports and humbled its stock market. 
While Hong Kong fought off the symptoms of the Asian flu longer than its neighbors, it finally succumbed -- slipping into a recession for the first time in 13 years.
If economic collapse was not enough, Hong Kong has also been hit by several calamities: a deadly outbreak of bird flu in December, a string of cholera cases and a creeping red algae tide in Hong Kong's coastal waters.
The flood of bad news has left people traumatized. 
And it has prompted them to question Hong Kong's government and its chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, the conservative shipping magnate who was chosen by Beijing to lead the territory. 
Such dissent is uncharacteristic for Hong Kong, where the British colonial governor ruled in close cooperation with the business elite.
"Economic prosperity was the major connecting thread between the old Hong Kong and new Hong Kong," said Michael DeGolyer, a professor of government at Baptist University here who studied public attitudes toward the handover. 
"Now Hong Kong people are getting very irritated."
Anger may have been one reason people voted in record numbers in Hong Kong's legislative elections last month. 
In a gesture of defiance to the local government and Beijing, the voters elected pro-democracy candidates to a majority of the popularly elected seats. 
Many of those politicians had been sent into political exile when Beijing dissolved Hong Kong's last democratically elected legislature before the handover and replaced it with a hand-picked body.
Pro-democracy politicians say Hong Kong's people are even more committed to a pluralistic system than they were before the handover, when the city's political independence under China seemed at risk. 
Being a part of China, they say, has made democracy seem more precious.
"Of the 1.2 billion people in China, we -- the 6.6 million people of Hong Kong -- are the only people who have the vote," said Martin Lee, the head of the Democratic Party, who regained his legislative seat.
Still, Mr. Lee admitted that concerns about civil rights and individual freedoms are being overshadowed by economic issues. 
Indeed, the Democratic Party teamed up with pro-business and pro-Beijing parties to mount a coordinated assault on the policies of Mr. Tung. The group is calling on the government to use its vast financial reserves to lessen the burden on people by cutting taxes.
Bowing to pressure, the government recently announced a package of measures, including a one-time tax rebate, to stimulate the economy.
For all the noise generated by the newly elected legislators, Hong Kong is still firmly controlled by Mr. Tung. Though Mr. Lee and his colleagues won more than half of the popular vote, they will hold fewer than one-third of the seats in the legislature. 
And the legislature does not have the power to introduce bills on major issues without the acquiescence of the chief executive.
Mr. Lee is demanding that the government accelerate the timetable for full democracy here. 
Under the current timetable, voters here will not be able to elect all legislators directly until 2007. 
But given that the chief executive and the National People's Congress in China would have to approve such an amendment to Hong Kong's constitution, Mr. Lee's crusade seems quixotic.
A more pressing concern for some pro-democracy politicians is the rule of law in Hong Kong. 
Although the territory has retained British common law as the foundation of its legal code, some critics say the government is making subtle changes that may whittle away citizen's rights.
Most notably, the government in April granted the Chinese Government the same immunity from local laws that the British Crown had. 
The trouble is, the Hong Kong authorities defined the Chinese Government broadly enough to include the New China News Agency, which has historically functioned as Beijing's eyes and ears in the territory.
The agency still inspires fear among pro-democracy leaders here, and the prospect that it will hold immunity from local laws is doubly frightening to them. 
"The last year has been little short of hair-raising," said Margaret Ng, a lawyer and pro-democracy politician who was also recently elected to the legislature.
Despite their qualms, even pro-democracy politicians credit Beijing with masterly public relations. 
After marching into Hong Kong at midnight on June 30, the Chinese Army troops retreated into their barracks and have been kept there since. 
A single soldier stands guard outside the garrison in central Hong Kong.
China's conduct has given Hong Kong's pro-Beijing politicians a keen sense of vindication. 
Tsang Yok-sing, an avowed Marxist who heads the main pro-Beijing party, said President Jiang had been scrupulous in maintaining the principle of "one country, two systems" -- even discouraging pro-Beijing people in Hong Kong from airing criticisms of the territory while on the mainland.
For people here who are intent on reaffirming their Chinese identity, however, China's low profile poses some ticklish problems. 
Hong Kong's top civil servant, Anson Chan, said in a recent speech in Washington that she had felt an "emotional and spiritual connection" in seeing the Chinese flag hoisted over Hong Kong to celebrate the national day of the People's Republic on Oct. 
1.
But Ms. Chan's speech was greeted with ambivalence at home. 
Mr. Lee, whose family fled to Hong Kong from neighboring Guangdong Province, said, "How can I feel warm when I see the flag go up when so many of my people are deprived of basic human rights?"
Even staunchly pro-Beijing people are not ready to predict that Hong Kong will never again clash with China. 
Though few believe that the Chinese Government will clamp down on Hong Kong over political issues, a growing number of politicians and business executives worry that Hong Kong's languishing economy might provoke China to take a more intrusive approach.
Beijing's financial stake in Hong Kong is vast and growing.The stock exchange here is the primary means for Chinese companies to raise capital. 
With Prime Minister Zhu Ronji pushing to privatize state-owned enterprises, Hong Kong will become an even more vital window between China and the global market.
The social contract between Beijing and Hong Kong is predicated on a simple idea: As long as Hong Kong makes money, Beijing will leave it alone. 
If Hong Kong stops making money, people here say, all bets are off.
Or as the Hong Kong author and publisher Louis Cha, put it: "Suppose Hong Kong Bank lends me $1 million and I run my business well. 
They will leave me alone. 
But if I run my business poorly and can't repay my loans, it's very possible they will send somebody to look at my books."
      
