
It is hardly surprising that President Clinton chose the wildly popular news magazine "Focus" as his final forum to address the Chinese people. 
Every evening at 7:38 more than 300 million people tune in to the 15-minute program whose hard-hitting investigations and interviews show just how far the Chinese media have come since the days when they provided little more than Communist Party dogma.
The program, which began in 1994, is sophisticated, offers great drama, and confronts a wide range of topics that would have been deemed too sensitive for exploration only a few years ago: domestic violence, corruption in the courts, state factories flouting pollution laws, nuclear proliferation in Asia. 
Last month, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel appeared on the program during his visit here.
On the surface it resembles "60 Minutes."
But underneath there is a crucial difference: "Focus" -- like other television shows, and magazines and newspapers in China -- is owned by the state, in this case by the Government's main television network, China Central Television.
The program's investigations and choice of topics clearly reflect China's new openness about certain types of problems, particularly official corruption. 
But the program, which has many features of independent journalism, is also in many respects a newfangled instrument of propaganda.
"We are a Government television station and we share a common interest with the Government," said Liang Jianzeng, "Focus's" general producer, who has been with the program since its start. 
"We have several standards for choosing topics: First, it needs to be news. 
Second, it has to be something that our audience wants to watch. 
And, third, the Government has to want to solve the problem."
Using this formula, "Focus" has become perhaps the most popular show in China, with five-second advertisements that sell for $10 million a year.
On a recent evening, hundreds of millions of Chinese watched senior government officials in the central city of Luoyang squirm. 
The officials had extorted $100,000 in illegal taxes from a wealthy private school. 
Now a crew from "Focus" -- with microphones waving and cameras rolling -- descended on government offices demanding to know why.
"Why did the township demand $6,500 from the school 'to quell trouble caused by local villagers'?" asked an earnest-looking reporter named Bo Yang. 
"Why did the local justice bureau demand that the school be re-notarized, even though its form was up-to-date?"
Finally, the reporter cornered a court official, Chen Lianghua, as she washed her hands in her office sink, and asked why the court had ordered the school to pay. 
"I'm not sure about this matter," a miffed-looking Ms. Chen answered, as she walked away, the camera trailing behind her.
"It's an order from the court, you should have known about it," Mr. Bo said.
"It's not convenient to talk now," Ms. Chen answered.
While such investigations are the backbone of "Focus," there is also occasionally more conventional fare, like a recent paean to President Jiang Zemin's visit to the United States last year. 
And there are the other topics that never appear, like forced abortions and releases of dissidents.
Some less prominent programs and certain publications with looser government ties, like Southern Weekend and Beijing Youth Daily, have pushed the boundaries of discourse a bit further.
But there are always limits. 
When a legal affairs columnist for Southern Weekend recently criticized the common practice of awarding judgeships to retiring army officers, for example, his weekly column disappeared for two weeks, replaced one week with a front-page commentary by an army colonel supporting the practice.
"The media are certainly more lively recently, but the basic prerequisite is still that you can't criticize or curse the party," said Deng Zhenglai, editor of Chinese Social Sciences Quarterly. 
"So it's not really meaningful freedom now."
The willingness to allow a program like "Focus" to address difficult issues publicly reflects the greater confidence of Chinese leaders. 
But the central Government also clearly appreciates that the press can be an effective weapon in its battles with local officials, who have increasingly ignored national laws and policies, imposing taxes and penalties on their own, for example.
Senior officials, including former Prime Minister Li Peng, who now heads the National People's Congress, have praised "Focus."
And the program's aggressive young reporters, who get their tips both from viewers and the central Government, have proved effective enforcers of laws and central Government policy.
Last month, the program documented how a district government in Zhejiang Province had removed elected village heads from two dozen villages and replaced them with cronies. 
Now the district officials are under investigation and new elections have been scheduled.
Such episodes have also bolstered the program's sky-high advertising rates, an important consideration when Government financing is dwindling.
Mr. Liang said that the producers did not need any clearance before deciding on specific topics, although he said that the station's leaders have, on rare occasions, elected not to broadcast a show.
"Maybe it is because the quality is not so good," he said.
In China now there is a saying: "Avoid fires, avoid theft, avoid 'Focus.'
" Mr. Liang -- who recently visited the ABC News "20/20" studio in New York -- said with a laugh, "Some people are afraid to be interviewed because they know they've done something wrong."
