
In his global vision, it seems, Bill Clinton ranks right up there with Richard M. Nixon.
Nixon will forever be revered here for reviving ties between the United States and the once isolated China.
Now, in the days before Mr. Clinton arrives for his first state visit to China, he is being lionized in the official press and among elements of the intelligentsia as a far-sighted statesman who had the wisdom to change course with China, by shifting from his initial attacks to his current policy of close engagement.
It's a politician's dream: newspapers, magazines and television shows are showing a deep fascination with Mr. Clinton the political leader, dissecting his recent speeches on China policy and extolling his courage in the face of the China-haters who are trying to derail the emerging "strategic partnership."
One newspaper ran a large picture of the President in a suit of armor, while Chinese journalists who visited Arkansas reveled in Mr. Clinton's record as Governor in promoting education, not Whitewater. 
(So far, oddly, there has been relatively little attention to Hillary Rodham Clinton, who will accompany him on the visit, which begins on Thursday.)
The adulation was evident this afternoon at the monthly salon of the XSH Book Club, in its headquarters in the middle of a park in northwest Beijing. 
The directors of the club -- which markets books at a discount to its thousands of members through catalogues and seminars -- assembled foreign policy experts and a few dozen Chinese journalists and book lovers to discuss three American titles recently published in Chinese.
The first was Mr. Clinton's "Between Hope and History: Meeting America's Challenges for the 21st Century" (Random House, 1996), the manifesto of his second Administration, written with William Nothdurft. 
This month, the book went into its second printing in China. 
("Not quite a 'Titanic,' " said the book club editor, Xi Hong, "but a consistent top-seller over the last year.")
The second featured title, just published here after a rush translation job, was Monica Crowley's new memoir, "Nixon in Winter" (Random House, 1998). 
The third was Henry Kissinger's 1994 tome "Diplomacy" (Simon & Schuster), which appeared in Chinese last year.
Whatever American critics may have made of the Clinton book and Ms. Crowley's deferential memoir of the former President who took her under his wing in his final years, the assembled professors here treated these works seriously, as offering insightinto the men who made today's emerging Chinese-American partnership possible.
Qian Wenrong, deputy director of the Xinhua World Issues Research Institute, noted that by the time Mr. Clinton published his book, he had already made his momentous shift in China policy, and recognized the leading role China will play in world affairs. 
Back in the 1970's, Mr. Qian said, Nixon too had presciently seen China's inevitable rise.
Wang Yizhou of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences called the Nixon book "excellent, a reminder of how far-sighted the man was."
He declared Mr. Kissinger's book a classic. 
"The Kissinger book is very deep," he said, "but I like the Clinton book better."
Jia Qingguo, a political scientist at Beijing University who spent several years in the United States, was less taken, but noted that through Mr. Clinton's book, and his rags-to-riches story, Chinese could better understand the American Dream.
A fourth scholar, Huang Annian, a historian at Beijing Normal University, listed the three most important American Presidents from China's perspective. 
The first was Franklin D. Roosevelt, leader during World War II, "the most glorious period in Chinese-U.S. relations" as the countries fought together against Japan.
The second was Nixon, who set the process in motion that led to normalized relations. 
And third was Mr. Clinton, who despite concerns over human rights and other issues has realized that the isolation of China does not serve America's interest.
"These three men -- they all have strategic vision," Mr. Huang said.
Even greater praise has appeared in the official media.
After Mr. Clinton gave an interview to visiting Chinese journalists in Washington last week, an article in The Economic Daily here said, "The 40-minute interview was unforgettable."
Mr. Clinton's "foresight, courage and insight deeply impressed the Chinese correspondents," the article said.
