
They call this city the Manhattan of Asia. 
And today, as President Clinton wound up his visit to China by motoring around town to give a speech, attend some meetings and do a bit of shopping, Hong Kong treated the leader of the free world with New York-style indifference.
"I'm not paying any attention to him," Chu Shu-san, a 48-year-old newsstand vendor, said with a shrug as he sold copies of papers with Mr. Clinton's picture on the front page. 
"He's just in transit anyway."
To be fair, Mr. Clinton attracted a good crowd for a speech this morning about the relationship between the United States and Asia. 
But the audience of local and foreign business leaders responded tepidly to his call for a speedier introduction of democracy to this former British colony, which reverted to Chinese rule a year ago.
"We debated this issue for five years in the 1980's," said Vincent Lo, a leading property developer, in a somewhat grumpy tone, as he rose to leave after Mr. Clinton's half-hour speech. 
"We know the good points and the bad points of democracy, and we know we musn't rush into it."
Mr. Clinton, the first President to visit Hong Kong while in office, came here three times before entering the White House, and he clearly likes the place. 
"I think it's quite appropriate for our trip to end in Hong Kong, because, for us Americans, Hong Kong is China's window on the world," he said.
Still, the 24-hour stop lacked the high drama of his televised debate with President Jiang Zemin, his freewheeling give-and-take with students at Beijing University or even the solemn welcoming ceremony at Tiananmen Square.
On a rainy day here, few people lined the streets to see Mr. Clinton's motorcade. 
When Hillary Rodham Clinton and her daughter, Chelsea, slipped away to do some shopping at Shanghai Tang, a boutique that specializes in updated Mao-style clothing, they barely drew a crowd.
Even "Primary Colors," the film adaptation of the thinly disguised satire on the Clinton Presidency, has flopped here. 
The movie, which opened in Hong Kong the day after Mr. Clinton arrived in China, has earned just a fraction of the box-office of the most popular current film, "True Mob Story."
One reason for the lack of drama is that Hong Kong's troubles are more economic than political. 
People here are worried about the swooning stock market, the plummeting value of real estate and the stabilityII of the Hong Kong dollar -- topics that do not lend themselves to soaring rhetoric or street theater.
Mr. Clinton praised Hong Kong and China for not devaluing their currencies and he endorsed a $200 billion plan announced on Thursday by the Japanese Government to take over failing banks and protect depositors.
Of course the President did not ignore political issues. 
He applauded the record voter turnout in Hong Kong's legislative elections of two months ago, saying, "The results were a mandate for more democracy, not less, and faster, not slower, strides toward political freedom."
After his speech, Mr. Clinton met privately for 20 minutes with Martin Lee, Hong Kong's most prominent democratic politician. 
Mr. Lee, who lost his seat in the legislature when Beijing dissolved the body before the handover and regained it in the recent elections, told the President he hoped that half of the council's 60 seats would be directly elected in 2000 -- compared with 20 seats today.
Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, said Mr. Clinton listened attentively to Mr. Lee but did not express an opinion on any specific proposals for speeding up democracy in Hong Kong. 
"I don't think it's for us to get into the specifics of what the timetable of that might be," Mr. Berger said.
Despite Mr. Clinton's reluctance to talk numbers, Mr. Lee said the meeting was "terrific."
He said the President responded positively to his argument that the "Hong Kong Government should be encouraged to develop democracy, so they can see that it works well under Chinese rule."
Later Mr. Clinton met several other democratically elected legislators. 
One participant, Tsang Yok-sing, the head of Hong Kong's largest pro-Beijing party, said the President "showed that he has a positive attitude toward developing a constructive relationship with the Chinese leadership."
After his news conference, Mr. Clinton and his family stopped off for some last-minute shopping on their way to Hong Kong's new $20 billion airport. 
The President's use of the airport is about the only part of his visit that has generated local interest. 
Air Force One landed six hours after the departure of President Jiang, who had been in Hong Kong to mark the first anniversary of the handover.
The Hong Kong Standard devoted much of its article on Mr. Clinton today to a discussion of the dual presidential flights.
