
A former senior Chinese official who was jailed for opposing the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown has been warned a third time by the Chinese authorities to stop talking to foreign journalists.
The latest warning came on Sunday, only a day after President Clinton's news conference with the Chinese President, Jiang Zemin. 
But the former official, Bao Tong, has continued to speak out, giving an interview on Tuesday to the Voice of America.
Senior American officials said today that Mr. Bao's fate is "a topic of significant interest" to the Clinton Administration. 
But they added that they could not say whether Mr. Clinton had raised Mr. Bao's case with Mr. Jiang.
Mr. Bao, 66, is no dissident. 
He served as chief of staff to the former Communist Party Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, who was ousted days before the June 1989 crackdown and who remains under house arrest.
Mr. Bao, who was jailed then for seven years followed by two years on probation that ended in late May, has used Mr. Clinton's visit to speak out about the Government's failings. 
Mr. Zhao himself circulated a letter to the party's Central Committee just before Mr. Clinton arrived, calling on it to reverse its condemnation of the demonstrations in the square, which are officially considered a "counterrevolutionary rebellion."
In the episode leading to the latest warning, Mr. Bao gave an interview to CBS News, which was televised on Monday. 
Mr. Bao's son, Bao Pu, said in an interview that the security police came to his father's Beijing apartment after the taping on Sunday, and spent two hours there.
Reached by telephone on Thursday in Beijing, Mr. Bao confirmed that he had been visited by public security agents three times in June, most recently on Sunday when three agents came to his house. 
"They were polite and not threatening," Mr. Bao said. 
He said they confirmed that he does enjoy freedom of speech. 
However, he said, they again warned him that he should not give interviews to overseas journalists without the approval of the Government. 
Such interviews are illegal, they told him. 
"I hope this is just a misunderstanding and does not reflect the guiding principles of the government," Mr. Bao said, speaking over a telephone line that was probably tapped by security agents.
Under Chinese regulations that are often ignored, foreign journalists are supposed to get official permission before conducting interviews.
Mr. Bao's son said that Mr. Bao told the agents that President Jiang himself had said the day before that "every Chinese citizen is given freedom of speech by the Constitution."
Also on Sunday, Mr. Bao gave an interview to The Los Angeles Times, which printed an article the next day.
It was Mr. Bao's third warning from the police, who had already told him on June 4 and 8, nearly three weeks before Mr. Clinton's arrival, that he must not give interviews to foreign journalists.
On June 3, The Washington Post and the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post printed interviews with Mr. Bao, the first since his probation ended.
The next day, he told The New York Times that he had been warned not to speak with foreign journalists. 
However, he spoke again to The Times for a June 25 article about the Zhao letter. 
In that interview he said, "Political reform is the biggest issue in China today."
Mr. Bao's wife, Jiang Zongcao, reached by telephone in Beijing, said the officials who visited their home had told him that any interviews with foreign reporters must be approved by the Chinese Government and that some of his previous statements to reporters were "inappropriate."
His son, who lives in the United States, said today that Mr. Bao and his family were nervous about what would happen after Mr. Clinton left China later this week, but he said his father intended to keep testing the new Chinese openness.
Mr. Bao is followed by the police wherever he goes, his son said.
      
