
President Clinton asked an advisory panel today to analyze security threats at the Energy Department's nuclear laboratories, after suspicions surfaced that China stole nuclear-weapons designs from the United States.
"I am determined to do all that is necessary to protect our sensitive national security information and to prevent its diversion to foreign countries," Mr. Clinton said in announcing the review by the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
The President's announcement was one of a series of steps the Administration has taken in recent days to try to reassure an angry Congress and the public that it has tightened security to prevent the transfer of sensitive technology information to China.
Mr. Clinton said the board would analyze how security threats have evolved over two decades and what steps can be taken to counter them.
The President asked the board's chairman, former Senator Warren H. Rudman, a New Hampshire Republican, to report back within 60 days. 
Mr. Clinton asked the board to deliver its report to Congress and to release an unclassified version to the public "to the fullest extent possible consistent with our national security."
David Leavy, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said Samuel R. Berger, the President's national security adviser, had recommended the review. 
Nuclear security has become a sensitive issue in recent weeks after assertions have grown that China has obtained American atomic data to help update its own warheads.
The latest suspicions have focused on Wen Ho Lee, an American engineer born in Taiwan, who was dismissed last week from his job at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico for violating security rules. 
He has not been charged with any crime.
There were clear signals today that the nuclear security issue will not abate soon.
Mr. Berger was criticized by Senators Richard C. Shelby of Alabama and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, the chairman and ranking Democrat, respectively, of the Senate Intelligence Committee. 
The Senators said Mr. Berger's recent comments that the Administration had briefed Congress repeatedly since 1996 about possible thefts of nuclear secrets by China were "misleading and inappropriate."
Mr. Shelby and Mr. Kerrey said Mr. Berger left the impression that Congress was lax about security at the labs when, in fact, lawmakers familiar with intelligence issues had pushed the Energy Department to strengthen security.
The President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board was created by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1956, abolished by President Jimmy Carter in 1977 and reinstated by President Ronald Reagan in 1981.
Its members serve without compensation and review the performance of all agencies engaged in gathering and evaluating intelligence. 
Members have included distinguished scientists, while its chairmen have typically been retired military officers or politicians.
Mr. Leavy said 4 of the panel's 12 members would work with Mr. Rudman on the inquiry. 
He said he did not know the identities of all four, but that one is Sidney Drell, a Stanford University physicist who heads the University of California president's council on the laboratories. 
A number of the Energy Department labs are operated by the University of California under contract to the Government.
Finally, with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji scheduled to visit Washington next month, a Chinese Diplomat in Washington played down tension between the United States and China.
      
