
President Clinton began a campaign today to win Congressional renewal of normal trading status for China, in an annual exercise that threatens to be more contentious than ever this year.
In an announcement before a group of business executives, Mr. Clinton said that trade ties are "the best way to bring China into the family of nations and to secure our interests and our ideals."
Mr. Clinton is facing growing anti-China sentiment on both the right and the left in Congress, with an unlikely combination of opponents lining up against renewing China's trade privileges. 
The coalition ranges from labor, which is concerned about economics and human rights issues, to the Christian right, which is opposing China on human rights grounds as well.
Once Mr. Clinton formally sends his decision to grant China what is known as "most-favored-nation status," the House and Senate have 90 days in which they can try to overturn his recommendation.
Originally the White House had hoped that this year relations with China could be put on a firmer footing. 
Mr. Clinton is expected to hold a summit meeting with President Jiang Zemin of China later this year, and the Administration is negotiating with China over entry into the World Trade Organization.
Admitting that it would not have the votes, the White House quietly shelved any hope that it might be able to win permanent, instead of annual, approval of normal trade ties for China this year.
The only debate inside the Administration, officials said, was over how much the President should personally put himself on the line to support China in the face of the campaign finance controversy.
The President won an important ally of sorts today in Representative Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House. 
Although Mr. Gingrich assailed Mr. Clinton as being "virtually absent without leadership on issues of religious tolerance, human rights, and democratic freedoms," he said he would support normal trade relations with China.
Other irritants in this year's debate are China's transfer of missiles to Iran and its huge trade surplus with the United States. 
Congress is also swayed this year by increasing concerns over Hong Kong. 
The assumption in Washington is that the handover of the British colony to China will go smoothly. 
If it doesn't, as one senior Administration official conceded this afternoon, "this whole effort sinks in the Pacific."
The White House today sought to address concerns about Hong Kong's transition by noting that Hong Kong's governor, Chris Patton, and Hong Kong's most prominent advocates of democracy , like Martin Lee, the leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, support extension of China's trade status.
"Even those people in Hong Kong that have been most passionately identified with the cause of freedom and human rights and have been most in conflict with the Chinese have argued that we have to maintain an open trading relationship with them so we can continue to work with them," Mr. Clinton said.
Other Administration officials argued that Hong Kong is the gateway of trade between the United States and China and that to cut off China's trade status at this moment would deal a blow to Hong Kong precisely at this crucial moment of transition.
While last year's announcement about China's trade status was made in a major speech on Asia policy, this year the President made the announcement at the business leaders' event, which was held in the Old Executive Office Building.
Mr. Clinton said that stopping normal trade relations would "cut off our contact with the Chinese people and undermine our influence with the Chinese Government."
Mr. Clinton originally came into office accusing President Bush of "coddling dictators," but in the spring of 1994, under pressure from American business groups, Mr. Clinton backed down from his early attempt to link China's most-favored-nation status to significant progress in human rights. 
Since then Mr. Clinton has called for renewal of China's trade status annually.
Mr. Clinton has argued that economic engagement is the best way to get China to improve its treatment of dissidents. 
But his national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, had to concede at a White House briefing today that "we cannot say that human rights conditions in China are better today than they were a year ago."
But Mr. Berger argued that commercial cooperation and openness to the world would eventually change the Beijing Government's behavior.
Yet the Administration's admissions that little has changed in human rights encouraged those who argue that Mr. Clinton's attempt to use commerce in the service of human rights has failed.
"They have to change the subject from human rights because they have nothing to point to," said Gary L. Bauer, the president of the Family Research Council, which is pressing its traditional Republican allies to abandon the party's longstanding support for renewing China's ordinary trading rights.
"It's a corrosive debate," Mr. Berger said in an interview in his office this afternoon. 
"Everyone in Congress knows that cutting off trade relations is far too blunt an instrument. 
Instead of debating how to influence China, how to shape the direction, we wind up debating a piece of the relationship. 
It doesn't work."
Mr. Clinton said today that "the United States has a huge stake in the continued emergence of China in a way that is open economically and stable politically. 
Of course we hope that it will come to respect human rights more and the rule of law more."
But Human Rights Watch/Asia immediately issued a statement asking how the Administration planned to exert influence on China on human rights, noting that the Administration's efforts to condemn China's human-rights practices in Geneva last month had failed. 
"What other measures is the Administration willing to use?" asked Mike Jendrzejcyk, the group's Washington director. 
"Or has it abandoned human rights altogether?"
Despite the growing anti-China sentiment in Congress, Administration officials and opponents of most-favored-nation trade status say that Mr. Clinton would ultimately have the votes to prevail on the issue.
The United States has economic incentives to continue the trade relationship. 
United States officials say that 170,000 American jobs are dependent on exports to China and that ending normal trade status would cost consumers $600 million annually in higher prices on certain consumer goods.
In fact, at this point the United States and China are so economically intertwined that even many members of the growing anti-China lobby in Congress concede that denying trade privileges to China would be tantamount to breaking off political relations with the world's most populous nation.
As the debate plays out over the next months, the only question, officials say, is whether the President will be forced into a bruising veto fight to preserve most-favored-nation status. 
That would occur if the House and Senate pass a joint resolution turning down normal trade status. 
Both chambers would then have to muster two-thirds votes to override the President's veto.
The last time there was such a confrontation over China was in 1992, a Presidential camapign year, when Congress tried to stop most-favored nation status but failed to override Mr. Bush's veto.
      
