
President Clinton, in his last opportunity to address a mass audience in China, said Wednesday that he would continue to speak out on behalf of democracy and individual liberty, but that the United States did not seek to dictate the path of China's development.
In an interview with China's main Government-run television network to be broadcast today, Mr. Clinton said that China's current course of economic liberalization and greater personal freedom was "morally right," and that the status of the United States as the world's lone superpower did not give it the right to use economic and military might to impose its values on China or any other nation.
In the course of the interview, Mr. Clinton sent subtle and somewhat contradictory messages to different audiences in China. 
His words offered reassurance to President Jiang Zemin and other leaders in Beijing that the United States would not and could not impose its will on China. 
But he also signaled to ordinary Chinese -- and to domestic critics of his policy of engagement with China -- that he would continue to press Beijing to allow greater personal freedom and take steps toward a more open political system.
"I think there's a genuine movement toward openness and freedom in China, which obviously as an American, and as an American President, I hope will continue and increase and which I believe is right -- morally right -- but I also think it's good for China," Mr. Clinton said.
Mr. Clinton was asked whether the world needed a single leader to mediate disputes within and among nations. 
"The short answer to your question is yes, the world needs a leader, but not in the sense of one country telling everyone else what to do," Mr. Clinton said. 
"So it's a different sort of world leadership than in the past where it's just a question of who has the biggest army gets to send a list of instructions to another country and you think it will be done. 
That's not the way the world works now."
He gave as examples the United States' intervention in Bosnia and Haiti and its efforts to mobilize other nations to combat drug trafficking, weapons proliferation and ethnic conflict. 
He said the way to get results in the post-cold-war world was to forge alliances to exert influence, rather than trying to act unilaterally. 
"And so the United States' role I think is to try to create a structure where more likely than not the right things will be done when problems arise -- not to just do it all ourselves or tell other people what to do," Mr. Clinton said.
The White House sought this interview because an earlier one with CCTV, held before Mr. Clinton left Washington, was heavily edited by the Chinese authorities and received little notice in China. 
United States officials said they had received assurances that Wednesday's interview would be broadcast in its entirety. 
It was conducted by Shui Junyi, anchor of CCTV-1's public affairs program "Focus" and Chen Xiaowei, an anchor on CCTV-4, thenetwork's international channel and host of a Sunday news program.
The questioning was gentle compared to the grilling Mr. Clinton got Monday from students at Beijing University who challenged him on United States policy toward Taiwan and human rights in America. 
Asked when he became interested in China, he gave a vintage Clintonian response. 
He said he was 8 or 9 years old and reading an encyclopedia when he came across the entry about China.
"And I was fascinated by what I read," Mr. Clinton said. 
"I always wanted to come here from that time on."
He said the most gratifying thing about his trip was the decision by Mr. Jiang to allow their Saturday press conference and his speech at Beijing University to be carried live on Chinese television. 
He said he was surprised and pleased by the decision to allow the "open, sweeping communication" with the Chinese people that those two events afforded.
"That I think was very good," Mr. Clinton said. 
"I think it was also good for the Chinese leaders."
Mr. Clinton sat for the 20-minute interview at the modern Shanghai Stock Exchange, where he received a rousing welcome from traders on the floor. 
Mr. Clinton conducted a round-table discussion with young entrepreneurs, who told him of the difficulties in starting a new business, securing venture capital and dealing with the bureaucracy. 
Mr. Clinton told the business people they were an important force for change in China, and a source of the new jobs that will be needed as state-owned enterprises close.
In the afternoon, Mr. Clinton visited a housing development to witness a relatively new phenomenon in China -- private ownership of homes. 
The Jin Hui Gardens complex opened five years ago, offering Chinese families the opportunity to buy their own apartments for $42,200 to $96,500, according to figures provided by the developers.
Mr. Clinton told families assembled at the development that home ownership represents an investment in society and the bedrock of middle-class life.
"All China benefits from more home owners because that means more jobs, a stronger economy, stronger families," Mr. Clinton said as low clouds threatened rain. 
"And, of course, when people own their own homes, they are free to take new jobs without worrying about losing housing benefits. 
We also see around the world that home owners take more responsibility for the communities in which they live."
The President announced a new joint United States-China program to promote the construction of affordable, energy-efficient housing. 
He also said that American officials would work with Beijing to create a middle-income mortgage-lending market and to strengthen legal rights for property owners.
Today, the President flew to Guilin, a picturesque city on the Li River, where he delivered an address on the environment. 
He continues on to Hong Kong, where on Friday he will give a speech on the turmoil in the Asian economy to business leaders and conduct a news conference before returning to Washington on Friday night.
