
At precisely the same time that President Clinton arrived to a colorfully choreographed welcoming ceremony in Xian this evening, a remarkable drama about a different strand of China-United States relations was wrapping up at Shanghai International Airport.
In a seedy-looking departure lounge, Nigel Redden, director of the Lincoln Center Festival, sat down for what he took to be a final talk with Ma Bomin, the director of Shanghai's Bureau of Culture, who has been blocking the classic Chinese opera "The Peony Pavilion" from making it to New York in time for its scheduled opening on July 7.
Mr. Redden's flight was scheduled for 7:40 P.M., and he was informed in the late afternoon that Ms. Ma would go to the airport to see him off, because she had something to say.
At 7 P.M. in the bar, Ms. Ma informed Mr. Redden that her bureau was now willing to compromise on the matter that kicked off this whole drama a week ago: blocking the shipment of elaborate sets, costumes and props. 
The shipment, Ms. Ma said, could now proceed.
Mr. Redden, suspicious after days of fruitless negotiations, quickly asked a pertinent question: What about the actors?
Would they be allowed to go too ?
No, Ms. Ma said with a grimace, the actors of the Kunqu Opera Company would not yet be allowed to perform, as she had said over and over, unless the opera was fully restaged to fit Government guidelines.
Costumes, but no actors. 
So a high-profile example of cultural exchange between the United States and China lay in ruins, on the day President Clinton arrived for a state visit, precisely the time when Chinese and United States officials are most eager to clear away unnecessary public conflict.
To an arts executive like Mr. Redden, it is stunning that Chinese authorities would want to prevent any ancient Chinese opera from being performed in New York (especially since Lincoln Center is paying). 
But it became clear in recent days that Chinese officialdom was not against "The Peony Pavilion," so much as one particular official was, and her name is Ma.
Ms. Ma's comments suggest that some petty political motives -- power over artistic troupes, professional jealousy, the right to censor -- may play as big a role as the artistic objections she cited, in her complaints that the work was a national treasure that needed to be protected from unorthodox interpretations.
And the reluctance of any higher Chinese authority to rein her in suggests that she wields considerable political clout.
Negotiating in China, it often seems, is never over. 
Mr. Redden knew that if he left, he might be called back to Shanghai the next day for a new round of talks.
"We keep asking about it, and the reaction is always 'It's extremely complicated,' " said Raymond Burghardt, United States Consul General in Shanghai. 
"Well, why is it so complicated?"
Mr. Burghardt was asking the question rhetorically, since as a diplomat with long experience in China he knows that calling a matter "extremely complicated" is a polite way of saying that there are a lot of politics involved.
Yet Mr. Burghardt fudged when asked whether President Clinton would inquire about the opera, even though one polite question from Mr. Clinton, voiced to a Chinese leader, could conceivably solve the issue in an instant.
At the airport this evening, Mr. Redden began to let his frustration show after making such little headway, particularly when Ms. Ma, a former opera singer, tried to tell reporters who had been hastily assembled that her compromise showed how her bureau had been flexible in these talks.
"There has been no flexibility at all," Mr. Redden protested. 
"I've been here since Monday, and have been met with no cooperation whatsoever."
As her aides started insisting that Mr. Redden leave because his flight was boarding, Ms. Ma turned to the reporters again to say, in Chinese, that perhaps both sides should continue to keep talking, since there were more avenues to be pursued.
When the comment was translated to Mr. Redden, he apparently thought Ms. Ma had actually meant what she said. 
He immediately ripped up his boarding pass and said, "So let's talk."
Looking shocked, as though a major headache on the verge of flying away had decided to stick around, Ms. Ma again described her concern about the opera's script, and how it would be necessary to unpack the costumes to rehearse. 
So maybe, she said, that shipment should not actually be allowed to go to New York. 
And before long, Mr. Redden was presented with a new boarding pass.
After Mr. Redden left, Ms. Ma turned to the reporters again and made another pitch: maybe Lincoln Center would accept a safer version of "The Peony Pavilion," one that was simpler to stage, that used none of the innovative techniques of Chen Shi-Zheng, the director hired by Lincoln Center, whom Ms. Ma, to put it mildly, does not like.
"We have already started rehearsing," Ms. Ma said, brightening. 
"We could certainly take it to Lincoln Center in time for their festival."
Mr. Chen, dejected by the opera's demise, lamented that bureaucrats like Ms. Ma seemed to have no sense that a serious arts festival like Lincoln Center's valued artistic integrity and vision, and would not simply slap in a replacement performance by another troupe if the original was blocked.
"You know, 'The Peony Pavilion' itself is about pursuing a dream, and how you need it to survive," said Mr. Chen, now an American citizen. 
Musing about his own dream of staging the opera in its original 55-act form, he said, "In China today, it is so clear, that kind of spirit is not allowed to live."
      
