
President Clinton arrived here today and prepared to repair the damage from what some of his aides call one of his biggest foreign policy mistakes this year: walking away from an agreement to get China into the World Trade Organization.
In preparation for a meeting scheduled for later today with President Jiang Zemin, Mr. Clinton's aides have been scrambling to make sure that China is still willing to make the broad market-opening concessions that it offered in April. 
At that time Mr. Clinton rejected the deal, after some top aides advised holding out for an even better deal.
Within days, the President decided that this was a mistake. 
Business executives flooded the White House with protests, complaining that he underestimated the extent of Chinese concessions.
But subsequent events -- from the accidental bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade to the accusations of Chinese nuclear spying -- led Beijing to suspend the talks, amid a vigorous debate in China over whether Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and Mr. Jiang were giving away too much.
That debate continues. 
But the mood in the Clinton Administration has changed, and Mr. Clinton is clearly primed to move a deal along -- even if one is not achievable at today's meeting.
"There is a sense that if we are going to get the relationship with China back on track, this is the only concrete step we can take," one of Mr. Clinton's top foreign policy advisers said.
The chief negotiator for the deal, Robert Cassidy, went to Beijing last weekend to lay the groundwork for today's meeting. 
Then his boss, Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky, met her Chinese counterpart here and agreed that the two nations would work to get China into the World Trade Organization within three months. 
That would be before the world's top trade officials gather in Seattle in December to begin a new round of negotiations over agriculture.
Assuming a deal is struck, the big remaining obstacle is Congress. 
Any agreement with the United States would require that China be given permanent preferential trade status -- depriving Congress of its annual trade debate, which has become a venue for venting frustration with China's human rights record.
Another problem in Congress is whether Democrats can be convinced that the deal protects American workers. 
Labor unions vow to lobby against getting China into the trade organization.
One of the mysteries for the Administration is how badly Mr. Zhu, and perhaps Mr. Jiang, were hurt by Ms. Barshefsky's decision in April to publish a summary of China's trade concessions. 
That list helped build support for a deal among American business executives. 
But it outraged many powerful Chinese, who fear that the deal would remove protections against foreign competition.
