
President Clinton's national security adviser said today that "it would be an enormous mistake" to postpone Mr. Clinton's trip to China next month simply because of the current political storm over the export of satellite technology.
Nonetheless, White House officials are already scrambling to find diplomatic offerings they can bring to Beijing without worsening the controversy, since many of the initiatives Mr. Clinton is considering would use access to American satellites and joint space research as a lure for China to take further steps in limiting weapons proliferation.
Appearing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, dismissed calls by virtually all the Republican leaders in Congress for Mr. Clinton to cancel his trip. 
Among those leaders was Speaker Newt Gingrich, who said on the CNN program "Late Edition," "Until we know the truth about what was going on, it is very inappropriate for the President to go to China."
Mr. Gingrich added that "it would be an embarrassment to both countries to have the meeting."
White House officials say there is virtually no chance Mr. Clinton will cancel plans for his meeting with Chinese leaders in late June, which Mr. Berger said comes at a critical moment in relations with Beijing. 
Noting India's recent tests of nuclear weapons and the turmoil caused by the Asian financial crisis, Mr. Berger said, "China is key to all of those."
At the same time, a continuing criminal investigation and the opening of several Congressional inquiries into the actions of two satellite makers are bound to affect the agenda of the trip, according to several officials and informal advisers to the Administration on China.
"It's obvious that a lot of what we had hoped to offer in return for Chinese commitments on proliferation -- especially in the space and technology area -- are going to have to be reviewed," one senior adviser to Mr. Clinton said. 
"That's just the political reality."
For example, a month ago Administration officials were discussing with the Chinese the possibility of a blanket waiver of sanctions imposed after the killing of demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989. 
The waiver would allow China to launch American-made satellites without case-by-case Presidential review. 
In return, the White House was looking for a commitment from China to join the Missile Technology Control Regime, the main international group that limits exports of missile technologies.
But in the current political climate, that proposal appears all but dead. 
Not only would it cause an uproar in Congress, according to Administration and other officials, but China has so far not indicated a willingness to join the missile regime, though it already adheres to some of its principles.
There are also questions about another major proposal: an agreement between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and its Chinese counterpart to conduct scientific observations from space.
Before the current controversy, Administration officials say, the Pentagon and the nation's intelligence agencies had insisted on restrictions to make sure that the space accord did not enable China to improve its spy satellite capability, or its ability to use global positioning satellites to allow more precise targeting of ballistic missiles. 
The cooperation agreement was focused mostly on observing agricultural changes and pollution.
"Even with that," one Administration official said this weekend, "people are going to look at this carefully because it has the words 'space' and 'satellite' in it."
It is unclear how, or even if, the satellite controversy will affect other offerings to the Chinese. 
Some are not technology-related: for example, the Administration has considered lifting an eight-year-old ban that has prevented two Government agencies, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and the Trade and Development Agency, from promoting deals between American companies and the Chinese Government.
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation provides political risk insurance to American companies for a fee. 
The Trade and Development Agency finances feasibility studies of overseas projects that could create jobs for American workers.
Last week, the House of Representatives overwhelmingly passed amendments to a military spending bill that would prohibit virtually all satellite exports to China. 
Among the House members who voted for the bill were a number who had urged Mr. Clinton to allow such exports in the past, rather than let the business go to rival European companies.
Mr. Berger suggested today that Congress had acted prematurely and emotionally. 
"I always thought we went from accusation to fact to conclusion to remedy," he said.
On the talk shows today and on Capitol Hill last week, participants in the debate often conflated three separate issues into a broad argument over whether the Clinton Administration has taken actions that could compromise national security.
The first of those issues concerns a waiver President Clinton signed earlier this year allowing Loral Space and Communications, a major military contractor, to export a satellite that is scheduled to be launched by the Chinese in November. 
The President's decision was complicated by the fact that Federal prosecutors have been investigating a 1996 incident in which Loral's engineers are accused of having breached security by advising the Chinese on how to build more reliable rockets.
That advice followed an investigation into the causes of the explosion of a Long March rocket, the mainstay of China's commercial rocket fleet and its nuclear arsenal. 
Classified memorandums, made public by the White House on Friday, show that there was intense debate within the Clinton Administration over whether to approve this year's launching.
The question is whether the White House was influenced by appeals from Loral to sign the waiver quickly, before contractual penalties of more than $4 million were imposed by the Chinese for a delay in delivering the satellite. 
Mr. Berger defended the decision to allow the export, saying that "no technology was being transferred by the license."
He noted that the license could still be revoked if the investigation led to an indictment of the company or any of its employees.
The second issue concerns Mr. Clinton's pattern of issuing waivers that allow such launchings. 
The White House has noted that President George Bush did the same, signing nine waivers between December 1989 -- only six months after the Tiananmen Square killings -- and 1992. 
Mr. Clinton has signed 11 waivers since July 1993.
Documents shown to reporters on Friday made it clear that the waivers are given to the Chinese as a reward for an action that pleases Washington, or used as an incentive for future action. 
For example, the State Department recommended that Mr. Clinton approve the February waiver because it would "provide an incentive for China to observe M.T.C.R. missile proliferation guidelines."
But the waivers are also motivated by a desire to assure that American companies remain ahead of their European competitors in the race to get satellites aloft, serving telephone users and television viewers around the world.
Thus the Administration is open to charges that it has twisted its security judgments for the benefit of American companies, including those whose officers are known to have made large campaign contributions. 
The issue is complicated by the fact that some of the waivers clearly aided the China Aerospace Group, a conglomerate owned by the Chinese Government. 
An executive of China Aerospace, Liu Chaoying, is believed to have been the conduit for surreptitious donations to the Democratic Party in 1996. 
Ms. Liu has denied the accusation.
And almost lost in the Washington debate is what may be the most critical question: why President Clinton, in March 1996, overrode his Secretary of State, Warren M. Christopher, by ruling that satellites would no longer be classified as munitions. 
That eased the process of getting export waivers approved.
"I am convinced the national security was not compromised by any decision that we made," Mr. Berger said today.
