
In meeting China's President in Seattle on Friday, President Clinton is gambling that the strategy of tentatively embracing Beijing's leaders rather than castigating them will work better for him than it did for President George Bush.
The one-hour meeting, the highest-level contact since China suppressed pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989, comes after a formal policy review in September that led to a decision to shift away from threats and finger-pointing and substitute what a top Administration specialist called "enhanced engagement."
Mr. Clinton was so determined to turn the deteriorating relationship around that in September he opened high-level exchanges with Beijing and sent President Jiang Zemin a letter announcing that the United States would help promote a "strong, stable and prosperous China."
It did not seem to matter that Mr. Jiang's most important title is General Secretary of the Communist Party, or that in last year's campaign Mr. Clinton had accused Mr. Bush of "coddling" China's leadership.
There are some differences in both the policy and the risks for the two Administrations. 
President Clinton started off in office as a far tougher critic of the Chinese and, unlike Mr. Bush, he is willing to link trade benefits to Beijing's human rights performance, at least in the abstract.
Because of Mr. Bush's close association to China, dating from the 1970's when he was the American envoy, he was excoriated in Congress and in the press for meeting with Prime Minister Li Peng at the United Nations in January 1992. 
By contrast, there has been virtually no criticism of Mr. Clinton's planned meeting with Mr. Jiang. Administration officials maintain that this is due to a tougher track record that they hope will now make the switch to a softer line more effective.
On the lofty political level, the American goal is to convince China that it is in its national interest to liberalize its political process. 
Mr. Clinton will tell his Chinese counterpart that if China wants to continue to export its goods to the United States under the same low tariffs enjoyed by most other nations, it must make broad changes in its human rights policies now, rather than wait until the benefits face renewal in June.
 
What China Must Do
The concern is that China may do too little too late in meeting the requirements of a May 1993 executive order linking extension of the trade benefits to China's progress on releasing of political prisoners, ceasing the jamming of international broadcasts, implementing the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, protecting Tibet's cultural and religious heritage and allowing visits by international humanitarian organizations.
On a more mundane level, the Administration's policy is driven by Mr. Clinton's determination that the United States get a larger chunk of the world's fastest-growing market. 
China's trade surplus with the United States could exceed that of Japan's by the end of the decade.
That means a renewal of China's trade benefits, because China has threatened to retaliate against American companies if the privileges are withdrawn. 
And all of the Administration's economic agencies have begun to weigh in heavily on China policy, arguing that the interests of commerce should prevail over other policy considerations.
 
Criticism From Christopher
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who has not acted on Foreign Minister Qian Qichen's invitation to visit China, is the Administration's most vocal advocate of Beijing's need to do much more if it wants to keep its preferential trade status.
At a briefing Monday, Mr. Christopher characterized as helpful but inadequate such isolated gestures as China's announcement last week that it will give "positive consideration" to allowing the Red Cross to visit prisoners.
The latest indication of China's attitude toward human rights came on Monday, when two dissidents were apparently seized by police and disappeared after attending a meeting to promote nonviolent political reform.
In a speech to a business group in Hong Kong today, Mr. Bush could not resist criticizing his successor's attempts to impose democratic values abroad. 
Saying China's economic leap forward had made its society much freer than when he was the envoy, he warned that to revoke China's trading privileges would isolate China and narrow Washington's influence.
 
Questions of Missiles
But kind gestures and sweet talk in Washington do not necessarily produce results in Beijing, as evidenced by China's determination to sell ballistic missiles in violation of an international accord.
During a visit to Beijing in 1988, Secretary of State George P. Shultz was unable to dissuade the Chinese from going forward with contracts to sell such missiles; three years later, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d ended talks in China under the erroneous impression that the Chinese would adhere to their pledges not to export missiles or technology that violated the accord.
The Clinton Administration is fighting the same battle and, thus far, the Chinese are winning.
The Administration imposed sanctions on an estimated $1 billion in high-technology trade with China last August, as required under United States law, after intelligence agencies reported that China had shipped technology and components for M-11 missiles to Pakistan.
China has refused to pledge adherence to the accord. 
In a meeting with senior State Department officials in Washington early this month, the Deputy Foreign Minister, Liu Huaqiu, said Beijing would be willing to open a formal dialogue with the United States only after Washington lifted the sanctions.
 
Gesture of Good Will
As a gesture of good will to the Chinese, Mr. Clinton's senior advisers are recommending that he accept a broad interpretation of the law requiring sanctions. 
That would enable him to announce to Mr. Jiang that he was allowing the export of two of the seven satellites affected by the sanctions.
Mr. Clinton's advisers are also urging that he approve the sale of a supercomputer for meteorological purposes that some nonproliferation experts in the Administration fear could be put to military uses.
The Clinton-Jiang meeting will certainly be Mr. Clinton's most important encounter during an economic summit meeting that will bring together leaders of the 15-member Asia-Pacific Economic Conference.
But a subdrama of another sort may also play out in Seattle: Mr. Christopher's search for a deputy after the forced resignation of Clifton R. Wharton Jr. last week.
 
Post Turned Down
Senior Administration officials said Mr. Christopher's first choice was Michael H. Armacost, who served as Ambassador to Japan and was the third-ranking official in Mr. Baker's State Department. 
But Mr. Armacost, now a visiting professor at the Asia-Pacific Research Center, turned it down.
While senior officials said Mr. Christopher may try to change Mr. Armacost's mind, he is also focusing on several other candidates, including two officials who will be demonstrating their diplomatic mettle in Seattle this week: J. Stapleton Roy, the Ambassador to China, and Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
The front-runner -- at least on the lists of some officials among State Department executives -- remains Thomas R. Pickering, the Ambassador to Russia; unlike Mr. Armacost, he is said to be very interested in serving as Mr. Christopher's No. 2.
