
United States officials expressed concern to the Government today over reports that several dissidents had been detained and others harassed in connection with President Clinton's visit.
"We're very concerned that some dissidents may have been detained or otherwise disrupted," the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, told reporters soon after Mr. Clinton's arrival in Xian this evening. 
He said the United States Ambassador, James R. Sasser, had conveyed this to Chinese officials.
In the Xian area, three democracy advocates were reportedly detained and a fourth was forced to leave the area temporarily.
On Friday morning, during a news conference near Xian, President Clinton was asked about the matter and said, "I found the reports disturbing."
He added, "If true, this represents not China at its best, not China looking forward, but looking backward."
Among those detained, Yang Hai of Xian, one of about 70 people who had called on Mr. Clinton to meet with dissidents during his visit, was taken away by the police today, according to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, a Hong Kong-based monitoring group.
On Wednesday, Yan Jun of Xian, another petitioner, and Li Zhiying, who has signed petitions to the Government, were also detained, and another Xian resident who petitioned Mr. Clinton, Fu Sheng, was put on a train to Qingdao on Wednesday.
Security forces in China often use temporary detentions to intimidate dissidents and prevent their activities at sensitive times. 
In addition, more than 2,000 people are believed to be in labor camps or prison for their pro-democracy campaigning.
Still, in the months since the Chinese Government released the prominent dissident Wei Jingsheng into exile in the United States last November, scores of people around the country have signed petitions and written open letters calling for democracy and a reappraisal of the military crackdown in Tiananmen Square in 1989, in which hundreds of civilians were killed. 
Many of them face constant police harassment.
In the eastern city of Hangzhou today, three democracy campaigners applied today to register a new political party, the Chinese Democratic Party, and one was later detained, his wife told reporters.
The Communist Party has a monopoly on power and allows a few token parties to operate only under its guidance. 
In an unusual and risky move, the three campaigners in Hangzhou -- Wang Youcai, Wang Donghai and Lin Hui -- left application papers for their opposition party with a Zhejiang provincial office.
Wang Donghai, 53, was arrested this evening, his wife, Cheng Yunhui, told a Reuters reporter.
The best known of the three, Wang Youcai, 31, was a student leader in the 1989 demonstrations that ended in the Tiananmen massacre. 
He was sentenced to four years but released early for good conduct in November 1991. 
This spring he was detained when he tried to attend centennial celebrations at Beijing University.
This afternoon, after applying to form the new party, Mr. Wang Youcai told reporters, "We hope Clinton will pay attention and support the establishment of an opposition party in China, so we chose today to register."
      
