
Following are excerpts from an interview of President Clinton in the Oval Office by The New York Times:
 
Q. Looking back now, are you convinced that this approach that you developed of using this web of economic engagement . . . has actually worked, and that's proved your thesis that as you engage more economically, you actually do bring countries around to democracy -- this despite the Vietnam and Chinese examples?
 
A. Well, the short answer is, yes, I think it is -- I think it will work. 
But I think it's a question of whether you -- whether we're prepared to pay the price of time, and what the options are.
I don't think there's any way for us to bring openness and freedom to China or to Vietnam more quickly than the one we've adopted. 
I don't think that either country -- I don't think we have any levers of pressure, for example, that would bring change more quickly. 
And I think the downsides of adopting a different approach are greater than the upsides.
I think the -- first, let me back up and say my whole view of this period in which we're living is that the world is becoming exponentially more interdependent, and with all kinds of new opportunities and all kinds of new dangers -- that if you want to make the most of an interdependent world, you have to let people within your country have more freedom over the basic aspects of their lives. 
. . .
 
Q. What kind of time frames are we talking about for China and Vietnam, do you think?
 
A. I don't know. 
I think, if you look at Vietnam, it was really interesting to me when I was there to see the differences in the approaches taken sort of in gradations from the mayor of Ho Chi Minh City to the prime minister to the president to the general secretary of the party. 
And if you -- the way they -- even the way they talked was so much a function of their responsibilities and the extent to which they are dealing with the emerging world. 
I was actually, on balance, quite encouraged by what I saw there and where I think it's going.
In China, I think it's really just a matter of time. 
If you go to -- as I've said, you've got a lot of different things going on in China. 
It's a vast country. 
But if you go to Shanghai, or just go out in those villages -- like I went to a couple of those little villages, where they elected their mayors and all -- I think there's more and more personal freedom, freedom of movement, freedom of choice of career, freedom in educational choices, things that did not exist before.
And I think that eventually the country will become more open and free if we do the right things and they do the right things.
There is always the possibility you will have people get in office in either country that will make mistakes. 
But I think that the policy is right, and the direction is right.
 
Q. Coming back to Vietnam from a domestic side, were there ways in which you felt your going there and the trip had brought you full circle kind of culturally and politically?
. . .
 
A. Well, it was interesting. 
I had this encounter with the general secretary of the party, sitting there with Pete Peterson, who was a P.O.W. for six and a half years. 
And he is, parenthetically, not just our ambassador, but a very good personal friend of mine -- we've been close for years -- and a man who is astonishingly free of resentment and demons, given what he went through.
But -- and some of this has been reported, but basically, the general secretary was saying -- he was the most hard line of all the people I talked to -- and he said:
Well, we can talk all about the future here, but we've got to get the past straight. 
And we didn't invade your country, you invaded our country, and it was terrible. 
And I'm so glad that so many of the American people opposed it, I'm glad you opposed it, I'm glad the people were in the streets. 
But it happened, and we've got to somehow work this out.
And I looked at him, and I said, "If you want to talk about history, we can, but -- and it's true that we were deeply divided over the war."
I said, "Most of our division related to what the character of the conflict was, and what if any impact we could have on it."
But, I said, "Mr. 
Chairman, we were not France. 
We were not colonialists. 
We were not imperialists. 
And people like Ambassador Peterson that served six and half years in one of your prisons, they came here believing they were fighting for freedom and self-determination for the South Vietnamese."
I said: "Now your country is unified, and you are at peace. 
But you still have to face the age-old questions: How much of the economy should the state control?
How much should be in private hands?
How much personal freedom should people have, and how many decisions should be made by their families, their villages, or the state?"
And I said, "I think it would be better if we had these discussions looking to the future."
