
With surprises abroad and critics at home bedeviling his foreign policy, President Clinton today defended his efforts to cooperate with Mexico in fighting drugs, to engage with China to promote political freedom, and to threaten force to bring peace to Kosovo.
Mr. Clinton tried to step back on a jumbled day of scattershot developments and locate coherent themes in a foreign policy that his critics have long complained reacts to world events more than it anticipates them, and abides the abuses of nations more than it prevents or punishes them.
Twice in his broad-gauged, 50-minute speech here, he spoke of the "inexorable logic of globalization."
He warned that while increased trade and economic growth might knit nations closer together, without active American leadership they would not guarantee peace, wealth or environmental protection.
"The promise of our future lies in the world," Mr. Clinton said. 
"Therefore we must work hard with the world -- to defeat the dangers we face together and to build this hopeful moment together, in a generation of peace, prosperity, and freedom."
He went on to list regions and issues where he planned to use the country's troops, trade, aid and cooperation -- rather than its broad, cold shoulder -- to advance his goals.
On Kosovo, the Clinton Administration has faced criticism for setting a deadline for peace talks between Serbs and ethnic Albanian rebels, and then letting it slip.
In his speech, the President declared his intent to certify to Congress that Mexico is cooperating in the fight on drugs, despite the widely held view in his Administration that corruption in the Mexican Government has resulted in less cooperation in the last year. 
A6.
Mr. Clinton warned Slobodan Milosevic, Yugoslavia's President, to exert "restraint, not repression" during the pause in the troubled peace negotiations with the Albanian rebels in the once-autonomous region of Kosovo. 
"If he does not, NATO is prepared to act," he said. 
But he did not specify what actions might prompt the long-threatened bombing raids.
And on the day that his State Department issued a scathing summary of China's rights abuses in the annual Human Rights Report, Mr. Clinton called for "principled and purposeful engagement with China, its Government and its people."
Without referring specifically to the State Department's findings, he suggested that China was "moving away from the rule of fear" but was "not yet rooted in the rule of law."
"I do not believe we can hope to bring change to China if we isolate China from the forces of change," he said. 
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, who is preparing to leave for China this weekend, sat to Mr. Clinton's left as he delivered his speech, in a hotel's basement ballroom here. 
He spoke to the Pacific Council for Globalization, the Commonwealth Club and the World Affairs Council.
With Israelis and Palestinians at an impasse over the President's latest intervention for peace, the Wye River Agreement, Mr. Clinton declared today, "I intend to use the time I have remaining in this office to push for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East," adding, "The people of the Middle East can do it, but time is precious, and they can't afford to waste any more of it."
He began his survey of the world -- which his national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, called a "State of the Union for foreign policy" -- with an upbeat appraisal of the times. 
"For the first time since before the rise of Fascism early in this century, there is no overriding threat to our survival or our freedom," he said. 
He then described a fifteenfold jump in world trade since the end of World War II that has raised "living standards on every continent."
But, calling for "a little humility," he read a long quotation declaring that an extraordinary increase in trade, travel and information flow had insured that "isolation is no longer possible."
The words were said 100 years ago by President William McKinley, Mr. Clinton said, noting that McKinley's optimism was followed by two world wars, the Holocaust, the Great Depression and Communism.
"Had leading nations acted decisively then, perhaps these disasters might have been prevented," he said.
As a result of that experience, he warned: "We cannot assume today that globalization alone will wash away the forces of destruction at the dawn of the 21st century, any more than it did at the dawn of the 20th century. 
We cannot assume it will bring freedom and prosperity to ordinary citizens around the world who long for them. 
We cannot assume it will avoid environmental and public health disasters."
Cautioning against what he called an American tendency to withdraw from the world during good times, the President went on to slot his top foreign policy concerns into overlapping categories, listing five "challenges" to the United States in the coming century: building a "more peaceful 21st century world;" bringing Russia and China "into the international system as open, prosperous, stable nations;" protecting against dangers of weapons proliferation, terrorism, drugs and climate change; creating a world trading and financial system that benefits ordinary people, and maintaining freedom as "a top goal."
His aides say that after regarding foreign policy as a regrettable but necessary distraction at the beginning of his first term, Mr. Clinton came to relish the world stage, particularly after 1994, when a Republican Congress stymied much of his domestic agenda. 
He also became increasingly convinced of the benefits of global trade to American business and of the potential of commercial ties and international organizations to enmesh potentially rogue nations and enforce peace, foster democracy and protect human rights.
Taking more control over his policy, he replaced the mentors of his first term -- notably Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher -- with advisers like Mr. Berger and Ms. Albright whom he regards as peers.
But while he has been credited in his two terms with advances in the Middle East, Haiti and Northern Ireland, Mr. Clinton has been repeatedly criticized for ignoring festering problems, like those in Bosnia and Rwanda. 
He has been unable to build enough support in his own party to win the special negotiating authority from Congress necessary to strike the free-trade deals that he regards as central to his policy. 
And critics have accused him of naive optimism that the flow of products and information will ultimately force China and other repressive governments to open their political systems.
Further, Mr. Clinton's go-go optimism for free markets, both of goods and of capital -- encouraged by his Treasury Secretary, Robert E. Rubin -- may have blinded him, critics charge, to the risks posed by furious currency trading to the fragile economies of South East Asia, Latin America and Russia.
Today, he appealed to his audience for help in figuring out what to do about such sloshing of capital in and out of developing countries. 
"We have got to find a way to facilitate the movement of money -- without which trade and investment cannot occur -- in a way that avoids these dramatic cycles of boom and then bust, which have led to the collapse of economic activity in so many countries around the world," he said.
On a six-day trip through the west, Mr. Clinton flew this afternoon to Los Angeles to attend a fund-raiser this evening. 
On Saturday, he planned to fly to Utah for a three-day vacation with his family, to celebrate the 19th birthday of his daughter, Chelsea.
At a fund-raiser here Thursday night, he said he had made "no progress" in resolving tensions between Turkey and Greece, or between India and Pakistan. 
He did not speak so starkly today, but he observed that the standoff in South Asia was a reminder that "the next big war could still be nuclear."
In the Balkans, he urged Americans to heed the lesson that he has said he had learned in Bosnia. 
"Kosovo is not an easy problem," he said. 
"But if we don't stop the conflict now, it clearly will spread. 
And then we will not be able to stop it, except at far greater cost and risk."
