
Addressing concerns over the sale of American supercomputers to Russia and China, the Clinton Administration added 13 foreign organizations today to its list of groups that are involved in secretly producing nuclear weapons and will now require special Federal approval to buy American technology.
Six organizations in Russia and China will now be on "an alert to exporters" and additional names will be added soon, said William A. Reinsch, Under Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration.
Critics said, however, that today's publication is too little and too late after recent disclosures that dozens of American supercomputers, many with possible military applications, have been sold to Russia and China since 1996 without Federal licenses.
These sales did not require Government approval because they were made under greatly relaxed export controls for supercomputers issued by President Clinton in 1995. 
Under those rules, the Government transferred to companies the responsibility for screening buyers to insure they were not diverting sensitive technology to military uses.
"This is a good first step, but it's a baby step, and in the case of the Russian nuclear weapons lab, it comes too late," said Gary Milhollin, the director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control.
Mr. Milhollin was referring to the All-Russian Scientific Research Institute of Technical Physics, which was added to the list today. 
Last year Silicon Graphics Inc. in Mountain View, Calif., sold supercomputers to the institute, saying it did not seek Government approval because it was unaware that the institute was also a weapons lab.
But the Russian institute's nuclear weapons role has long been widely known, so much so that the Commerce Department felt no urgency, until recently, to include it on the list, according to Commerce Department officials. 
Had the institute been put on the blacklist earlier, the sale would have been subject to Federal review and probably would not have happened, the officials also said.
The Department of Justice has opened a criminal investigation into Russia's purchase of supercomputers.
When announcing the 1995 deregulation, the White House promised to keep exporters informed of "potential proliferation and other security risks."
But in early 1996 the Clinton Administration turned down a request by Federal nuclear experts to fulfill that obligation, out of fear of offending some countries or compromising intelligence-gathering methods, officials said.
The Administration only published the first name on the list this year after Russia stunned proliferation experts by announcing that its nuclear weapons laboratories had acquired American supercomputers. 
Today's list, published in the Federal Register, includes organizations in India, Israel and Pakistan as well as three Chinese scientific organizations and two research institutes and a ministry in Russia.
Congress raised concerns after the disclosure of the sales to Russia and the discovery that China had obtained 47 supercomputers. 
American intelligence officials said the Chinese could use the computers to design more efficient or lighter nuclear warheads that could be put on missiles able to reach the United States.
Two weeks ago the House of Representatives passed an amendment to the defense authorization bill to reinstitute tighter controls over supercomputer exports. 
One sponsor, Floyd D. Spence, Republican of South Carolina, said it "would put Government officials back to where they belong, protecting our security interests instead of remaining on the sidelines while Russia, China and other nations of proliferation concern go on a shopping spree."
Senators Thad Cochran, Republican of Mississippi, and Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, have offered a similar amendment in the Senate.
The Clinton Administration strongly opposes both amendments, arguing that export controls should he handled by the executive branch.      
