
President Clinton today sent Congress his bill to usher China into the World Trade Organization. 
He then opened a new front in the debate on the subject in his own party, arguing that opening China's markets will undermine Communist Party control.
In a speech at the Johns Hopkins University's foreign affairs graduate school here, Mr. Clinton tried to float above the bitter economic debate in his party about the wisdom of the legislation, and he said little about Taiwan, whose tense relations with China have been worsening.
But he made an argument that opening up China's economy amounted to a poison pill for China's Communist leaders.
"In the new century, liberty will spread by cell phone and cable modem," Mr. Clinton told a crowd that included students, lobbyists and many cabinet members, who are now making daily calls to Congress about the issue.
When it joins the Geneva-based trade organization, the president said, China will be obliged to make "the tools of communication even cheaper, better and more widely available."
"We know how much the Internet has changed America, and we are already an open society," he said. 
"Imagine how much it could change China."
Excerpts, Page A10.
Mr. Clinton acknowledged that since the deal was signed four months ago, China's leaders have tried to control the kind of sites Chinese can reach via the Internet and to prevent foreign ownership of Internet-related companies. 
But to the Chinese leaders trying to control the Internet in a country as vast and hard to police as China, he said he had only two words: "Good luck!"
The long-delayed transmission of the bill to Congress -- it appeared timed to arrive after Vice President Gore had the Democratic presidential nomination firmly in grasp -- set off a battle within the Democratic Party that intertwines the politics of trade, the presidential election and Mr. Clinton's final effort to recast relations with Beijing.
The legislation's prospects are unclear. 
Only 50 to 60 Democratic members of the House appear ready to support the bill, which would grant permanent "normal" trade status to China. 
That is the one legal prerequisite that would let American companies benefit from market openings China promised in 13 years of negotiations that ended in November.
That means that Mr. Clinton is dependent on support from House and Senate Republicans to pass what may be the last major foreign policy legislation of his presidency. 
Senate passage is thought likely. 
But the vote in the House is expected to be very close. 
By most estimates, President Clinton would have to win over at least 20 more Democrats in the House to secure passage.
He is getting little help from Vice President Gore, who, to appease labor unions that vociferously oppose the deal, said three weeks ago that he would negotiate something better if elected to office. 
Mr. Gore later reiterated his support for the deal the administration struck, but his aides did not return calls on the subject today.
Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the presumed Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, said Mr. Bush remains a "vocal supporter" of China's entry into the trade organization, because "it is in our interest, and it is in the interest of the Chinese to grow an entrepreneurial middle class."
But he said the governor did not yet have a position on tying passage of the bill to providing new arms for Taiwan, a movement that several Republicans are considering as the price for their support.
Mr. Clinton was introduced today by Paul Wolfowitz, dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies. 
But Mr. Wolfowitz, who is one of Governor Bush's leading foreign policy advisers, did not mention that Mr. Bush has been more vocal in his support of the bill than Mr. Clinton's own vice president.
Mr. Clinton's argument today that entry to the regulatory body would loosen the hold of China's Communist leaders is bound to set off considerable debate, because it is far from clear that China's economic openings have been matched by a political relaxation.
Mr. Clinton made essentially the same argument in 1994 when he reversed himself, and said that despite his campaign promises he would no longer link the annual renewal of Chinese trade benefits to its human rights record. 
Over time, he said, trade would contribute to a lifting of political repression.
But in the six years since then, according to the annual reports published by the State Department, China's rights record has worsened.
"It's a risky argument because it leaves him vulnerable to the charge that he's overplaying what this agreement will do in China," said Nicholas Lardy, a China expert at the Brookings Institution. 
"It was a good speech, but there may have been too much emphasis on what this will do to change China rather than why it's in the national interests of the United States."
Even as Mr. Clinton spoke, his advisers foresaw a fierce battle in Congress, where they are trying to win passage by mid-May, before the congressional elections heat up.
And today Mr. Clinton lost a major ally: Representative John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat who is influential with his colleagues on military issues.
In a letter to his colleagues, Mr. Murtha, who has consistently voted to renew China's trading rights with the United States, said he now believes it would be a mistake to lose the leverage of an annual vote.
He said his mind was made up when China threatened "drastic measures" and "the use of force" against Taiwan if it was found to be indefinitely delaying unification talks.
"It is not in our national security interest," he concluded, "to condone and reward grossly irresponsible conduct."
While Mr. Clinton has been meeting with members of Congress for several weeks to press his case, Democratic and Republican leaders on Capitol Hill have complained that the White House was running out of time -- and needed to send up a bill. 
Senator Daniel P. Moynihan, Democrat of New York and a supporter of permanent normal trade relations, a status that most nations enjoy, complained two weeks ago that the White House needed to act soon.
Clearly part of that hesitation was the pressure on Vice President Gore. 
But now some White House officials say they hope he will strengthen his support, even if it means angering unions. 
"Where is the A.F.L.-C.I.O. going to run?" one cabinet member said today. 
"To George Bush?"
But the big issue is the Democratic members of Congress, who are caught between labor, which vows to defeat anyone supporting the bill, and business interests, which are organizing an advertising campaign for it. 
That effort is led by agricultural and technology concerns.
Meanwhile, China is nervous that the bill will fail, and Chinese officials have begun an unusual lobbying campaign. 
One senior administration official said this week that he feared that "China's own efforts could backfire on us big time."
But Mr. Clinton noted today that even if Congress votes against normal trade relations, China will still get into the world body.
A vote against the bill, Mr. Clinton said, "will cost America jobs as our competitors in Europe, Asia and elsewhere capture Chinese markets that we otherwise would have served."
      
