
President Clinton's foreign policy aides say he plans a diplomatic whirlwind in New York over the next three days, including what one senior official called "the last real chance" to jump-start the failed talks between Israel and the Palestinians and what may be prove to be a tense session with China's president over Beijing's continued missile exports to Pakistan.
Those meetings are part of a jammed schedule for Mr. Clinton, who arrives in Manhattan today for one of his last opportunities for major foreign policy accomplishments in his second term. 
Tomorrow, he is to open a three-day series of speeches and discussions by more than 150 world leaders at the United Nations.
Clearly intent on not sitting on the sidelines while the presidential campaign speeds into its last two months, Mr. Clinton plans to announce American support for a plan to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping department.
But Mr. Clinton also plans to use the United Nations meeting to insert himself in an array of simmering world conflicts -- from the Middle East to Cyprus to the Korean Peninsula.
Samuel R. Berger, Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, said in a lengthy interview over the weekend that much of Mr. Clinton's time will be spent on one last effort to reconstruct a deal between the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, and Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel. 
Mr. Clinton is said to want that foreign policy achievement more than any other in his short time left in office, and he watched in frustration and anger as it slipped from his grasp at Camp David in the early morning hours of July 25.
He put most of the blame on Mr. Arafat, who was unwilling to sign on to any agreement that gave him only partial sovereignty over contested parts of Jerusalem. 
Mr. Arafat also was apparently unwilling to go along with Mr. Clinton's alternative proposal, to announce a settlement on all issues except Jerusalem. 
Mr. Clinton later likened the sessions to "going to the dentist without having your gums deadened."
In advance of this week's meetings, Mr. Clinton dispatched Dennis Ross, his special Middle East envoy, and George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, to try out new formulations. 
"There needs to be some flexibility that would indicate we have some chance of getting real momentum here," Mr. Berger said. 
"If we are not any further than we were in Camp David, it will be tough to get this done."
Both President Clinton and Mr. Berger have contended that Mr. Arafat's inflexibility was the chief obstacle to an agreement at Camp David. 
American officials have made it clear that little has changed since then.
Mr. Berger said that currently there are no plans for three-way meetings between Mr. Arafat, Mr. Barak and Mr. Clinton. Instead, the president will shuttle between the two at the Waldorf-Astoria, starting tomorrow afternoon.
No other meetings are formally scheduled, but Mr. Clinton's aides have already laid out a plan for at least two more days of talks.
Nonetheless, the atmosphere of the chaotic week at the United Nations may work against Mr. Clinton's hopes. 
In the seclusion of Camp David, the president could shut out distractions and some of the outside pressures bearing down on the leaders in the heat of their talks. 
News blackouts were easy to manage, because the press was kept miles away. 
Cell phones do not work at Camp David, leaving just a few land lines for each delegation.
New York will be the opposite: Mr. Arafat will be negotiating with other Arab leaders just blocks away, and Mr. Barak will be talking as he entertains American Jewish groups and others with a strong interest in how a deal is constructed.
Thousands of reporters will be milling about; the delegations will have every form of communication at their fingertips.
"It's not an ideal atmosphere," a former senior official who was deeply involved in past negotiations said recently. 
"I think the effort is to get enough progress to justify more meetings or maybe whisking them back to Camp David at the end of the week."
Mr. Berger said he believed that any thought of reconvening at Camp David was premature; nonetheless, Clinton's schedule for week's end has been left vague, save for a few New York appearances on behalf of his wife's candidacy for the New York Senate seat.
Mr. Clinton's meeting on Friday with President Jiang Zemin of China may be Mr. Clinton's last chance to show that he has made a lasting imprint on American relations with China. 
He has not seen Mr. Jiang in more than a year, and not since the two countries reached agreement over China's entry into the World Trade Organization. 
Although Mr. Clinton contended that the trade accord would yield broader diplomatic benefits, encouraging China to be more cooperative in dealing with hot spots around the globe, so far there has been little evidence of a change in China's attitude.
Mr. Jiang, under increasing political pressure at home because of the scope of China's market-opening concessions, is not likely to be in a mood to offer Mr. Clinton much. 
Moreover, while the House approved the W.T.O. accord in the spring by a surprisingly large margin, the Senate has yet to act. 
Passage there seems all but assured, but the Republican leadership has yet to schedule a vote, part of an elaborate maneuver for political advantage in the last days of the Congressional session.
Mr. Berger said that even as the administration works to secure Senate passage of the trade bill, "we will be pressing the Chinese on the question of implementation" of the W.T.O. accord. 
Those are code words for American concern that China will drag its feet on market openings and continue its efforts -- stepped up in recent months -- to control Internet content in China.
Mr. Clinton said earlier this year that such efforts were fruitless and that eventually, the openness spawned by increased commercial contacts would undermine the Communist Party's power. 
He is unlikely to repeat that prediction, which presumably angered China's leaders, to Mr. Jiang.
One focus of the Friday meeting will be to win Mr. Jiang's assurance that China's missile exports to Pakistan, its longtime ally against India, will cease. 
"We have to get this resolved and we are seeking further commitments on restraint," Mr. Berger said. 
But he quickly added that he did not expect an accord at this meeting. 
The two men are expected to see each other again after the presidential election, at a meeting of Asian leaders. 
But by then Mr. Clinton's powers will be all the more diminished in China's eyes.
Mr. Berger also said that the two men would discuss Taiwan at some length, for the first time since the island's longtime opposition won the presidential election. 
China made threatening indications to Taiwan before the election, in an effort to keep independence forces far from power, but has been far more moderate since the Nationalist Party lost. 
Still, there has been little communication between Beijing and the new government in Taipei.
"We have been urging flexibility, restraint and dialogue and we have had more success on one and two than three," he said.
Mr. Clinton's United Nations speech tomorrow will also endorse a report, issued by a special advisory group to Secretary General Kofi Annan, that the peacekeeping department be augmented by an interdepartmental panel that could do more continuous planning and make peacekeeping less of an ad hoc operation. 
"In principle we are supportive of what is in the report for a peacekeeping operation," Mr. Berger said. 
"It parallels what we have been recommending for several years."
