
From China's point of view the most explosive issue in its relationship with the United States is Taiwan. 
Chinese officials consistently argue that the level of American arms sales to the island violates Washington's pledge to reduce and, ultimately, phase out such sales.
To press its point, Beijing contends that its help to Pakistan and Iran's military and missile programs, which Washington is trying to limit, is comparable to Washington's military assistance to Taiwan. 
In negotiations, Beijing has suggested trading off its missile cooperation in the Middle East for American commitments to cut arms sales sharply to Taiwan, a possibility criticized by American Republicans like the former American Ambassador to China and representative to Taiwan, James R. Lilley.
The United States has argued that Chinese missile assistance to countries like Iran, which may use the weapons offensively, is quite different from its select supplies of defensive weaponry to Taiwan.
Since 1979, when Washington recognized Beijing as the sole legal Government of China and acknowledged that Taiwan is part of China, Washington has been committed to sell Taiwan whatever it needs to defend itself, language in the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act and passed by Congress.
But in August 1982, in what became known as the third communique, President Ronald Reagan agreed that the United States would gradually reduce arms sales to Taipei from the levels of that era, $830 million a year. 
For a time the Administration cut spending $20 million a year.
Although Administration officials, then and now, argue that nothing in the 1982 communique contradicts the 1979 law, "the problem is that the two are not consistent, and it's not hard to find ways in which they are in conflict," said Prof. Kenneth Lieberthal of the University of Michigan.
The 1979 act, which Congress regards as pre-eminently the law of the land, speaks of no reductions. 
The communique, which China regards as superseding the law, promises reductions of sales to Taiwan, "leading over a period of time to a final resolution."
The issue was not prominent, however, until 1992. 
Then, in the midst of his campaign for re-election, President George Bush agreed to sell Taiwan 150 advanced F-16 fighters, worth more than $5 billion and produced in the pivotal state of Texas. 
That one sale drove the fiscal 1992 arms sales to Taiwan of $478 million, to $6.275 billion for fiscal year 1993, before falling back to figures below $500 million each year since then, according to unclassified Congressional notifications under the Export Control Act and assembled by the Congressional Research Service.
In the last few years the Clinton Administration has also notified Congress of some major sales, including, in January, three Knox-class frigates and anti-submarine missiles and launchers worth $300 million; last year 21 AH-1W Super Cobra attack helicopters worth $479 million, and, in 1996, two sales of Stinger ground-to-air missiles and launchers that totaled 1,764 missiles for $885 million.
China has been particularly concerned about past sales of Patriot-equivalent air-defense systems and wants to forestall future American sales of a "theater missile defense system" to Taiwan, a system that has not been developed yet.
In the 1982 communique Beijing promised a peaceful resolution of the question of Taiwan, which Washington interprets as directly linked to its promise to reduce arms sales, an assumption that Beijing rejects. 
Some officials here have argued that China's severe reaction to pressure by President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan for independence, including Chinese missile launchings that bracketed Taiwan before its elections in March 1996, was also a violation by Beijing of the communique.
"We have a legal and moral obligation to provide for Taiwan's security, and if Taiwan feels secure there's more likelihood for a real cross-straits dialogue between Beijing and Taipei about the future," said Winston Lord, former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and a former Ambassador to China.
Even the sales of F-16's, Mr. Lord argued, "though a stretch," were nonetheless legitimate, given China's growing military capacity.
