
Apart from Bill Clinton, who has clearly been having a ball, possibly no one has taken greater satisfaction in the presidential visit to China than the United States Ambassador to Beijing, James R. Sasser.
The new warmth in Chinese-American relations is in part a personal victory for Mr. Sasser, 61, who came to China in early 1996 as a very political appointee after the loss of his seat as a Democratic Senator from Tennessee, and at a time when China and the United States were all but hostile.
Big nations don't dance unless the geopolitical stars are correctly aligned, but by all accounts Mr. Sasser personified the American effort to create friendlier ties despite the deep differences over issues like human rights. 
His Southern style -- polite, charming and attentive -- was an evident hit with President Jiang Zemin, who also valued his closeness to his old Tennessee colleague, Al Gore, in the White House.
Reached on Wednesday in Shanghai, where he was accompanying the President, Mr. Sasser tried not to boast about the public relations coups for the President here.
It was up to his wife, Mary, to reveal their elation. 
"Wow!" she had said as she answered the phone. 
"It's just going great!"
Mr. Sasser is widely rumored to be leaving his post later this year to help Vice President Gore -- "social and political friends" is how Mr. Sasser describes the long relationship -- run for President.
On Wednesday, Mr. Sasser was coy, saying, "The normal term is about three years, and I've been here two and a half."
He added that he hopes to usher Prime Minister Zhu Rongji to Washington.
When Mr. Sasser first arrived in Beijing, he was criticized by some as a nonexpert, and relations between the two countries were plummeting. 
Shortly after he had taken up his post, the Chinese fired off missiles near Taiwan and the United States sent aircraft carriers to the region.
That hint of conflict proved to be a catalyst for both countries to seek a better way of communicating.
"He was very much the right man for the time," said William McCahill, the Deputy Chief of Mission here and a professional diplomat. 
"Nobody else here can pick up the phone to the White House."
After President Jiang's visit to the United States last fall, which the Chinese saw as a huge success, Mr. Sasser immediately pressed the White House to move up Mr. Clinton's reciprocal trip from the originally scheduled time next fall.
"Given the prickliness of this relationship, I felt that to wait a whole year was risky," he said.
Today, though some privately concede that the achievements of this summit meeting have been more atmospheric than substantive, senior foreign policy officials say they are glad the President followed Mr. Sasser's instincts.
One senior Administration official also said that Mr. Sasser's easy personal ties with Mr. Jiang and other top leaders here over the last two years have been a great asset, although the basic outlines of policy have been firmly drawn in Washington.
Mr. Sasser is clearly proud of his relations with the Chinese President, noting that he and his wife have been invited twice for personal dinners with Mr. Jiang and his wife.
"I think the training I had as a Senator was just perfect for this job in many ways," Mr. Sasser said, citing his skills gained as a conciliator and his familiarity with the American political system.
In his successful 1994 campaign to unseat Senator Sasser, Republican Bill Frist charged that Mr. Sasser would be "the official water boy to Bill Clinton."
Now, Mr. Sasser and Mr. Clinton, in their determination to build friendlier ties with China, are sometimes criticized as spending too much time carrying water for China, trying to minimize the differences on human rights and other issues.
Mr. Sasser asks the critics in return -- he isn't the sort to openly bristle -- "What is the alternative to a policy of dialogue and engagement?"
The No. 1 priority, he said, has to be working out a security arrangement so that the two countries "don't get on a collision course militarily."
He said he in no way minimizes the disputes that remain.
David M. Lampton, the director of China studies at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, said that Mr. Sasser has been "remarkably successful."
He added -- meaning this as a compliment -- that "his real strength has been to serve as China's ambassador to Congress."
Getting more legislators to visit China and see its changes and diversity has been a prime State Department goal. 
Close to 100 members of Congress have visited in the last year. 
This not only better acquaints them with China, but it also shows their Chinese hosts that concerns like human rights and religious tolerance are genuinely felt on the American side.
The exchange has made for amusing moments, Mr. Sasser recalled, such as a luncheon where a member of Congress asked a Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister -- like all senior officials here, a Communist -- if he had accepted Jesus Christ as his personal savior. 
"I haven't," the startled official replied.
A personal high point, Mr. Sasser said, was when he was told last fall that the Chinese were releasing Wei Jingsheng, the prominent dissident who had spent most of the last 20 years in jail, to exile in the United States. 
The Chinese insisted on secrecy, so for Mr. Wei's release, and later that of the student leader Wang Dan, the Ambassador sneaked into a building in the back of the Beijing airport to interview them before they boarded their planes.
"Those are high moments, when you see those guys get on an airplane for the United States, after spending so many years in prison," he recalled.
