
Declaring the isolation of China to be "unworkable, counterproductive and potentially dangerous," President Clinton today defended his policy of engagement with China as fundamental to America's economic and security interests.
The President's 25-minute address to a small group of Asia experts at Voice of America headquarters here was broadcast to a global radio audience estimated at 100 million, and was meant to lay a foundation for next week's summit meeting with President Jiang Zemin of China. 
It was the first time in his Presidency that Mr. Clinton has devoted an entire speech to a broad treatment of the relationship between America and China.
He said that even though he is having a high-profile meeting with Mr. Jiang -- the first Chinese state visit in a dozen years -- significant problems remained between Washington and Beijing. 
China stifles dissent, supplies weapons components to rogue states and does not adhere to international trading regimes, the President said. 
But the relationship with China is too important to base solely on points of friction, he asserted.
"As always, America must be prepared to live and flourish in a world in which we are at odds with China," he said. 
"But that is not the world we want. 
Our objective is not containment and conflict; it is cooperation. 
We will far better serve our interests, and our principles, if we work with a China that shares that objective with us."
The President touched all the bases of China policy without lingering very long on any one -- human rights, trade, environmental protection, Chinese political liberalization and American security interests in Asia.
The audience of diplomats, China scholars and Government officials interrupted the President with polite applause only twice, when he made his most forceful statements on American determination to call attention to continuing human rights abuses in China.
Mr. Clinton sought to inoculate himself against critics who claim that the United States should not act so cooperatively toward a repeat violator of press and religious freedoms, but should rather use its political and economic muscle to press Beijing toward more openness.
The President spoke of the profound economic changes under way in China and predicted that the growth of a market economy would bring with it greater political freedom.
"In the process, however, they have stifled political dissent to a degree and in ways that we believe are fundamentally wrong," he said.
"This approach has caused problems within China and in its relationship to the United States," he continued. 
"Chinese leaders believe it is necessary to hold the nation together to keep it growing, to keep moving toward its destiny. 
But it will become increasingly difficult to maintain the closed political system in an ever more open economy and society."
Despite these differences, the President insisted, the United States could not afford to contain or isolate Beijing, nor could it succeed in doing so because such an approach would embolden the enemies of freedom in China and give European and Asian business competitors a jump on the world's largest emerging market.
"A pragmatic policy of engagement is the best way to advance our fundamental interests and values," the President said.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat, criticized the President's speech as having glossed over Chinese human rights violations, however.
"President Clinton's China speech was masterful in its craftiness in whitewashing China's record," Ms. Pelosi said. 
"With this speech, President Clinton has tried to justify the failure of his trade policy and the failure of his human rights policy with a fiction of China's cooperation on proliferation of weapons of mass destruction."
Although the President's Washington audience consisted chiefly of professional China experts, he aimed his message at listeners in China and across the United States.
Evelyn Lieberman, director of Voice of America, said the speech was being broadcast into China in Mandarin and would be rebroadcast over the next several days. 
Foreign radio broadcasts into China are sometimes jammed.
The President spelled out six reasons it is in American interests to work with China on a range of issues, and said they would figure in next week's summit agenda. 
He maintained that policing the unpredictable post-cold-war world would be much simpler with China as a partner, that the security of American allies and trading partners in Asia depended on China's peaceful role in resolving disputes there, and that global efforts to curb the spread of weapons of mass destruction would fail unless China agreed to stop selling dangerous technology to unreliable nations.
In addition, he said China could be a crucial partner in stemming the regional and global flow of drugs, arms and aliens; that China represented the richest potential market for American goods at a time when American economic growth depends on the growth of exports, and that China had a large role to play in efforts to reduce energy consumption and protect the environment.
He closed by approvingly quoting Richard M. Nixon, who as President brought about the historic modern opening of China to the West. 
Even in 1967, before winning the Presidency, he said, Mr. Nixon recognized the futility of trying to isolate the world's most populous nation, warning that "there is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation."
