
The Coca-Cola Company expanded its status as the world's leading producer of soft drinks this morning by signing an agreement in Beijing with the Chinese Government to build or upgrade 10 bottling plants in the interior of the country.
The deal will enable Coca-Cola to move well beyond the coastal regions of China, where it has had a relatively strong presence, and build what it hopes might eventually become one of its largest national markets.
Roberto C. Goizueta, Coca-Cola's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday that the company would invest $150 million in China over five years. 
He said the expansion would enable Coca-Cola to produce and sell significantly more than the 75 million cases of its drinks that it sold in China last year. 
That is roughly the same quantity sold in France.
But with China's population nearing 1.2 billion, as compared with 55 million in France, that meant that each Chinese, on average, drank only one and a half cans or bottles of Coke a year.
Mr. Goizueta said the company's goal was to increase Chinese consumption of Coca-Cola drinks to that in the United States, where on average, each person drinks nearly one can or bottle a day -- the highest in any of the 195 countries where Coca-Cola sells.
The beverage company currently operates 13 plants -- one each in Shanghai, Beijing and 11 other cities near the east coast. 
Of the 10 plants covered by the deal signed today, some are situations in which existing soft-drink plants operated by the Chinese will be upgraded to produce Coca-Cola products.
"This is a monumental step for the Chinese to have taken," Mr. Goizueta said in an interview. 
"We don't have exclusivity in China, but we do have the lion's share of the market and we need to increase the per-capita."
Pepsico, the world's second-leading producer of soft drinks, ranked second to Coca-Cola in China last year, selling 27.4 million cases from seven bottling plants.
Coca-Cola's agreement was the culmination of several years of negotiations with the Chinese Ministry of Light Industry and the expansion of Coca-Cola's presence in China, which began in 1981.
 
A Chinese Staff
The company intends to operate the new plants with Chinese managers, many of whom were educated in the United States, and with 5,000 local employees. 
They will produce not only Coca-Cola products but also a Chinese brand of cola known as Jinmeile.
Mr. Goizueta said the new plants would be operated as joint ventures, the way eight of the company's existing plants are run. 
The five others are state-owned.
Linda Peek, a Coca-Cola spokeswoman, said that the jobs in the new plants would about double the number of Chinese people working for the company and would increase its investment in China to about $250 million.
It would also maintain Coca-Cola as one of the largest American investors in China, particularly among consumer-products companies.
Richard Brecher, a director of the United States-China Business Council in Washington, said that most American companies operating in China were involved with industrial or technology products and that most were joint ventures, with the American investment ranging from $5 million to $10 million.
 
Money, and Lots of It
But that is changing. 
"In the last two years, we have seen a real explosion in China again," Mr. Brecher said. 
"Consumers suddenly have money and they are spending it on foreign products."
Referring to the size of Coca-Cola's investment, he said that five years ago "only a handful" of American companies were so involved in China.
"Now," he added, "we are seeing quite a few, and there are a lot more in the pipeline."
Mr. Goizueta said Coca-Cola's expansion reflected the company's confidence about the increased buying power in China and the people's growing interest in American products. 
Last year, Coke's sales there were the highest among the Asian countries in which the company's products are sold.
"Our plans for further investment in China are testimony to the very bright future of this country and its soft-drink industry," he said.
