
With Prime Minister Ehud Barak standing by his side, Defense Secretary William S. Cohen today strongly criticized Israel's decision to supply advanced airborne radar systems to China.
Washington considers it "counterproductive" to provide China with Awacs-style surveillance aircraft, Mr. Cohen said at a news conference after meeting this morning with Mr. Barak, who declined to halt the sale.
Israel Aircraft Industries, a state-owned defense contractor, has already equipped one Chinese-owned Ilyushin cargo plane with Israeli-made early-warning radar systems for a reported $230 million. 
It is expected to present the aircraft for delivery during a visit here later this week by China's president, Jiang Zemin. 
Israel has offered China three more such planes.
"I have indicated before that the United States does not support the sale of this type of technology to China, because of the potential of changing the strategic balance in that region, with the tensions running high as they are between China and Taiwan," Mr. Cohen said today.
Mr. Barak responded that Israel would "take into account" American concerns. 
But he indicated that Israel expects to proceed with the promised sale of at least the first radar-equipped aircraft.
"We are aware of the sensitivity in the United States with regard to China," he said. 
Then he quickly added, "We are, of course, aware of our commitments in the contracts that we signed."
Mr. Jiang's arrival here on Thursday will be the first official visit to Israel by a Chinese leader, making this a singularly awkward week to renege on the deal. 
But American Congressional leaders have warned Israel that proceeding with the contract could jeopardize support for the huge $17 billion military aid package Israel is seeking in connection with an eventual peace treaty with Syria. 
Among the items Israel is requesting are American Boeing Awacs, considered far more sophisticated than the Israeli version.
According to Israeli military officials, Israel notified the United States four years ago of its intent to offer airborne radar surveillance systems for sale to China. 
Pentagon officials reviewing the proposed contract determined then that Israel would not be providing China with proprietary American military technology, the Israelis said.
But American objections to the sale are based not on narrow interpretations of agreements but on the broader principle that Israel as an ally should defer to Washington's strategic judgments in regions beyond the Middle East. 
The United States has not supplied arms to China since 1992.
Mr. Cohen voiced concerns privately before, but had never spoken out publicly here against the sale.
"We are aware of the need to be in close coordination and contact with the United States on every issue that might pose a risk to American interests," Mr. Barak said today.
Yet Mr. Barak has also placed great emphasis on the self-sufficiency of Israel's military industry, which Pentagon officials readily acknowledge can survive only through an aggressive sales program. 
Israeli Aircraft Industries is the country's largest export earner, selling weapons systems and refurbished fighter jets to dozens of countries, as well as civilian commuter aircraft.
Mr. Barak and his predecessors have also put great stock in a strengthened relationship with China, seen as both a critical market for Israel and a bulwark against diplomatic isolation.
Though Israel did not establish full diplomatic relations with China until 1997, it has provided arms to Beijing since the 1980's. 
Israel aided the development of China's F-10 fighter jet, which is expected to carry a version of Israel's Pitun missile. 
But the potentially billion-dollar order for four Awacs-type planes would, if realized, be its largest sale to China yet.
Chinese officials also clearly consider it important. 
Li Peng, the chairman of China's National People's Congress, and Che Ho Tien, China's defense minister, have personally inspected the converted Ilyushin surveillance planes on visits to Israel in the past six months.
      
