
Five hundred years of European colonialism in Asia sputters to a close here this weekend on a desolate, rain-swept waterfront dredged out of Macao's once beguiling harbor. 
At the stroke of midnight on Sunday, China will reclaim this tiny enclave from Portugal, raising its red flag over another patch of Chinese soil and setting the stage for what it hopes will be eventual reunification with Taiwan.
Unlike Britain's handover of nearby Hong Kong two years ago, which was heralded by years of Chinese anticipation and British angst, this is not the reluctant surrender of a prized possession. 
Portugal tried to give back this enclave of 430,000 people once before, after the revolution that ended decades of dictatorship in Portugal in 1974, but China's leaders, fearful of losing a trading channel to the outside world, demurred.
Since then, the Portuguese administration has presided over Macao's steady deterioration into a disreputable, vaguely sinister gambling destination for weekend wagerers from Hong Kong. 
As feuds between rival Chinese gangs have terrorized the colony over the last few years, the economy has withered and Macao has become ever more hooked on the casinos, which generate more than half of its tax revenues.
"As a local, I'd have to say the Portuguese haven't done a good job," said Eric T. M. Yeung, a prominent Macao businessman who makes toys. 
"But in fairness, they had their own problems and couldn't pay attention to a little spot of land on the other side of the world."
A senior Chinese official in the future local government, who asked not to be identified to avoid offending the Portuguese, said: "Hong Kong is so successful that Hong Kong people always think they are superior to the Chinese. 
We are happy in Macao, but I don't think anyone is proud."
Portuguese officials are keenly aware of their checkered legacy. 
They were the first Europeans to colonize in Asia, driven by a lust for adventure and discovery, and a desire to spread the Christianity that had helped free Portugal of Moorish, Muslim rule. 
But for all the centuries they have lingered here, the Portuguese have left behind no lasting political culture.
In the last few weeks, they have worked diligently to promote the artifacts, old and new, of 442 years of colonial rule: meticulously restored buildings in Portuguese pastels, a state-of-the-art airport and gleaming causeways that connect Macao with its outer islands.
Portugal's president, Jorge Sampaio, said that in the last decade Macao had taken on many of the hallmarks of a liberal Western state, including the rule of law, freedom of religion and a free press. 
"Well, it could have been done 300 years ago," he said in an interview on the eve of the handover, "but that was not the habit of time."
For Sunday's ceremony, the departing colonial masters from a small nation on the other side of the world have produced the trappings of a momentous occasion. 
This week, workers frantically hammered the last planks on an $8 million pavilion where President Jiang Zemin of China will take control of the eight-square-mile territory from Mr. Sampaio. Officials say the translucent building is meant to resemble a Chinese lantern. 
In truth, it looks more like a giant, softly lighted bathtub.
The Portuguese have also sought to account for the dark side of their rule: a stunted political system, with few local Chinese trained to take over the government, shaky courts, a corrupt police force, and a democracy movement that can be summed up by the fact that it has exactly one elected legislator.
"We can build an airport in five years; we can build a bridge in two," said Jorge Alberto Rangel, the secretary for public administration, who is coordinating the handover ceremony. 
"But forming people takes time. 
We really did what we thought was best for Macao."
Mr. Rangel's sense of conflict is deeply felt. 
A native Macanese -- part Portuguese, part Chinese -- he comes from one of the colony's oldest families.
But he also served in the Portuguese Army as an infantry commander in Guinea-Bissau, in West Africa. 
There, Mr. Rangel witnessed Portugal's chaotic departure from its African colonies after the 1974 revolution. 
With no leadership and no capacity to govern themselves, formerly Portuguese Mozambique and Angola fell into bloody strife, and in Angola, it continues today.
"What happened in Africa was disaster," Mr. Rangel said. 
"We made no preparations, like we have here. 
I believe Macao deserved to have it done differently."
Portugal's sudden renunciation of empire was not just a tragedy in Africa. 
Its retreat from East Timor 25 years ago opened the door for Indonesia to invade and turn the colony into an unwilling province. 
Guerrilla rebels fought the Indonesian Army until this year, when Jakarta unexpectedly agreed to allow the East Timorese to decide their own future. 
The Indonesian Army left, but not before reducing much of the territory to cinders and attacking the Roman Catholic Church, whose strength in East Timor is arguably Portugal's most lasting legacy there.
Macao was spared such predations, mainly because China effectively gave Portugal squatter's rights after its seafarers landed here in 1557. 
Satisfied as long as the Portuguese paid tribute, the Chinese allowed them to build a bustling trading post in the 17th and 18th centuries. 
Along with the traders came the Jesuit priests, who used Macao as a base to launch missions into China. 
The richly detailed facade of Sao Paulo, the surviving fragment of a church that burned down in 1831, attests to the church's deep roots here.
"It's amazing that a European power could remain on Chinese soil for all this time," said Fok Kai Cheong, a professor of history at the University of Macao. 
"They survived every kind of Chinese government: dynastic, xenophobic, nationalistic, Communist."
But while Macao kept the peace with China, it could do little about the thrusting British colony 38 miles across the Pearl River delta. 
Hong Kong, which was ceded to Britain in 1842 after the Opium War, rapidly supplanted Macao as the preferred trading hub in the region. 
By the early 20th century, Macao was a backwater known mostly as a refuge for families fleeing from China's war with Japan.
Macao's next shock came in 1966, when Chinese laborers caught up in the fever of the Cultural Revolution rose up against the Portuguese. 
The unrest was quelled, but it shook Macao's administrators and soured Lisbon's appetite for its vestigial foothold in Asia. 
As the Portuguese retreated, local Chinese -- mostly bankers and traders -- emerged as the de facto powers in the colony.
Among those shadow leaders was Ho Yin, a banker who is revered by many here for mediating between the Chinese and the Portuguese. 
His son, Edmund Ho, was chosen to be the first postcolonial chief executive of Macao by a Beijing-appointed committee last May.
Like his counterpart in Hong Kong, Tung Chee-hwa, Mr. Ho is a conservative businessman who is not likely to ruffle the feathers of the Chinese leaders. 
He even looks a bit like Mr. Tung, with razor-cut hair that would pass muster in boot camp. 
But unlike the courtly Mr. Tung, he can be blunt.
In an interview here on the eve of taking control, Mr. Ho, 44, came across like a big-city mayor who wanted to let people know who was boss. 
His target was the Chinese gangs, or triads, which have waged an ugly war for control of Macao's casinos since the mid-1990's.
"My basic policy on the triads is that they have to learn how to behave," he said. 
"I don't think we'll have to go house to house, arresting people and putting them in concentration camps. 
But they must know how to behave. 
If you are in the underworld, learn to keep it under."
Mr. Ho also welcomed Beijing's decision to deploy army troops in Macao after the handover. 
Portugal had protested the move, noting that it had withdrawn its troops in 1974. 
Mr. Sampaio even briefly threatened to boycott the ceremony Sunday.
Although Mr. Ho said the troops would not be used for police work, he clearly relished having a garrison at hand.
"One major advantage is that I will have psychological support for making drastic changes in the police," he said. 
"Because if they say, 'We're not happy, we don't want reforms, we don't want to do our jobs,' I'll say, 'You can just step aside and I'll put in the soldiers.'
"
Remarks like that would cause a tempest in Hong Kong, where pro-democracy leaders are on the lookout for any authoritarian tendencies in the government. 
Among Macao's overwhelmingly Chinese population, however, they are seen as an overdue return to law and order.
"Most local people don't object to the Chinese Army coming to Macao," said Ng Kuok Cheong, the lone pro-democracy member in the territory's legislature. 
"They believe that mainland China can control crime, but that the Portuguese government can't."
China is happy that most Macanese see it that way. 
For Beijing, the ceremony Sunday is another step in its push to reunify all of China, including Taiwan, the seat of the Chinese Nationalist government whose 22 million people seem unlikely to accept any move that would place them under Communist rule.
Mr. Ng, a soft-spoken former loan officer at the Bank of China who lost his job because of his politics, said that democracy had little future in Macao. 
But he blames that less on China than on Portugal. 
"The British established a pro-Western capitalist elite in Hong Kong," Mr. Ng said. 
"The Portuguese never did that. 
Their primary concern was preserving Portuguese culture."
A magnificent salmon-pink edifice housing the public security department here attests both to that Portuguese concern and to the accompanying failure to curb the gang wars that have killed government officials, scared off tourists and brought gun battles and car bombings to otherwise tranquil streets.
Last month, Macao sentenced its most flamboyant triad leader, Wan Kuok-koi, to 15 years in prison. 
It was a victory for the authorities, who had seethed as Mr. Wan strutted around town with an aura of invincibility. 
Yet Mr. Wan, who goes by the nickname Broken Tooth, got in some telling last words. 
As he was being led away, he screamed at the police: "You're corrupt. 
You've taken dirty money."
Few people here believe the Mr. Wan's demise will end the mayhem. 
But they note approvingly that China has arrested hundreds of suspected triad members in neighboring Guangdong Province. 
Now, they say, the new government must figure out how to clean up Macao's casinos, which have contributed to the crime wave by allowing gangs to take control of V.I.P. rooms that cater to high rollers.
Cramped, dark and crawling with prostitutes, Macao's casinos are worlds away from the theme-park ambience of Las Vegas. 
The gambling industry is controlled by Stanley Ho, a Hong Kong billionaire who has held an exclusive government license since 1961. 
That license expires in 2001, and Edmund Ho, who is not related to Stanley, is not revealing whether it will be renewed.
In the meantime, Macao's next leader is busy building a government -- "from ground zero," he notes in a swipe at the decamping colonials. 
Mr. Ho is also putting out the word that Macao intends to remain a distinct enclave, with its own laws and customs. 
Even he acknowledges, however, that it will live mostly in memory -- Europe's last foothold in Asia, soon to be lost in the enormity of modern China.
"Everyone here would like the world to remember that there's a Macao somewhere in this region," Mr. Ho said a bit wistfully. 
"But we have to be realistic."
