
Yah Lin Trie, a friend of President Clinton who is suspected of donating foreign money to the Democratic Party, received $1.4 million in wire transfers from abroad from 1994 through 1996, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today in the Senate inquiry on campaign finance practices.
The agent, Jerome Campane, who has been working as a special investigator for the Senate committee, said $905,000 of the $1.4 million came from a single source, Ng Lap Seng, a business associate of Mr. Trie from Macao, a Portuguese territory on the coast of China near Hong Kong.
This money was used in part to cover the $220,000 that Mr. Trie and his wife gave to the Democratic National Committee, Mr. Campane (pronounced campaign) testified. 
It was also used, he said, to reimburse donations made by associates of Mr. Trie, who is a United States citizen, and Mr. Ng.
Donating foreign money to American political parties or disguising the source of contributions is against the law. 
Republicans hold that Mr. Trie is a prime exhibit of how fund-raising by President Clinton and the Democrats got out of hand in the last election.
The Democrats have returned all the money Mr. Trie and his wife donated, as well as an additional $425,000 that he raised from others for the party. 
Party officials did so, they have said, because they believed it was foreign money or because they were suspicious of the source of the money.
Among the money Mr. Trie received from overseas that did not come from Mr. Ng was $100,000 from Charoen Pokphand, a business conglomerate in Thailand.
The Washington representative of the conglomerate was Pauline Kanchanalak, another large Democratic contributor whose donations are being investigated.
Pressed by the senators, Mr. Campane said he could not determine whether any of the money wired to Mr. Trie had originated in China, whose possible effort to influence American elections through major, illegal campaign contributions is a prime target of the Senate investigation.
But he said Mr. Ng was wealthy in his own right and could easily have afforded the money he sent. 
And he indicated he thought the ultimate aim of Mr. Ng and Mr. Trie was to gain political influence for themselves, not someone else.
Mr. Campane also said he had found no evidence that Mr. Clinton, Vice President Al Gore or anyone at the Democratic National Committee knew Mr. Trie's money had come from overseas at the time it was donated.
Asked by Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, whether he thought Mr. Trie had laundered campaign contributions, Mr. Campane responded, "It's what we call in the business a slam dunk, Senator."
Mr. Trie, who is called Charlie, is said to be in China and is refusing to cooperate with investigators. 
In an interview last month with NBC-TV, he adamantly denied wrongdoing and said of the Senate investigators, "They'll never find me."
A native of Taiwan who is now an American citizen, Mr. Trie owned a Chinese restaurant in Little Rock, Ark., that was frequented by Mr. Clinton and other politicians when Mr. Clinton was Governor.
After Mr. Clinton was elected President, Mr. Trie sold his restaurant, moved to Washington, opened an office and tried to use his connection in business activities.
He was "always trying to find a deal and find the next deal," Mr. Campane testified. 
But the deals almost always fell through and none seemed to have made much money.
Many of Mr. Trie's activities have been covered in news reports over the last six months, including how he gave $640,000 to the trust fund collecting money for President Clinton's legal expenses, money that the trustees returned before its existence was publicly known.
But Mr. Campane's testimony today, especially the details of how much money was received from abroad, was more complete and authoritative than any of the news accounts.
The agent described how Mr. Trie had visited the Clinton White House at least 23 times and how he had arranged for Wang Jun, China's most important arms dealer, to attend a coffee with the President.
Asked why Mr. Trie had become involved in politics, Mr. Campane said that he seemed to enjoy hobnobbing with politicians and also hoped to use his political connections to make money.
"Trie understood and practiced an important lesson of Asian business culture: important political connections enhance one's reputation as a businessman," Mr. Campane said.
The same appeared to have been true of Mr. Ng, the businessman from Macao, whose name in Mandarin is Wu and who was referred to in today's hearing as "Mr. 
Wu."
After listening to the testimony, Senator Robert F. Bennett, a Republican from Utah, explained why he thought the businessman was willing to give Mr. Trie almost $1 million.
"I think Mr. Wu got what he paid for," Mr. Bennett said. 
"He was interested in establishing his own credentials or the credentials of his man in the United States, if Mr. Trie would be so characterized, as having very high-level contacts. 
And it's been my personal experience that this is very valuable, can open a lot of doors in a lot of places in ways that American business people simply do not understand, because we don't do business that way in the United States."
As was the case two weeks ago when the committee explored the activities of John Huang, another Chinese-American fund-raiser, the implication throughout today's hearing was that somehow Mr. Trie might have been a conduit of money from China.
At the outset of the hearings early this month, Senator Fred Thompson, the Tennessee Republican who is heading the investigation, spoke of a plot by the Chinese Government to funnel money into the American election campaigns last year.
So far, the Governmental Affairs Committee, headed by Mr. Thompson, has produced no public evidence to substantiate the plot.
On Monday night, several Senators on the committee received a classified briefing on the China question from Louis J. Freeh, Director of the F.B.I., and George J. Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence.
The Senators would not talk publicly about the substance of the meeting. 
But Democrats said they thought Mr. Thompson had overstated his case.
The Democratic view is that while the Chinese may have had some intention of trying to influence the election, there is no evidence that any money was actually put into the presidential race, and only scanty evidence that Congressional elections were involved.
After Mr. Campane left the witness table today, two Chinese immigrant homemakers testified to taking part in an elaborate three-cornered money transaction involving Mr. Trie. They gave $25,000 in their own names to the Democratic National Committee last year and were then reimbursed from a bank account held here in the name of Mr. Trie and Mr. Wu and supported by Mr. Wu.'s overseas resources.
The money was used to purchase a ticket to a Democratic fund raiser for the President's re-election at the Hay Adams Hotel here on Feb. 
19, 1996. 
After the campaign abuse scandal broke, the Democratic National Committee returned the money.
Given immunity from prosecution, the two women, Yue F. Chu and Xiping Wang, testified in Chinese, their words translated by a State Department translator.
They said they did not understand the transaction or its connection to American politics. 
But Ms. Chu, whose husband is an employee of Mr. Wu, repeatedly explained the situation this way:
"Mr. Wu was my husband's boss, and he wanted to buy a ticket to pass the gate. 
The boss wanted to go to the White House."
      
