
In a deal potentially worth billions of dollars over the next few years, Northern Telecom of Canada yesterday announced an agreement to modernize and, in many cases, build a telephone system for China.
The agreement calls for joint ventures that would cover cellular telephones, fiber-optic transmission systems, computer terminals and networks and switching systems for China's vast rural areas.
"This is a very important, very signficant long-term agreement," said Jean C. Monty, Northern Telecom's president and chief executive.
China is certain to be one of the most hotly competitive telecommunications markets in the world. 
With more than one billion people spread over nearly six million square miles, it has four times as many people and more land than the United States butonly one phone for every 33 households; the United States has almost one per household.
China wants to add 100 million telephone lines in the next six years. 
The United States has 140 million lines.
 
Signed in Toronto
The agreement, known as a memorandum of understanding, with China's State Planning Commission, was signed in Toronto yesterday and took 12 months to work out. 
Details will take six months more. 
Besides serving China, the joint venture will also sell products elsewhere in Asia, including Japan, Singapore and South Korea.
The accord establishes a joint venture to engineer and produce digital switches, the backbone of a modern phone network, in a plant that will cost at least $50 million and take two years to build.
The agreement also forms a Bell-Northern Research Center in China for developing advanced gear and a joint venture for making advanced computer chips.
 
 
Similar to A.T.& T. Pact
The agreement is broadly similar to a February agreement China signed with A.T.& T., which is also potentially worth billions.
China's agreement with Northern Telecom positions North American companies as key suppliers as European telecommunications-equipment makers -- notably Alcatel of France, Siemens of Germany, Ericsson of Sweden and NEC of Japan -- compete ferociously for global business.
The agreement is a boon to Northern Telecom, which has positioned itself as the principal alternative to A.T.&. 
T. telecommunications gear, especially digital switches. 
Northern Telecom had revenue of $8.4 billion for 1992; A.T.& T. had $65 billion.
Northern Telecom has been in China since 1972 and already provides more than 1.6 million phone lines in 13 provinces and three major cities, including Beijing.
