
CAN you teach an old propagandist new tricks?
Zhu Muzhi is living proof of it. 
Assigned to craft a sophisticated international lobbying campaign to counter China's dismal human rights record, Mr. Zhu, 78 years old, is already a master of the sound bite -- a quick study at the spin-control rules of Madison Avenue and Capitol Hill:
The best defense is a good offense. 
"I certainly think America is not perfect when it comes to human rights. 
I do not think you have gotten rid of racial discrimination or segregation. 
The Los Angeles riots are a case in point."
Grab an audience with celebrity names, preferably taken straight from the headlines. 
"You protest a lot about people in our prisons and ask us to give you details about their condition. 
But take the U.S., for example. 
If we asked you to let us see O. J. Simpson or Mike Tyson in prison, how would you react?"
Give a little, but never lose sight of your client's larger message. 
"I don't mean to say that the human rights situation is perfect here," says Mr. Zhu. "But tremendous progress has been made in human rights. 
If you look at China's history, this is the best period in our history."
Mr. Zhu, former director of the official New China News Agency, is the founding president of the China Society for Human Rights Studies, a group established last year in Beijing with a charter to "promote the human rights issue in China."
He insists that the society, which has a membership drawn from China's universities, labor unions and bar association, is completely independent.
"We have no relationship with the Government," says Mr. Zhu, who has also perfected the perpetual grin that is common to both Washington lobbyists and the senior cadre of the Chinese Communist Party.
Diplomats and human rights groups find Mr. Zhu's assurances of independence hard to swallow. 
Many insist that the Human Rights Society is simply a front group for the Government, a vehicle for presenting China's defense of its human rights record through a purportedly impartial voice.
And there is reason for their cynicism. 
Nothing about Mr. Zhu's own career would suggest that he has ever been willing to raise his voice against the Government. 
He acknowledges with obvious pride that he joined the Communist Party in 1939, and much of his career was spent writing and editing the party's heavy-handed praise of itself through the New China News Agency.
Clumsy No More The society's budget -- about $120,000 in its first year -- is largely underwritten by donations from state-owned companies. 
Even the location of the interview raises suspicions. 
Mr. Zhu meets foreign guests in a conference room in one of Beijing's plushest new hotels. 
The hotel is a large donor to the Human Rights Society, which seems curious since the hotel is partly owned by the Ministry of Public Security, which controls much of China's domestic spying operation.
Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch-Asia, which is based in New York, says Mr. Zhu's organization is "a creation of the Chinese -- its views are indistinguishable from the Government's."
Yet at the same time, Mr. Munro cautiously welcomes the group: "It's always good when the Chinese want to engage in a dialogue on human rights, even if it's through a group like this."
Mr. Zhu suggests that China's reputation on human rights is really more a problem of public relations than anything else.
For decades, China defended its human rights record with clumsy, Maoist denunciations of its "running dog" enemies. 
That era, Mr. Zhu made clear, was over.
"We need to alert people of other countries to the facts -- the facts -- of the human rights situation in China," he said. 
"I think we're partially responsible for the current situation since we failed to publicize all of the facts."
A conversation with Mr. Zhu is a carefully choreographed event. 
He is accompanied by four aides who, in a demonstration of China's paranoia over human rights, carry two tape recorders that capture his every word. 
Although his visitor has brought an English translator, Mr. Zhu has his own, and the two translators keep interrupting each other over the precise interpretation of his answers.
Mr. Zhu's central argument is directed at Washington: What gives the United States, a nation plagued by crime, violence and racial tension, the right to lecture China, a nation with serious limitations on political freedom but one where people live in reasonable harmony and can walk the streets at night?
While praising President Clinton's "very wise" move last May to separate human rights in China from issues of trade, Mr. Zhu still compared the United States to a busybody "who makes comments about all of his neighbors -- who is an alcoholic, who is beating his wife -- and then ignores the situation in his own home."
Freedom, he says, is a gradual process in a nation still as poor as China, and it's time that the United States recognized how far China had come.
Polished Rebuttal "If you are well fed, you cannot understand those who suffer for food," he said, offering a Chinese counterpart to the words of Marie Antoinette. 
"In ancient China, there was an emperor who was told that his subjects didn't have enough rice to eat, and he replied, 'Why don't they eat meat?'
"
"Human rights here are still far away from what we deserve, and it will require a tremendous effort to improve the human rights situation here," he said. 
"But China has made tremendous progress. 
After centuries of struggle, we have basically accomplished our goal of meeting the people's need for food and shelter. 
If you compare our situation with that in the rest of the world, where several hundred million people have still not solved the problems of food and shelter, you would have to say that China has achieved a lot."
Mr. Zhu's more polished public relations strategy was unveiled in June, when the Human Rights Society released a handsomely produced, 21-page booklet in English to rebut the State Department's 1994 report on human rights in China.
While questioning the booklet's accuracy on several points -- most outrageously, it claimed that more than 130 people had frozen to death in the streets of Washington, D.C., during a blizzard last winter -- diplomats and human rights groups agreed that the response was the most impressive, point-by-point human rights rebuttal ever produced by the Chinese.
The State Department, for example, noted "credible reports" that Liu Gang, an imprisoned dissident who was an organizer of the Tiananmen Square uprising in 1989, was in poor health as a result of prison beatings.
In its rebuttal, the Human Rights Society said that it had received permission from the Justice Ministry to dispatch an investigator to meet in prison with Mr. Liu, who "appeared quite healthy," had put on nine pounds since his arrest, and whose "only illnesses have been common colds."
Diplomats say any detailed update on the condition of Mr. Liu and other jailed dissidents is welcome, even from a biased source.
"If this group is really going to go out and check on the condition of individual political prisoners, that's valuable -- it's one more way of protecting these people," said an American official. 
"Forget the rhetoric. 
If that's the sort of help Mr. Zhu wants to give us, we welcome it."
