
SUZHOU CREEK is where the bodies are buried.
In Shanghai's glory days of the 1920's and 30's, when British bankers strolled along the waterfront and French chefs concocted culinary delights for the city's elite restaurants, Chinese gangsters ruled the night. 
When someone got in their way, and a corpse had to be disposed of, Suzhou Creek was often the preferred dumping location.
Since the Communist takeover in 1949, the principal dumping into the Suzhou Creek has been industrial, and it became one of China's most polluted waterways, black as tar and home to a colorful collection of floating refuse.
A rescue, of sorts, has now come. 
Efforts to clean up Suzhou Creek, whose industrial smell became so intense that many residents along its banks had to close their windows in the heat of a summer afternoon, are finally starting to pay off.
"A year ago, it was black," said Yao Jianguo, who supervision of river boat deliveries brings him to Suzhou Creek each day. 
"Now it's gray. 
Maybe in a few years it will actually be clear."
For the first-time visitor to Shanghai, a trip to the city's waterfront is essential, either for a view of the European buildings that look out over bustling river traffic, or for a trip up the modernistic Oriental Television Tower across the way in East Shanghai.
For those who like to walk, turning the corner off the waterfront onto Suzhou Creek and following it into the gritty innards of Shanghai is an option that requires little map-toting navigation, and that now offers a cleaner river. 
Just stick by the creek, as it winds its way past rows of ramshackle houses with red tile roofs and dilapidated warehouses, where the daily commerce of squalid city life is on view at close range.
Dozens of low-lying canal boats that transport goods to Shanghai from inland areas are moored against the river bank on any given day, and the families who live aboard let their children play on the flat decks while parents hang laundry to dry on "People who live on these boats wash their hands in it now," said Mr. Yao of the river. 
"A year ago, they wouldn't even do that."
If the water looks better than it used to, it isn't exactly what anyone would call clean. 
One recent morning, watermelon rind, plastic sandals, and discarded white Kentucky Fried Chicken cups could be seen drifting downstream on the gray water.
"Suzhou Creek is still our worst waterway," said Gu Youzhi, an engineer who works on the cleanup project. 
"It's a lot better, but there is still a long way to go."
The cleanup effort actually began in 1988, with the construction of a series of pipelines to discharge human and industrial waste into the city's huge sewage treatment system. 
It was done with the aid of a $145 million loan from the World Bank and completed just over a year ago.
In their eagerness to hail the success of the cleanup, city officials proclaimed their ambition to make the Suzhou Creek as lovely an attraction as the Seine in Paris.
Mr. Gu is a little more realistic, saying the river's cleanup is less than half complete and will require more infrastructure. 
Sixty percent of the waste is industrial, he said, while the rest comes from spill that feeds into the river from city streets each time a hard rain falls, and from the refuse chucked over the side of boats.
"You see these boats packed against the river bank?" asked Xu Yongcai, who operates one of the garbage collection boats that lift floating refuse into a small boat. 
"They'll stay for a few days, and when they pull out, all this garbage will be left behind."
Protecting the environment is still a new idea in China, Mr. Yao pointed out, and teaching ordinary people something as simple as throwing garbage into a refuse bin rather than directly into the river will doubtless take time.
"People are only starting to have this idea of cleaning up the environment around them," he said. 
"At least the government is doing something about it."
