
Hundreds of thousands of boxes of crayons imported from China were recalled today after the Government said they contained traces of lead that could poison children who ate the crayons.
The recalled crayons, most of which were manufactured a few years ago, amount to only a small fraction of the millions of boxes sold each year.
Although very few tainted crayons are thought to be on store shelves, many may be in use and should be discarded or returned to stores for refunds, the Consumer Products Safety Commission said.
The agency said parents and schools should buy crayons and other art materials only if they carry the label "Conforms to ASTM D-4236," or a similar phrase, indicating that a toxicologist has determined that the product poses no chronic hazard.
 
Main Brand Is Found Safe
The recall highlights a continuing, broad effort to eliminate sources of possible lead exposure, a danger to children that is well established by toxicologists but not fully appreciated by many parents and health professionals.
Agency tests of Crayola crayons, the dominant brand with about half the United States market, found them safe.
Among the brands recalled was one sold by the nationwide chain Toys "R" Us, and labeled as Safe 48 Nontoxic I'm A Toys "R" Us Kid!
Crayons. The chain sold 100,000 boxes of the crayons in 1990 and 1991, and more than 2,000 boxes since then.
The recall order to importers and distributors came after a nationwide survey of crayons from China. 
The survey, undertaken after a Phoenix infant suffered lead poisoning from eating a crayon, found three brands that investigators determined to have had enough lead to pose a definite hazard to children and eight brands with smaller amounts.
Although many recalled crayons probably do not have enough lead to raise a child's level to what is defined as poisonous, a child who is also exposed to small amounts of lead from other sources could be harmed by the additional exposure from the crayons, the agency warned.
Lead poisoning in children is officially defined as 10 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood.
Exposure to lead is considered the most serious pollution problem facing children. 
It can come from many sources, including paint dust or chips, and solder in cans and plumbing, and cumulative exposure can cause permanent brain damage or even death. 
Surveys indicate that millions of children have unsafe levels of lead.
Mental health specialists now recognize that even low levels of lead exposure can cause developmental delays and intellectual impairment, and recent research has found no safe level of lead exposure for children.
"While there are other causes of lead poisoning, such as lead paint, no children's product, especially crayons, should contain lead," said Ann Brown, the consumer agency's chairwoman.
 
Most Imported Before 1990
Most crayons recalled today were imported before a new law took effect in 1990. 
It requires children's art supplies to be free of toxic materials including lead, and all art supplies must indicate on the label whether they contain toxins.
Toys "R" Us removed all the remaining crayons from its stores last week, after it and other suppliers were notified of the problem so they could prepare for the recall. 
Toy "R" Us no longer buys these or any other crayons from China, a company spokeswoman said.
Toys "R" Us said an independent toxicologist sampled the crayons and found them to be safe after the consumer agency notified the company of the potential hazard. 
But the agency said the Toys "R" Us crayons it tested had enough lead to present a poisoning hazard.
Another brand, marked 64 Crayons CR 64-64 CT, was widely distributed in the New York City area by Baum Imports, the agency said. 
The company sold 80,400 boxes of 64 crayons.
In one case, the agency found that a brand carrying the proper label still had toxic levels of lead. 
That brand, marked 12 Crayons, Glory, was imported by the Glory Stationery Manufacturing Company in Los Angeles. 
The company told the agency that none of the crayons were in retail stores and that all would be retrieved from distributors and destroyed.
