
Intensifying their investigation of the smuggling of Chinese immigrants into the United States, a Federal prosecutor said today that one of the crew members of a smuggling ship that ran aground in New Jersey had pleaded guilty to conspiracy charges and that another was expected to plead guilty later this week.
At the same time, the prosecutor, Carolyn A. Murray, an assistant United States attorney in New Jersey, said that the 23 Chinese immigrants who arrived aboard that smuggling ship and have since been detained by the authorities as witnesses in the Federal investigation would probably be released on bond soon. 
Beginning next week, the Federal Government plans to take depositions from some of the 23 in a process that should take several weeks, and at its conclusion, will allow the immigrants to be released.
"The whole purpose of the depositions is to keep the amount of time they spend in custody as witnesses to a minimum," Ms. Murray said after a meeting with defense lawyers before Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise in Federal District Court here. 
So far, the illegal immigrants have been held for more than two months.
Today's proceeding was not a formal hearing; it was more a matter of legal necessity to coordinate schedules and logistics as the summer winds down. 
Even so, the conference hinted at how the Government is proceeding with its investigation into the smuggling of illegal immigrants, and what lies ahead for the principal players involved.
The Federal Government is investigating the events surrounding the evening of May 30, when a power boat carrying the illegal immigrants ran aground in a soupy fog in the affluent town of Bay Head, N.J., some eight miles north of the intended destination, Belmar, N.J.
The case attracted additional attention, no doubt, because of its parallels with the case of Golden Venture, a larger ship that was carrying 286 illegal Chinese immigrants when it came to a halt in Queens in 1993.
Last month, the Federal Government indicted six men in a conspiracy to smuggle the 23 Chinese men into the United States. 
The six were accused of participating in an international smuggling operation that solicited as much as $40,000 apiece from anyone interested in leaving Fujian province in southern China for the United States.
Five of the six are being held without bail in New Jersey jails; the other, Charng Seon Choi, is still at large. 
One man facing smuggling charges, Kim Jong Che, has said that he was born in Korea but lives in Venezuela, while the backgrounds and residences of the other defendants remain unclear.
But last week, another of the six, Cho Yang Nam, pleaded guilty to one conspiracy charge, acknowledging that he plotted with unnamed others to smuggle the Chinese immigrants, according to court documents. 
He has since agreed to cooperate with investigators, which could pare his sentence from its maximum of 10 years in jail and a $250,000 fine, the documents show.
Mr. Cho's guilty plea was not disclosed until today, however, because of case strategy, Ms. Murray said. 
Another man accused of smuggling, Nam Jick Cho of Bayside, Queens, may plead guilty this week, she said.
Neither of the Chos -- who prosecutors say are not believed to be related -- appeared in court today. 
But the other three accused men in custody -- Mr. Che, Piao Zhen Jia and Jiang Yong Zhu -- did show up in the courtroom, looking stone-faced while listening to a translator. 
The trial is scheduled to being on Nov. 
17.
As for the illegal immigrants, they were first held in an Immigration and Naturalization Service detention center in Elizabeth, N.J. 
Most were released in mid-July on bond by two immigration judges, only to be immediately rearrested by Federal authorities as witnesses in the Federal investigation.
For now, the 23 men remain in Government custody, most in the Passaic County Jail. 
But some of the men were briefly reunited last month with several relatives who appeared in immigration court in Elizabeth to offer testimony to support the men's release on bond.
Within a week or so, Federal prosecutors are expected to whittle the list of 23 to about 10 or so men from whom they plan to take videotaped depositions.
Those who are not deposed presumably will be released immediately; those who are formally questioned will be released after their depositions, assuming no further legal complications, Ms. Murray said.
Of course, the men still face deportation hearings by the I.N.S. 
But most have filed for political asylum.
