
One day after Under Secretary of State Thomas R. Pickering presented Chinese officials with a detailed explanation of how NATO warplanes could have accidentally bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade last month, the Chinese Government rejected it today as "unconvincing."
Mr. Pickering spent hours on Wednesday briefing Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan and other officials about the conclusions of an investigation into the bombing, which killed three Chinese and set off angry anti-American protests here.
Tonight, the report's findings were featured on state-run television and carried by the official New China News Agency -- along with a detailed Chinese Government analysis concluding that the American explanations were inadequate.
"This irrelevant explanation only shows that the United States lacks any sincerity," said People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper.
Beijing's rejection of the American version of events marked another setback for Chinese-American relations, which were at a low point at the time of the bombing, but recently had seemed to be mending somewhat.
"There was an opportunity here to move forward on W.T.O. and other big issues, but instead something in the Chinese foreign-policy-making process made them want to rachet this up again," said David Zweig, a China expert at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
But some Chinese were more optimistic, seeing the exchanges on this issue as a first step in a healing process. 
"From the Chinese perspective the explanation is not convincing," said Jia Qingguo, a professor of international politics at Beijing University. 
"But I think China wants further clarification so it can get over its doubts, so that it can move on in the relationship."
Most Chinese have been convinced from the start that the United States intentionally bombed the embassy, though few can say why the United States would want to do that. 
Many believe it was intended to test China's resolve or to punish China for its vocal opposition to the NATO air campaign in Yugoslavia.
The Clinton Administration has promised to provide a fuller briefing to Congress and news organizations when Mr. Pickering returns to Washington next week, James B. Foley, the deputy State Department spokesman, said today.
"I think you've seen Chinese spokesmen on television this morning indicating that they were not fully satisfied with the report."
Mr. Foley said. 
"I would like to point out, though, that from our perspective, we believe that the information Ambassador Pickering provided is sufficient to demonstrate that the bombing was a terrible mistake."
An Administration official, who spoke only on condition that he not be identified, suggested that the hostile Chinese response to the explanation may be partly for internal consumption. 
State media spent the last month decrying the bombing as an act of imperialist aggression, a position that may be politically difficult to reverse overnight.
The New China News Agency said that Mr. Pickering told the Chinese that the intended target was the Yugoslav Federal Directorate for Supply and Procurement, but that these errors resulted in striking the embassy instead:
*American intelligence used three maps, two produced in Yugoslavia and one by a United States Government agency in 1997, none of which specifically identified the Directorate or the correct location of the Chinese Embassy.
*An American intelligence officer -- "in breach of operational rules" -- preliminarily located the target by extrapolating from "the pattern and numbering system" of parallel streets. 
He mistakenly picked out the Chinese Embassy.
*Military and targeting databases had not been updated and contained an old address for the Chinese Embassy, so the error was not detected.
*Targeting reviews also failed to pick up the mistake, and the air crew, flying high and at night, could not see identifying markers.
Government commentaries rejected this explanation today. 
An analysis released by the New China News Agency pointed out that many current maps have the correct location of the Chinese Embassy, and that the Chinese Embassy is distant from and looks nothing like the Yugoslav Government building.
It treated with disbelief the notion that American databases were so out of date or that NATO would allow an intelligence officer to pick a bombing target using imprecise techniques.
Still, Government statements made clear that China's goal is renewed engagement, and urged Washington to "take practical action and handle this incident properly so as to create necessary conditions and an atmosphere for bilateral relations to return to a normal track."
But it was unclear what action would satisfy the Chinese -- or what further information Washington might provide.
