
Exactly 10 years ago, with protesters in Tiananmen Square, a small grassy triangle in the center of Beijing University became a shrine to democracy, plastered with tracts about liberty and freedom. 
In recent years it had become a temple for the professions, filled with notices about computers and law examinations.
But in the last four days, the plaza has been transformed anew, into a museum of frenzied nationalism and anti-American sentiment. 
Hundreds of handwritten letters and posters decorate the fence, the trees and nearby billboards in a vitriolic reaction to the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital.
"Support Yugoslavia and Resist America," one poster read. 
"Adolph Clinton," another read. 
A letter suggested that students should cover the American Embassy with garbage.
A poem read, in part: "Resist America Beginning with Cola, Attack McDonald's, Storm K.F.C."
University students here led the angry and sometimes violent protests at the American Embassy over the bombing. 
With the authorities' permission, the students have vented and displayed for the world the fury that many Chinese say they feel.
But even after four days of nearly continuous demonstrations, it is clear that there remains an extremely deep wellspring of angry emotion on college campuses that students say could percolate for months or years.
For many people, Chinese friendship toward the United States has always been tinged with a drop of suspicion, and the bombings have allowed dormant nationalism and anti-Western sentiments to surge to the surface.
The demonstrations have quickly become a formative experience for college students, who are in some cases making dramatic life decisions like forgoing overseas study based on their new views.
A generation raised on rock music and Coca-Cola is experiencing a complicated shift. 
"Many of my classmates have been going through their things and planning to burn all American products, at least those they can do without," said a 22-year-old marketing major at Beijing University, whose surname is Zhao.
Many students who cheered Michael Jordan last year and welcomed President Clinton on his recent visit are turning their backs or even lashing out at all things American.
At People's University on Sunday, several American students were surrounded by a group of Chinese students who were screaming, "Blood must be repaid with blood!"
Such incidents are rare, but Westerners who were walking on the Beijing University campus were subject to hard stares, as well as the occasional impromptu lecture on imperialism and anti-American taunts tossed out of dormitory windows.
The scene is a jarring about-face at universities where two months ago the highest achievement was to obtain a place at an American graduate school. 
In some departments at Beijing University, more than half the students have gone to the United States after graduation in the last few years.
Some students said they worried that rash actions now could haunt China for years. 
"There is a tone of irrational extremism, and people aren't thinking clearly about what they think and write," said Yu Jie, a popular liberal essayist who is a graduate student at the university. 
"I think this will have a very bad effect on the economic, social and cultural development of China."
Since Saturday, the universitieshere have sent busloads of students to the American Embassy area. 
On campuses, students talk of little else, and they have organized accompanying on-campus study sessions and protest rallies.
"I protested because I'm extremely outraged at this trampling on the dignity of the Chinese people," said Chen Wanyi, 20, who marched last weekend.
Although many students opposed the rock throwing that has battered the embassy, they said they understood why it had occurred.
"I know the protest looked extreme," said Lin Yijin, a trendily dressed 28-year-old journalism student at People's University, who protested on Saturday and Sunday. 
"But I think compared to what we were responding to, it was pretty restrained, just bottles and rocks and things like that."
Students said they believed that the United States had intentionally bombed the embassy in Belgrade, although few explained why Washington might have wanted to do that.
Unlike average Chinese, who can see only state-controlled media, the elite university students generally have Internet access. 
They read Mr. Clinton's expressions of regret and the NATO explanation, both of which the students dismissed as unbelievable or inadequate.
At the Beijing University triangle, students have posted a full English transcript of the NATO news conference in which officials first explained the bombing. 
It is covered with comments like "pure lies."
"Chinese are furious, and although we've now heard the apologies, we still feel that the response from NATO and the United States has been superficial," a 22-year-old international business major from northeastern China with the surname Wei. 
"If you'd seen the pictures of the three corpses, you'd understand why."
Although a number of students said they continued to feel friendly toward the American people, they were keeping their distance for now. 
Students said they were boycotting American products. 
Near the university, the usually bustling McDonald's and Pizza Hut restaurants stood mostly empty today.
"Give up the poison of American-style fast food and cultural opium -- Coca-Cola, Pepsi, McDonald's, K.F.C.," read a poster on the triangle.
A Dairy Queen store near the protests was closed this evening, and a Baskin-Robbins store was also closed, hiding its sign under red cloth and placing banners that said, "Down With Imperialism," on its doors.
The anti-American atmosphere is so intense that some students said they were contemplating whether to continue English classes, take jobs with American companies or pursue hard-won acceptances to Harvard University.
Many are clearly torn between the moment's anger and pragmatism. 
Some said the protest groups were probably smaller than usual today because students were busily cramming for a national English test tomorrow and standardized tests this weekend that are required for American graduate schools.
A group of students at the National Minorities University in Beijing said it wanted to go to Yugoslavia to join the army, and it has posted fliers on other campuses urging others to join.
But a number of students who strongly support the protests said the excesses frightened them. 
"Are we still in the revolutionary era?" an essay posted on a wall at People's University asked. 
"Must we answer barbarity with barbarity?"
Jiao Li, 20, a student at the Beijing Transport Technology College, said: "I think this is a passing thing when students are inflamed with patriotism and very emotional. 
So it's natural for now to respond by not drinking Coke, for example. 
But I don't think that refusing to work for an American firm will solve any problems."
Students said the anger would fade slowly and only if NATO and the United States offered acceptable apologies.
"What the Chinese want is an explanation and an apology that will restore our dignity," Lin Yijin said. 
"I wouldn't take the stuff about 'Blood for blood' and 'Attack NATO' too seriously. 
For us this is about saving face."
