
Large, angry protests erupted around American Government offices in several cities after Chinese learned that NATO bombs had hit their embassy in Belgrade, killing at least three people sleeping inside. 
By this morning, the demonstration had left a consulate in flames and the embassy here in a state of siege with most of its windows broken by rocks.
In Chengdu, in western China, several thousand protesters threw rocks and bottle-rockets, setting a consulate building on fire. 
The police used tear gas to disperse the crowd, said an embassy spokesman here.
At dawn today in Beijing, the streets were briefly quiet. 
But by 9 A.M. tens of thousands of students were streaming toward the American Embassy where, despite a heavy police presence, they barraged embassy buildings with a continuous stream of rocks and firecrackers.
In Beijing on Saturday, thousands of well-organized university students cheered on by other Beijing residents held noisy protests on the streets surrounding the American Embassy as the police looked on. 
Small groups of students and residents threw rocks through embassy windows, pummeled cars belonging to embassy employees and burned American flags.
It was by far the largest anti-American demonstration in China since well before President Nixon's historic visit to China in 1972 and the largest political protest since the student rallies in Tiananmen Square 10 years ago.
"Now we hate America," said Ma Zhanglu, 20, a student with shoulder-length dyed hair, who had just hurled a rock at the embassy. 
"China has been especially friendly to the American people," he said. 
"But we have been rebuffed and now the Americans have broken international law."
The protests marked an extraordinary moment in a controlled country where such outbursts are normally forbidden and almost never occur, though Saturday's demonstrations clearly had some measure of Government approval. 
The protests also come just two weeks after Buddhist Law, a spiritual group seeking official recognition, held another huge rally in the city center.
In Shanghai, a large chanting crowd threw rocks and bottles at the American Consulate. 
Similar demonstrations were reported in Guangzhou.
In Beijing after nightfall on Saturday, large unruly throngs roamed the embassy district, defying police requests to go home. 
Several times crowds pushed against lines of police officers, who held them away from the American and British Embassies, shouting "Don't you protect Americans?"
At one point, a group of 50 demonstrators burst through police lines, only to be stopped by a row of police five deep about 50 yards from the American Embassy compound. 
The police, who did not carry weapons, made no arrests.
An embassy spokesman said the embassy had "strongly protested" inadequate police protection, after students were allowed to press up against the embassy's street-side gates and throw rocks through windows of an office building still holding 15 to 20 embassy staff members, including James Sasser, the American Ambassador.
Virtually all protesters said they thought the bombing was intentional.
The protests began early Saturday afternoon when angry people started gathering on the tree-lined streets in front of the embassy in Beijing. 
Around 4 P.M., they were joined by thousands of angry, chanting students, not die-hard Communist Party cadres but thoroughly Westernized youths, wearing baseball caps and Nike sweat pants.
The Beijing students marched in groups of several hundred behind their university banners carrying hand-painted signs, some in English, like "U.S.A. 
Nazi Killers" and chanting slogans like "The blood of Chinese must be repaid."
Each group paused in front of the iron gate at the embassy, just 15 feet from its front door, to chant, sing patriotic songs and deliver a variety of petitions. 
At first, an officer from the embassy's political section came out solemnly to accept the papers. 
But the protests quickly turned violent, as students from several universities pelted the embassy with rocks and water bottles. 
Each broken light and window was greeted with thunderous cheers.
Although most students returned to their campuses around nightfall, many remained in the embassy district, and by 9 P.M. raucous students and other demonstrators had regrouped near the embassy, jostling with unarmed police officers and smashing cars with American Embassy plates, identifiable by the red character for embassy, followed by the number 224.
Although the police presence was heavy, the officers, generally equipped at most with cell phones, at first did little to stop the rock throwing. 
The embassy warned Americans living in Beijing to increase personal security and to avoid any protests.
As the fever pitch increased, reinforcements were brought in and made some serious efforts, though often with little effect. 
Police officers stood by as hundreds of protesters burned an American flag.
The well-planned afternoon march was clearly condoned by the Government. 
Official student organizations arranged for buses, and students said that the Beijing Municipal government had approved the protest.
Foreign reporters, who are generally shooed away by public security officers from even minor car accidents, were given freedom to interview and photograph protesters on Saturday.
But the anger was deep and genuine both from the students and the thousands of Beijing residents who apparently gathered spontaneously, many with children, after they had found out about the protest from friends or on the Internet.
"As a young Chinese I've always felt a very friendly attitude toward the U.S. and its people," said Wang Bin, an interpreter, who decided early Saturday afternoon to stand peacefully outside the embassy in protest. 
"But now I feel a deep internal disgust and anger."
Chinese public opinion has been violently opposed to the NATO war over Kosovo, in part because the Government-controlled press did not report on the Serbian purge of Kosovo Albanians. 
But most also agree with their Government that Kovoso's internal ethnic conflicts should not be solved by "a foreign bully" wielding bombs. 
They now regard President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia as a hero for standing up to NATO and the Serbs as an oppressed people.
"I'd always thought that Kosovo should be considered an internal affair and that NATO shouldn't be there," said Guo Qionghu, a student at the National Minorities University. 
"But today this issue has fallen directly on the heads of the Chinese people, and that's why our emotions are so aroused."
The evening television news carried China's furious official condemnations of the attack as "barbarian" and a "gross violation of China's sovereignty" and featured the students' demonstrations.
The three Chinese known to have died in the Belgrade attack were identified as Shao Yunhuan, a 40-year-old woman who was a reporter for the New China News Agency; Xu Xinghu, the resident correspondent in Belgrade for the newspaper Guangming Daily, and Mr. Xu's wife, Zhu Yin, an employee in the advertising section of the newspaper. 
The couple had only been married for a year.
Before being trapped in the embassy compound, Ambassador Sasser had been called in to the Chinese Foreign Ministry to receive its strong protest.
In a country where there is often a huge divide between official pronouncements and public opinion, China now appeared to react as one.
"They did it on purpose," said Yu He, a bank employee in Shanghai, adding. 
"Of course I'm angry now they're attacking us too."
Even before the protests, a Chinese Internet chat room about Kosovo that has been popular in recent weeks was deluged with vituperative messages, including "Tonight, let's lay siege to the U.S. 
Embassy."
Liberal Chinese who have supported engagement with the United States called reporters with a deep sense of disbelief and betrayal, looking for explanations. 
Students at the Beijing demonstration, some of whom had welcomed President Clinton to China a year ago, said they also felt betrayed.
Kicking off the protest, student delegations from China's most prominent universities -- Beijing University, Qinghua University and People's University -- marched in lines, waving red flags and banners, chanting slogans like "Down with Imperialism" and singing patriotic songs.
Some students carried hand-painted signs condemning NATO or the United States and wore targets like those worn in protest by civilians in Serbia.
The crowd turned violent when the group of 200 students from Beijing Polytechnic turned onto the road that bisects the two grassy office compounds of the American Embassy. 
Piles of rocks and cement squares lined the sidewalks, which are being re-laid as part of the campaign to dress up Beijing for the nation's 50th anniversary this fall.
The building material along the narrow street provided ample weaponry for the students in the dense crowd, who hurled the rocks through the windows of the embassy's visa office and an administrative building just behind the fence.
The embassy is a hodgepodge of older buildings in three different sites, all within 15 to 20 feet of the road. 
The street that divides the two main office sites, home to the day's protests, has been closed to nonembassy automotive traffic since the bombings in Africa last summer.
Police had clearly been girding since early in the day, when they closed a nearby popular outdoor market, Silk Alley, where tourists flock to buy Beanie Babies, Chinese qipao dresses and fake Prada bags.
But they were certainly unprepared for the outpouring of anger that gathered throughout the day and into the late evening, when thousands of angry protesters moved from the American Embassy to the nearby British Embassy and on to the American Ambassador's house.
