
The Clinton Administration struggled today to prevent the accidental bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade from either hobbling NATO's air campaign or stifling the nascent diplomatic search for a way to end the war over Kosovo.
The White House said the American Ambassador in Beijing, James Sasser, had apologized to the Chinese Government and would continue to provide Chinese officials with information on how the accident happened.
In an attempt to show sympathy with China, Administration officials said NATO would guarantee safe passage for a Chinese plane being sent to Belgrade to evacuate embassy staff members who survived the bombing. 
But there was no suggestion of any letup in the air strikes, a step urged by both China and Russia.
The attack against the Chinese Embassy came just as the diplomatic process to end the Kosovo war had begun to gather steam, raising concerns that the efforts could stall, particularly at the United Nations Security Council, where China and Russia are both permanent members and denounced the attack overnight as a flagrant affront to international order.
President Clinton, speaking to reporters in Del City, Okla., where he inspected tornado damage, described the embassy bombing as a "tragic mistake."
But he insisted that the alliance's air strikes would continue until President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia accepted NATO's terms, including a NATO military presence to enforce a peace in Kosovo.
Asked about Russian denunciations of the bombing as barbaric, Mr. Clinton replied: "Well, it isn't barbaric. 
What is barbaric is what Mr. Milosevic has done. 
What is barbaric is the intentional ethnic cleansing that he has provoked for a decade now."
"I believe that Russia recognizes that, which is why they have shown so much leadership on the diplomatic front," he said. 
"And I would encourage them to stay on that course."
The Russian envoy, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, was in Germany today for talks with Chancellor Gerhard Schroder and was expected to move on to Belgrade on Sunday.
The Western allies are banking on Russia's and China's support for a Security Council resolution to authorize an international security force in Kosovo.
Administration and NATO officials expressed confidence that the emotional outpourings in Beijing, in Moscow and at the United Nations would be short-lived. 
They even suggested that the accident might actually add urgency to the diplomatic efforts.
"We will just have to ride it out," a senior Administration official said. 
"Everyone recognizes this is an unfortunate development."
The official said the Administration had prepared itself for more civilian casualties and mistaken hits as the price of a more expanded air campaign, but had not counted on hitting the embassy of a key Security Council member. 
There was little doubt that the NATO military planners would take extreme caution in the coming days about their targeting, the official said.
Officials from the United States and other NATO countries argued that since a United Nations resolution on the security force was at least some weeks away, the accident need not affect the final vote. 
It was unlikely, they said, that if Russia backed a resolution, China would stand alone and veto it.
"We believe there is broad agreement to the contours of a settlement and that the Chinese would not block it," a spokesman for the National security Council, David Leavy, said.
The national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, met with the United Nations Secretary General, Kofi Annan, at the White House today. 
Mr. Leavy said Mr. Berger had expressed regret but had vowed that the air campaign would go on. 
Before the meeting, Mr. Annan, speaking to reporters briefly in Washington, said he was "rather shocked" about the damage to the embassy.
"This is a reason for continuing peace talks," he said. 
"I hope it will not unduly complicate our search for peace."
But he added, "Obviously it is not going to make matters easy."
The Pentagon said today that the accidental bombing of the embassy would not affect the basic direction of its air campaign. 
There will be no pauses in the bombing, said the Pentagon spokesman, Kenneth H. Bacon, nor will NATO give advance warning of its targets to neutral parties.
"NATO is determined to continue this campaign and to intensify the campaign," Mr. Bacon said. 
"I don't anticipate there will be a pause. 
In fact, I see that there will be broadening attacks as NATO continues to work toward its goals."
The round-the-clock air campaign has grown to include around 600 missions daily.
In a step toward a diplomatic solution, the Russians agreed with the Western allies on Thursday that a security force was necessary in Kosovo to guarantee the return of the ethnic Albanian refugees.
There are still considerable gaps between Russia and the allies on the composition of the force.
It was possible, a NATO official said, that the attack on the embassy could weaken the hand of the allies a little as they bargain with the Russians on who should take part in the peacekeeping operation.
But overall, this official said, the attack should "encourage the Russians to be more forthright in sorting out the problems and encourage the Russians to lean on Milosevic."
The NATO Secretary General, Javier Solana, called the bombing of the embassy "a tragic mistake."
Apparently determined to show that it would not deflect attention from the military campaign, NATO and Administration officials stressed today the successful hits in Belgrade on Friday night, including a bunker complex they said was used by Mr. Milosevic.
Mr. Solana said in a statement in Brussels that NATO would continue its military campaign and at the same time back the diplomatic track.
While publicly confident that the attack on the embassy would not have a lasting impact on their diplomatic efforts, the Administration appeared to be doing what it could to mollify the Chinese.
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright was trying to call the Chinese Foreign Minister, Tang Jiaxuan, to express her sympathy, a State Department spokesman said.
In a statement, the State Department said it deeply regretted the loss of life in the bombing, in which at least three people were killed. 
The United States still looks forward to working with China on matters of mutual concern, including the Kosovo crisis, the statement added.
Despite the outward confidence, the embassy attack comes as relations between Washington and Beijing have soured over a number of issues. 
The Chinese have been very critical of the NATO assaults against Yugoslavia, largely because they fear that a precedent is being set that could allow interference in Tibet. 
Trade disputes and allegations of Chinese espionage have complicated relations further.
The Chinese showed earlier this year how they can wield their diplomatic weight when they vetoed a Security Council resolution to extend the mandate for a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Macedonia. 
The veto was an expression of China's anger at Macedonia's diplomatic recognition of Taiwan.
Emotions ran high at a Security Council session called by China on Friday night. 
China called the strike a "war crime."
The Russian delegate to the United Nations, Sergey V. Lavrov, accused NATO of trying to "destroy world order."
