
Chinese demonstrators protesting the bombing of their embassy here on Friday night held up a banner in the main square of the capital today, where a crowd was gathered for the daily rock concert: "America the loser, Yugoslavia the winner," it read.
That summed up the defiant mood here in Belgrade. 
Although the bombing of the embassy has shocked Serbs and Chinese alike, dashed burgeoning hopes of peace, and fed the fear of living under the threat of air strikes, it has also convinced many residents that they are being deliberately targeted by NATO, and hardened their determination to resist.
In a series of conversations this weekend, virtually every Belgrader interviewed seemed convinced that the United States had intended to hit the Chinese Embassy. 
They gave various reasons: NATO's alleged intention to spark a greater crisis by dragging in China, an attempt by the United States to show its superiority as the world's only superpower, or as part of a cynical campaign to hit more and more civilian targets.
"Would you believe that with all their sophisticated weapons, they can miss?" said a pensioner, Vlade Smiljanic, who was examining bomb damage to Government buildings on a main Belgrade street across the Sava River from the New Belgrade district where the Chinese Embassy is located.
"Why did they not bomb the American, German, French and Canadian embassies along here?" shouted his companion, Djordje. 
"Just you see, they will hit the Russian Embassy next and spark a third world war."
Downtown, in a bookshop cafe where intellectuals gather, the views were the same. 
"It was a provocation by the United States," said Zoran Arsic, a computer systems manager who was drinking a morning coffee with a friend. 
"They did it on purpose to show the whole world that they are the only remaining superpower. 
To say to us: 'How can such a small power do anything, when the U.S. can do this to China,' "
Mr. Arsic said he was sure that the latest bombing, the heaviest Belgrade has experienced, signaled NATO's new determination to hit at the civilian population. 
"Now they are going to bomb by day to scare the people," he said.
The embassy bombing has rattled many people, who are showing the stress of nearly six weeks of on-off bombing. 
They say it was a sign that anything is a target. 
Saturday night was quiet in the capital, but NATO planes continued their bombing around the country. 
People in the city are bracing for more.
"This has completely changed our views," said Mr. Smiljanic. "Things are worse now. 
I am more calm but my wife has psychological problems with all the sirens going off again and again. 
I never go to the bunker, because I am so old it does not matter, but these young girls should go," he said gesturing to a 9-year-old girl on the street.
"They have water in their ears," he said of NATO. 
"They are disoriented. 
They don't know what to hit next."
Some Serbian reasoning defies logic. 
The people can be simultaneously nervous and supremely indifferent, even fatalistic. 
They are often scared, but few bother to go down to the bunkers at night and almost no one reacts when air raid sirens sound during the day.
Vladan Markovic, a 24-year-old mechanical engineering student, was in his apartment just behind the Chinese Embassy compound when the missiles hit on Friday. 
"I never felt it that way before," he said. 
"My knees began to shake. 
I went to the cellar first, but what should I do there?
It is only the old people there."
Many Serbian interpretations of NATO's aims and intentions in this war are wayward, or warped by propaganda and old Communist suspicions.
Bombing people into submission is always senseless, they say, but particularly senseless when it comes to Serbs because they will resist even harder. 
"It is the wrong politics of the West," Mr. Arsic said. 
"They do not know our thinking."
But his friend, Misa Popovic, who was drinking coffee with him, countered: "They are very clever. 
They know how Serbs will resist, because they know we will not be conquered."
His reasoning was that the Serbs would fight to the end, and so be destroyed by the West or reduced to slaves, which, he argued, is what the West has wanted all along.
"Now they have shown what their real goal is," Mr. Arsic added. 
"They do not want to allow Yugoslavia to live under its own authority, and they do not want to see Yugoslavia as a partner in business or politics."
