
The Chinese Government tonight suspended high-level military ties and a new human rights dialogue with the United States in response to the mistaken NATO bombing of its embassy in Belgrade last week.
Talks on arms control, international security and preventing arms proliferation were also being postponed, the official New China News Agency said.
The announcement by Beijing seemed intended to signal China's displeasure without disrupting the main elements of its battered relationship with Washington. 
But the bomb attack has already proven its potential to do far greater harm to ties with Beijing than to frustrate any peace settlement for Kosovo, Administration officials said today.
The accidental bombing by NATO, portrayed in China as deliberate, played to one of China's historical sensitivities: humiliation at the hands of foreigners.
With no letup today in street protests in Beijing against the United States, the Administration scrambled to try and persuade the Chinese that it regretted the loss of lives.
Worried that the embassy bombing may strengthen the hands of conservatives in Beijing's secretive leadership, Administration officials also emphasized the continuing desire for a "strategic partnership" with China, a relationship already badly frayed over allegations of espionage, and issues of human rights and trade.
President Clinton today sent a letter to China's President, Jiang Zemin, that expressed condolences and set out NATO's cause against Yugoslavia, a White House spokesman said. 
The letter concluded by saying the President would continue to work on improving relations, the spokesman said. 
To date, however, China has resolutely opposed NATO's bombing, and its controlled media have not reported on the plight of Kosovo's Albanians, but rather on the suffering of Serbs.
Around midnight on Saturday, Secretary of State, Madeleine K. Albright, accompanied by Undersecretary of State, Thomas Pickering, went to the Chinese Embassy to speak with Ambassador Li Zhaoxing to express sorrow at the accident, a State Department spokesman said. 
The Secretary, he said, explained to the Ambassador that the accident was an "intelligence failure."
How much effect the late-night visit had was not clear.
Appearing on the ABC television program "This Week" today, Ambassador Li declared that the bombing was a "horrifying atrocity, something rarely seen in the entire history of the worst diplomacy."
Mr. Li said his Government was demanding an investigation of the bombing by NATO and after the results of the inquiry would determine what "further actions" to take.
Speaking from the American Embassy in Beijing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," America's Ambassador to China, James Sasser, said the Chinese Government was tolerating or even encouraging the street demonstrations in Beijing, which he called a risky policy.
"You get a sense of widespread indignation within officialdom itself here about this tragic bombing of the Chinese Embassy," he said, even as the demonstrations continued outside his compound. 
"This is, I think, really a national thought to some extent, and one of our more perceptive foreign service officers here today said, perhaps the Chinese want us to feel their pain."
It was probably inevitable, a senior Administration official said, that the bombing would be exploited by the conservative elements in the Beijing Government who have been against the more modernizing trends led by President Zemin and Prime Minister Zhu Rongji. 
"This is a major complicating factor in the United States-China relationship," the official said.
On the other hand, the official said, the Administration's policy of working toward a "strategic partnership" with China may have shown some dividends in the current crisis.
With personal contacts established between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang during their visits to each other's countries in the last two years, it was slightly harder for the Chinese to return immediately to the mentality of the cold war.
But the pressures on the more Western-leaning officials, particularly as China faces the 10th anniversary next month of the killing of hundreds of civilians by the military at the Tiananmen demonstrations, would only mount in the wake of the Belgrade bombing.
"There has been a debate in China mirroring that in the United States in which the military and the hard-liners have accused Prime Minister Zhu of being too soft," said Winston Lord, a former American Ambassador to China. 
"There is the danger that in the coming weeks that those who want to be constructive will be on the defensive. 
This is going to give ammunition to the hard-liners."
While China, as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, is needed for any United Nations-brokered resolution of the Kosovo war, the most immediate long-term issue at stake for Washington is China's entry into the World Trade Organization, the Geneva-based body that governs world commerce. 
China's admission has been going through a rocky phase after the visit of Prime Minister Zhu to Washington last month.
Mr. Zhu, who came to the United States with far more concessions on market openings than the Administration expected, was aggrieved when President Clinton failed to sign an agreement that would have paved the way for China's entry.
But just before Mr. Zhu left the United States, Mr. Clinton backtracked somewhat, telephoning the Prime Minister with a pledge that the United States would back China's membership in the trade organization as long China stood by the major concessions on foreign investment in telecommunications, banking and insurance.
By last week, however, those concessions had been withdrawn, apparently the victim of Chinese Government officials who believed that Mr. Zhu had given away too much to the West. 
With anti-Americanism now raging in the media and on the streets of Beijing, these conservative officials could well prevail, a Clinton Administration official said.
Even without the bombing of the embassy, the next three weeks are critical in the World Trade Organization process. 
President Clinton faces a June 3 deadline for telling Congress whether he intends to renew China's trading status. 
If China becomes a member of the trade body, Congress would have to normalize China's trading status, a move likely to set off a major political brawl for the White House.
On the question of human rights, the Administration infuriated Beijing by filing a resolution condemning China's practices at the annual meeting of the United Nations this spring in Geneva. 
The recent State Department annual report on human rights around the world was particularly critical of China.
The relationship has also soured over allegations from United States intelligence agencies that China posed an "acute intelligence threat" to nuclear weapons laboratories.      
