
"IN my opinion, Chinese chefs are much more skilled than French chefs," Ching Yun Pu said. 
And then he added, "Although we do not brag the way French chefs do."
It was 1981, and Mr. Pu, a master chef trained in pre-revolutionary China, was working in a restaurant in San Francisco's Chinatown. 
I was working at a magazine there, trying to find the best Chinese restaurants in the state. 
I couldn't do it on my own, so I enlisted the help of Chinese friends (among them, Wayne Wang, then an unknown filmmaker). 
They read the ads in Chinese-language newspapers, talked to their parents and consulted employment agencies that placed cooks. 
And then we started eating; before we were done we had found 50 astonishingly good restaurants cooking regional Chinese food and catering almost exclusively to a Chinese clientele.
I had been to China the year before, but I gained a new respect for Chinese food in America. 
As I ate Sichuan minced squab soup, Chiu Chow crab roll and Hakka stuffed bean curd, I learned about the enormous impact politics and immigration laws have had on the Chinese restaurants of America. 
It was not an accident that regional Chinese cooking became a craze during the late 1960's; the Hart-Celler Act of 1965 allowed many more Chinese people into the country and brought new chefs to our shores.
America got Chiu Chow food as a result of turmoil in Southeast Asia. 
The first wave of Hong Kong cooking was due to the Cultural Revolution, which drove many people out of South China to Hong Kong and from there to the United States. 
The second wave came courtesy of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, which increased the Hong Kong immigration quota. 
Tasting the flavors these new immigrants brought with them was exciting, and I became convinced that America was about to experience an explosion of Chinese cooking. 
I was positive that before long the country would have as many notable Chinese restaurants as French ones.
Almost 20 years later, I have to admit that I was wrong. 
It is still possible to find a good Chinese meal in the United States. 
As more Chinese people have come into the country, the number and quality of small, regional restaurants have certainly increased. 
If you want the Chinese equivalent of French bistro cooking, you can easily find it.
But China, like France, also has a venerable tradition of haute cuisine. 
While expensive French restaurants in New York can hold their own against many places in Paris, if you want to move beyond steamed dumplings and stir-fries to experience the complexity of Chinese banquet cuisine, the possibilities grow dimmer each year. 
Why?
Chinese food experts in this country contemplate this culinary disappointment with deep sadness. 
The reasons, they say, range from the apathy and lack of sophistication of American diners to a shortage of great Chinese chefs.
Twenty years ago, San Francisco had the benefit of master chefs like Mr. Pu. New York's Chinese restaurants of that period also showed the influence of T. T. Wang, who opened the original Shun Lee restaurants; Uncle Lou, a renowned banquet chef, and the chefs from mainland China who opened Sichuan Pavilion. 
They had all been classically trained, a process that can take years.
"Our training was very hard," said Mr. Pu, who served a formal apprenticeship in Beijing in the 1940's with one of China's most powerful families. 
"We were sometimes beaten when we made mistakes. 
And we had to prepare each dish according to the classic method, no matter what the conditions. 
In the winter we had to peel shrimps, washing them with cold water because warm would have changed their taste. 
No matter that our hands were burning from cuts and stinging from the cold."
The revolution, of course, put an end to all that. 
"Who wanted to be a chef in China from 1949 to 1985?" said Michael Tong, the owner of Shun Lee Palace and Shun Lee West, both in Manhattan.
But today's China is a different place. 
Tourism is booming, along with national wealth. 
Hotels are being built. 
Restaurants are opening. 
The market, Mr. Tong says, is getting bigger, and there are not enough chefs. 
"Over the years we must have had 500 chefs coming and going at Shun Lee Palace," he said, "and only 5 percent were trained in China."
Mr. Tong also talks of the old system of apprenticeship, in which young people who worked for famous chefs lived behind the kitchen and did everything from making their beds to heating their wine. 
But prosperity has changed that, as well. 
"China has never thought of being a chef as a high profession, and there is no tradition of celebrity chefs," Mr. Tong said. 
"Young people aren't being trained as they used to."
The result is intense global competition for top Chinese chefs. 
And rising salaries.
A good chef in Hong Kong, says Philip Chiang, the owner of the Mandarin Restaurant in Beverly Hills, Calif., can make more than $100,000 a year. 
After taxes. 
If a restaurant in the United States wants a chef of that caliber, it has to match those dollars. 
Few chefs in the United States, no matter what their style of cuisine, are paid that much money. 
"Chinese chefs are better paid than French ones," Mr. Chiang said.
The Chinese, though, with their growing tourist economy and new freedom to enjoy luxuries in public, are increasingly willing to pay whatever it takes to hire great chefs.
MOST Chinese experts are too tactful to say so, but money is only one part of the equation.
"Why should Chinese cooks come here?" asked Bruce Cost, the restaurateur and author of several Chinese cookbooks. 
Mr. Cost, who is not Chinese, was the chef and an owner of Monsoon in San Francisco. 
He is now an owner of Big Bowl in Chicago. 
"Anybody who can cook can make a good living in Asia," he said. 
"And if you're a Chinese chef, you want to feed Chinese people."
Nina Simonds, a cookbook author and another non-Chinese expert in Asian cooking, agrees. 
"The best Chinese chefs," she said, "don't cater to Westerners."
It is true that many Chinese are convinced that Americans do not value Chinese food. 
Mr. Tong is among them. 
"Americans appreciate French culture more than Chinese culture," he said. 
"And Americans have much more knowledge of French food."
He noted, rather heatedly, that he sometimes goes to Restaurant Daniel in Manhattan and watches incredulously as people devour squabs. 
"They even eat them rare!" he added. 
"I used to put squab on the menu; maybe I would sell two or three. 
And if I put eel, duck webs or sliced kidneys on the menu, nobody orders that."
Mr. Cost said: "There is a difference in what people like to eat. 
The Chinese eat bones and innards. 
Americans don't."
Or as Ms. Simonds said, "In this country the audience is not there to appreciate really great Chinese food."
Mr. Tong blames himself. 
"In the 70's we invented all these dishes: orange beef and crispy sea bass. 
There's no such thing in classic Chinese cooking. 
When Americans eat Chinese food now, they want crispness. 
They want sweetness. 
They want spicy. 
If I try to give them red-cooked dishes, they don't understand or want it."
Which is a shame. 
Red-cooking is a classic Chinese technique that involves searing meat or fish in oil and then slowly stewing it in a mixture of soy, sherry, rock sugar and spices like star anise. 
The result is a glistening sauce with a complex flavor that is simultaneously salty, sweet and rich.
Not long ago, I was invited to an elaborate banquet at Shun Lee West, given by a friend eager to prove that Chinese food can be as impressive as anything produced by the French. 
It was testimony to the fact that when Shun Lee wants to pull out all the stops, the kitchen is equal to the task.
The meal began with cold hors d'oeuvres surrounding an edible landscape, in which pandas carved out of vegetables cavorted around a gelatin lake. 
Eight cold plates were set around it: crisp slices of pig's ear in hot oil crunched pleasantly when you ate them. 
Dried bean curd was cut into noodles and tossed with fava beans. 
Pork kidneys had been soaked in many changes of water until they were pure texture, little clouds under a hailstorm of Sichuan peppercorns. 
Fish was richly smoked. 
Jellied pate rivaled anything on the Champs-Elysees. 
"They just don't sell," Mr. Tong said. 
"We sell one cold hors d'oeuvre for every 30 hot ones like egg rolls, dumplings or spare ribs."
Twenty years ago, Mr. Pu was already lamenting what had become of his native food in American hands. 
Speaking of the Hunan food that was then the rage in San Francisco, he said: "What is often called Hunanese food is something made up to please the American palate. 
Once the pattern of spiciness and the overuse of garlic was established, nothing could change it."
THERE is another attitude that nothing seems to be able to change, either. 
Drew Nieporent, the restaurateur and an owner of Nobu, TriBeCa Grill and Montrachet in Manhattan, has been considering opening a Chinese restaurant. 
But he said: "One thing worries me -- price. 
There's a certain conditioning about Chinese restaurants that they shouldn't be expensive."
Mr. Tong said flatly, "American people won't come if you charge more than $75" per person.
Mr. Cost said: "Think about Hong Kong, where a single abalone dish can cost $1,100. 
And then ask why the restaurants here aren't as good."
It is true: the most expensive meal I have ever had was in a Hong Kong restaurant where dinner for two, without alcohol, was almost $1,000, in American dollars. 
The crabs alone, with delicious fat down to the end of their claws, cost $400. 
Would Americans be willing to pay those prices?
"No, they would not," said Mr. Cost, who still becomes angry when he thinks about the reviews of his now-defunct San Francisco restaurant, Monsoon. 
"One review called it Asian food at European prices. 
I was buying the same raw ingredients as Chez Panisse, but there was an attitude that Chinese food had to be cheap."
It is a prejudice that extends even to cookbooks, Ms. Simonds maintains. 
"Publishers tell me that people will pay more for an Italian or French cookbook than a Chinese one," she said.
Prejudice, however, goes both ways, and even if you were willing to spend a fortune on a Chinese meal, you might not succeed. 
There are many small restaurants serving good regional Chinese food, and they will feed you well. 
But when you get to the next level, eating well becomes more difficult. 
Consider the Chinese food palaces that opened when Hong Kong money was flooding into the United States in the early 90's.
"Hong Kong money is only invested in Chinatown and Flushing," Mr. Tong said. 
"They only want to cater to Chinese people. 
They have no interest in taking care of Caucasians."
The reasons are mainly pragmatic. 
"The Chinese spend more money," he said. 
"They eat more quickly. 
Caucasians come in, just a few of them, and they want to have a drink first. 
Then, when you want them to order, they say, 'Don't rush me.'
"
The Chinese also arrive in bigger numbers, he said. 
"Look around," he said. 
"The Chinese go in groups. 
It's a cuisine of sharing. 
In a Chinese restaurant there are no tables for two or four; there are only big tables and private rooms."
Chinese people, Mr. Tong said, even order differently when they go out to eat. 
"They always," he said, "order ahead."
Scott Haas, a Boston food writer, recently had a meal at one of that city's best Chinese restaurants, New Shanghai. 
Julia Child and Ms. Simonds were seated nearby, and he noted that their food looked much more appealing than what was on his own table. 
When he asked C. K. Sau, the chef and an owner of the restaurant, the reason for it, Mr. Sau replied: "When Julia and Nina come in, they don't order. 
They call me the day before and say 'C. 
K., go to the market, get something fresh, get something that's in season.'
They never order from the menu."
But is the culture gap unbridgeable?
Probably not. 
Americans could certainly become more knowledgeable consumers of Chinese cuisine. 
Chinese restaurateurs could learn to trust American customers.
But it may be too late. 
Ed Schoenfeld, one of the first non-Chinese to take Chinese food seriously, recalls that when he was a manager at Uncle Tai's Hunan Yuan in Manhattan in 1973, the chefs were extraordinary. 
"The three top chefs each had 25 years' experience," he said. 
"The No. 10 chef had 10 years' experience. 
The rest had learned in Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
The food was wonderful. 
There aren't so many Chinese chefs of that caliber in New York anymore."
There may not, in fact, be many chefs of that caliber anyplace anymore. 
Ms. Simonds has just returned from Asia. 
She said that although she ate spendidly in Taiwan and Hong Kong, it was getting harder to find good food there, as well.
"My mentor, T. C. Lai, becomes very upset when he starts talking about the general level of cooking there," she said. 
"He is one of the most knowledgeable people about Chinese food, and he thinks the standard has gone down."
