
With exquisite simplicity, the astonishing Chinese film maker Zhang Yimou tells stories that pierce the heart. 
"To Live," his latest (after "Raise the Red Lantern," "Ju Dou" and "The Story of Qiu Ju"), is one more stirring example of this director's ability to mix humanity with history, letting a politically charged drama unfold on the most intimate, affecting scale. 
Mr. Zhang's daringly iconoclastic work remains banned in China, but it deserves to be admired in every corner of the globe.
"To Live," an eloquent and devastating chronicle of family life in modern China, spans three decades in the marriage of a couple (played wonderfully by Ge You and Gong Li) buffeted by political upheaval. 
Those changes manifest themselves in indirect ways, but family tragedies and reversals of fortune are inextricably linked to larger changes in Chinese life. 
That theme is familiar among today's Chinese film makers, but Mr. Zhang makes it particularly personal and moving. 
He also sets forth this sad story with a superb eye for revealing detail.
"To Live," one of this year's very best foreign films, will also be notable as a no-show in the Oscar race, giving one more black mark to the arcane nominating procedures of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. 
China, which now bans some of its most distinguished film makers from traveling abroad and even working, required Mr. Zhang to produce a written apology for "To Live" and isn't likely to submit his scathing film as a possible nominee.
The academy still relies on nominations made by a film's country of origin. 
Aside from allowing politics to influence the process, this system works against international co-productions, which are more and more present. 
So Krzysztof Kieslowski's haunting "Red," a nominally Swiss film with a Polish director and French producer, is considered unacceptable as a candidate from any of those countries.
"To Live" and "Red" will not be the only impressive films unreasonably overlooked by the Oscars. 
There's a casualty of the academy's television rule, which disqualifies films if they were seen on television before their American theatrical release. 
Best-actress nominees will be elusive this year, and Linda Fiorentino's scarifying performance as a ruthless con woman looks like a real contender. 
But "The Last Seduction" was first shown on HBO, so it hasn't got a chance.   JANET MASLIN
