
In the trophy case in Representative Christopher H. Smith's Capitol Hill office sits a photograph of Wei Jingsheng, the Chinese dissident. 
The coffee table is littered with press releases about flood control programs and health clinics back home. 
On his desk rests a signed book of Richard Gere photographs from Tibet ("A celebrity who really cares," Mr. Smith says).
There is little here to tell a visitor that this place belongs to one of Congress's most fervent -- critics say obsessive -- opponents of abortion. 
And that is just how Mr. Smith wants it.
"High profile doesn't mean it is all you do," the nine-term Republican from central New Jersey said of his abortion fights. 
"Nobody should ever be a single-issue politician."
His comments, and his office decor, reflect the difficult political balancing act Mr. Smith struggles to maintain each day. 
In Washington, he is best known as a relentlessly effective floor leader in the fight to outlaw abortion, a battle that routinely allies him with Congress's most conservative members against most of his New Jersey colleagues, Republican and Democrat alike.
But beyond the Beltway, the Republican Congressman cuts a more complex figure, one not easily explained with conventional labels. 
To human rights activists, he is a vocal advocate for political freedoms abroad. 
To union organizers, he has become a surprisingly reliable friend. 
And to many voters back home, he has been a dependable defender of popular Government programs, from Medicare to Social Security to veterans' benefits.
Still, he is often labeled an ideological conservative. 
As a result, Mr. Smith is continually struggling to maintain credibility with the Northeastern moderates who are his natural allies on many issues, but who find his no-holds-barred anti-abortion tactics abhorrent.
Those tactics came into sharp relief last month in the final days of the Congressional session. 
As other members were making preparations to leave town, Mr. Smith led a move to hold up American payments to the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund as a way to force action on anti-abortion legislation. 
When the Clinton Administration refused to deal, the Republican leadership, at Mr. Smith's urging, blocked the payments, disrupting White House foreign policy plans as crises were developing in Iraq and Asia.
The maneuver infuriated leaders from just about every patch of the global political spectrum, including United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan, Senator Jesse A. Helms and President Clinton, whose spokesman called it "bone-headed."
The pressure on Mr. Smith to back down was intense, the lobbying, including from members of his own party, furious. 
None of it seemed to faze the 44-year-old Congressman.
"It only makes me more determined," he said. 
"I can't say it's been just another day at the office. 
But I'm getting used to this sort of thing."
For Mr. Smith, such battles have become a way of life. 
A devout Catholic who often quotes scripture to explain his political philosophy, he says his religion is the unifying force behind his diverse views, from opposing abortion and the death penalty to supporting human rights in other nations.
As a freshman at Trenton State College, he formed a chapter of New Jersey Right to Life after seeing a news story about a fetus that had survived an abortion. 
After graduation, he went to work for the group as executive director. 
At age 27, he won what even he called a fluke election, defeating a powerful incumbent Congressman, Frank Thompson Jr., who had been recently indicted on -- and was later convicted of -- fraud charges in the Abscam scandal.
Ever since, he has been associated almost exclusively in Washington with fighting abortion, which he equates with murder, even genocide. 
He has been co-chairman of the House Pro-Life Caucus for 15 years.
Last year, no less a conservative than House Speaker Newt Gingrich punished him for backing an anti-abortion candidate against an incumbent Republican, Representative Sue W. Kelly of New York State, an abortion-rights supporter. 
On the other hand, Representative Henry J. Hyde, the dean of anti-abortion congressmen, calls him "heroic."
"For the most part in Congress, the name of the game is compromise," said Jo Blum, vice president for government relations with the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League in Washington. 
"But Chris Smith is not one to compromise."
Yet Mr. Smith is also walking proof that the abortion issue is not in itself enough to sustain a congressional career. 
Friends and critics alike describe him as deeply complex, capable of teaming up with the conservative Westerners on abortion one moment, then working with Northeastern liberals to preserve wetlands or increase the minimum wage the next. 
Even White House officials say he has been very helpful on immigration and refugee issues.
"There are two Chris Smiths," said Brian M. Hughes, a Democrat who ran against Mr. Smith in 1992. 
"There is one in Washington where abortion is his primary issue. 
Then there is the one in New Jersey, who is for economic development, fighting for veterans, fighting for Social Security. 
You wouldn't think he spent any time on the abortion issue."
"He's never walked away from the issue," Mr. Hughes added, "but he doesn't highlight it the way he does in Washington."
In part, pure political survival dictates Mr. Smith's voting record. 
His district wraps like a belt across New Jersey's waist, from Democratic Trenton, with its many unionized government workers, through a band of blue-collar towns to the shore, with its large bloc of retiree voters. 
Not surprisingly, Mr. Smith has repeatedly bucked his party's leadership and opposed efforts to cut programs cherished by the elderly, like Medicare, or to restrict union rights.
"When you take a look at his voting record, from building trades to public sector unions, he's been there for us," said Chuck Loveless, director of legislation for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union.
But even some allies wonder whether his uncompromising style on abortion can be self-defeating. 
An official with an international human rights group described Mr. Smith as a "prince" who had used his position as chairman of the House Subcommittee on International Operations and Human Rights to press for political freedoms in other countries.
But the same official, speaking on condition of anonymity, lamented that Mr. Smith's anti-abortion guerrilla tactics had undermined his standing among moderates and liberals in Congress. 
On human rights issues, the official said: "Chris is truly a leader and one of the best ones we've got. 
I'm just concerned that his natural allies in Congress think of him as a one-issue person. 
And he's not."
Indeed, his position on abortion constantly infuriates moderates in his own party. 
For example, he refused to campaign for Gov. Christine Todd Whitman this year because of her strong support for abortion rights, prompting Hazel Gluck, a leading Whitman supporter, to call him "an extremist."
But Mr. Smith routinely angers conservatives, as well. 
Just as he was winning plaudits from conservatives for blocking payments to the United Nations, he was fighting Republican free-trade advocates by opposing so-called "fast track" legislation, which would have expanded the President's powers to negotiate trade agreements. 
He was one of only six Republicans to vote against reducing Medicare spending in 1995. 
And an anti-immigration group, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, has attacked him for his efforts to open American borders to more political refugees.
Even Senator Helms, the rock-ribbed anti-abortion conservative from North Carolina, was incensed at Mr. Smith for blocking the United Nations payments, which were linked to legislation Mr. Helms had meticulously negotiated to reorganize the State Department.
Mr. Smith, who was born in Rahway, said his support for labor comes from his father, a teamster turned sporting goods wholesaler who was laid off from a job driving for Borden's Food in Newark when Mr. Smith was 14. 
"When plant-closing legislation became an issue in Congress, it really brought back some vivid memories," he said.
But he says his activist streak comes from his grandfather, a Montclair lawyer who, for no charge, helped Chinese immigrants move their families out of Communist China. 
"He opened my eyes," Mr. Smith said. 
"I learned you can live out the Gospel by tangibly helping people."
He met his wife, Marie, at Trenton State where they were both active in Right to Life. 
They have four children, ages 10 to 19, and live in the northern Virginia suburbs so that he can spend more time with them -- an issue that has occasionally been raised in campaigns against him. 
"I love New Jersey, but while I'm on assignment, I'm not going to jeopardize my family life," he said.
The Democrats have repeatedly run abortion rights supporters against Mr. Smith, thinking the issue would work against him among New Jersey's relatively moderate voters, who polls show generally support abortion rights. 
The strategy has failed miserably: he has won re-election with more than 60 percent of the vote most times. 
Last year, the Democrats reversed field, choosing an anti-abortion conservative. 
He, too, lost by a wide margin.
With such stalwart support back home, Mr. Smith says he feels even greater freedom to push his anti-abortion agenda in Washington, a role he likens to the crusade of the 19th century abolitionists. 
And he says he has no intention of backing down in the standoff over payments to the United Nations, an issue sure to return next year.
"With abortion and the violence inherent in it, there is a meanness," he said, eyes blazing. 
"It is a national blind spot that will be removed."
