
Two years after the start of construction on the world's largest dam in the scenic Three Gorges area of central China, the extensive rescue effort envisioned to save some of the country's best-known cultural antiquities has yet to begin. 
It has become mired in a rancorous dispute pitting hundreds of historians, archeologists and other scholars against Government engineers who are racing against time and a shortage of financing to complete the mammoth project.
In an unusual public challenge to Communist Party authorities, 56 leading cultural figures have petitioned President Jiang Zemin to intervene in the dispute, to insure that the cultural treasures of the Yangtze River region are preserved. 
If he fails to do so, Yu Weichao, director of the National Museum of Chinese History and an archeology professor at Beijing University, has threatened to dramatize the Government's lack of interest by making public an inventory of archeological and cultural sites and the plans for how they can be saved.
What is needed, Mr. Yu and other scholars say, is a rescue operation many times larger than the one conducted in Egypt to save the temples of Ramses II and Queen Nefertari behind the Aswan Dam three decades ago.
The scholars' appeal has drawn an angry response from the chief engineer of the Three Gorges project, Wei Tingcheng. 
In a interview, he accused the cultural preservationists of exceeding their mandate by devising "grandiose" schemes for museums and "palaces" to house the treasures of the Yangtze valley. 
More to the point, he asserted, the Chinese people are not that interested in cultural preservation.
"To tell you the truth," he said, "the common people of China have such a low education level that they will not be able to enjoy these cultural relics, and only some of these experts will go to these museums."
The sudden collision on the Three Gorges preservation issue reflects the deep divisions caused by the project, which will cost $17 billion to $30 billion. 
By the time it is completed in 2009, it is expected to boost China's electrical generating output by 10 percent and to provide critical flood protection for millions of people downstream. 
But it has also raised serious concerns about its environmental impact and the planned resettlement of at least 1.13 million people before the dam can make its serpentine lake, stretching 400 miles from Yichang to Chongqing.
The senior engineer's belittling of the preservation issue reflects not only the financial jitters of the construction organization but also the priorities of the engineering culture, which dominates the Communist Party leadership today.
"Li Peng is making this dam impossible to stop, though it could have many problems in the future," said Sun Changjiang, a leading party intellectual of the 1980's; he was referring to China's Prime Minister, a Soviet-trained engineer and the dam's chief proponent in the Government. 
"The scholars will be told to 'look at the larger picture' of China's energy and flood control needs," he said, adding that when it came to preservation, they would have to settle for less.
Towering Fortress The Gods Can't Save
Among the national treasures that may be lost beneath the waters of the man-made lake that will form behind the dam is the one here at Shibaozhai, which means "stone rock fortress."
Generations of Chinese have built their temples on the towering rock formation that rises from the mists here to stand watch over a sweeping turn of the Yangtze River on its way to the sea.
One legend holds that an ancient goddess was trying to plug a hole in the heavens ripped open by a shower of comets when this 100-foot-high shard of limestone slipped from her grasp and thundered to earth. 
In the 18th century, a magnificent 12-story pagoda was added to the rock face to ease the ascent of those who come to pray on the summit.
"Without Shibaozhai, there are only mountains and poverty here," said Zhou Kangwu, who lives in the village below the rock.
Not far downstream from Shibaozhai, a Chinese Hercules named Zhang Fei was killed by rivals. 
The residents of nearby Yunyang have spent 1,700 years crafting and adding to the memorial temple that honors him. 
Now they wonder whether it will be saved.
And up a winding tributary called the Daning River, the residents of the ancient village of Dachang still live in houses that are the best examples of Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) structural art remaining in rural China. 
These living museums are also in danger, the scholars say.
In their challenge to Communist Party leaders, 56 Chinese scholars wrote: "At the moment when the Three Gorges cultural relics are about to be destroyed on a large scale, we respectfully present to you this letter in the hope that the Three Gorges project departments realize the importance of the cultural relics in the area and carry out rescue work."
The letter, dated Aug. 
8, was also sent to Prime Minister Li and the other six members of the Politburo's Standing Committee.
Among its signers were Chai Zemin, former Ambassador to the United States; Wang Meng, former Minister of Culture; Jia Lanpo, a discoverer of Peking man, and professors from Beijing University and other leading academic institutions. 
Professor Yu, the director of the national history museum, helped organize the petition. 
For seven months he supervised the work of 300 scholars and technical experts who drafted the 30-volume rescue plan presented to the Three Gorges construction office in May. 
It calls for spending $230 million over 10 years.
Opportunities Lost As Pressure Mounts
The plan has remained in limbo; no money has been allocated for rescue operations that were to have started this year, even though the dam project itself races forward. 
Mr. Wei, the chief engineer, would not comment except to say there were "different ideas about the protection of cultural relics."
Professor Yu disagrees, asserting that there is broad consensus among archeologists and historians about how to preserve the region's cultural heritage.
"Now we have missed a year and a lot of things can't be done," Professor Yu said, adding, "unless we have the cooperation of all of our colleagues in the world."
But so far, Prime Minister Li has rejected any option calling for international assistance.
Of particular concern to archeologists are excavations that are not yet complete near the dam site at Sandouping.
"This area was the site of some of the earliest civilized developments in Chinese history," the petition letter reads. 
One of them, an early civilization known as the Ba people, is at risk. 
Skilled as warriors and artisans, the Ba helped topple the Shang Dynasty about 1100 B.C. and established their own kingdom. 
"Archeological excavation will allow us to reconstruct the Ba culture," the scholars wrote. 
"But if not rescued in a timely fashion, the Ba will disappear with the construction of the reservoir -- an irreversible error."
"Some ancient graves and cultural relics have already been destroyed by giant earth-moving equipment," the scholars continued in the letter, saying that in recent weeks, a stone carving known as "Conversing About Beautiful Mountains and Rivers" had been dynamited by project engineers.
Mr. Wei, the engineer, who is 70 and has been preparing to build the Three Gorges Dam since he was 25, said he did not see the need to build new museums and "palaces" for rescued artifacts.
"Right now," he said, "to spend so much money to build museums does not conform to the interests of the state."
He added that China's top leaders were aware of the issues raised by the scholars' letter but declined to say how they would respond.
There are credible reports that the Three Gorges engineers are feeling intense pressure from the office of Prime Minister Li, who is said to fear any obstacle to progress on the dam. 
Mr. Li's second and final term as Prime Minister ends in March 1998, and it is widely understood that he would like to oversee two milestones that would push the dam project past the point of no return.
One comes late next year when the Yangtze River will be blocked with a huge rock berm to allow construction on the main span of the dam and its powerhouse. 
The contract for building the berm was awarded last month. 
The second milestone will be the awarding of multibillion-dollar contracts, also in 1997, for the dam's giant turbines and generators. 
Four international consortia, one of which includes General Electric Co., are in competition.
Some scholars have long suspected that cultural sites would be sacrificed by engineers more interested in meeting their construction deadlines than in protecting the national heritage.
"Time is very precious, "Professor Yu said. 
"Even if we get a lot of money in the final stage, it will be of no use."
Preservation Plans Awaiting Support
Here at Shibaozhai recently, Zhou Kangwu, an attendant at the site, hiked up and down the monolithic rock formation to show a visitor its intricate temples and the commanding view from its promontory.
The preservationists' plan, developed at the Beijing Construction Engineering College, is to surround the rock fortress with an oval-shaped wall that would make it an island in the new lake, 1,200 feet around and accessible by a bridge. 
The wall would rise 80 feet above the surface of the lake. 
The bright red pagoda would thus be protected and would cut a striking new profile on the lake.
Downstream at Yunyang, Zhang Fei's temple is inextricably tied to the identity of the town, which will also be inundated.
"Many people have built their family tombs near the temple," said Tan Zhong, 34, who runs a restaurant at the busy port across from the temple.
A preservation plan developed at Qinghua University in Beijing calls for dismantling the oldest part of the temple by 2003 and moving it 15 miles upstream opposite the relocated town of Yunyang on the new lake.
In the Ming Dynasty village of Dachang, the houses in the old quarter are bunched together along narrow lanes. 
Delicate stone carvings adorn roof lines, and hand-carved lattices can still be found in some rooms. 
A plan to relocate a dozen Ming Dynasty houses is estimated to cost about $4.5 million.
But planning for preservation has been hampered by secrecy and mistrust. 
Professor Yu complains that the Three Gorges engineers will not disclose exactly when they will begin raising the level of the lake, which is to begin forming as early as late 1997.
Engineers like Mr. Wei insist that the water level will not rise in 1997 because a diversion channel will remain open. 
But municipal officials along the river say they have been told to expect higher water.
"We have had to find out through our own informal sources what the water level will be after they close the river," Professor Yu said, "and we believe that after the river is closed in 1997, more than 100 cultural sites will be flooded."
