
THE director Ang Lee's shimmering new film, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," which opens in New York on Friday, flows with the rhythms of dance. 
Although indebted to fantasy-filled Cantonese wuxia pian films popular in Hong Kong in the 1950's and early 60's, in which chivalrous warriors sailed through the air with swords and daggers flashing, Mr. Lee's movie takes that martial-arts genre to a whole new level. 
By informing the film's thrilling displays of physical prowess with psychological insight and choreographic sophistication, Mr. Lee touches the heart.
Although known for his versatility, Mr. Lee, who was born in Taiwan, had given no hint in his previous work of his lifelong interest in martial-arts novels and films. 
It seemed unlikely that the director of "The Wedding Banquet" (1993), "Eat Drink Man Woman" (1994), "Sense and Sensibility" (1995) and "The Ice Storm" (1997), or even "Ride With the Devil" (1999) -- all centered on human relationships -- would also like what is often considered B-movie material.
"I grew up with the genre," Mr. Lee, 46, said on a visit in September to the mid-Manhattan offices of Sony Pictures Classics, the film's distributor. 
"I felt I wouldn't be a real filmmaker until I made this type of film, although mine deals with real feelings, which is unusual."
Following a story line common to the wuxia pian genre, the film takes as its hero an honorable martial-arts warrior who sets out to reclaim his stolen weapon, a beautiful jade sword, and to disclose his lifelong love for a female warrior who matches him in skill and courage. 
His course is irrevocably interrupted when a young aristocratic woman tries to throw off her family's constraints by entering into an affair with a dashing bandit.
The Asian film idol Chow Yun Fat and the martial-arts film star Michelle Yeoh play the warriors, with Zhang Ziyi and Chang Chen taking the roles of the rebellious lovers. 
Against panoramic backgrounds of desert wilds, cloud-shrouded mountain ranges, silvery bamboo forests and a re-creation of early 19th-century Beijing, they contend for the sword, twisting, leaping, spinning and flying in encounters as meticulously choreographed as Balanchine ballets. 
As in many martial-arts films, the women fight as fiercely as the men.
There are good reasons for the film's choreographic magic. 
Working with the master action-choreographer Yuen Wo-Ping, whose techniques propelled Jackie Chan to fame as a comic stuntman in "Drunken Master" (1978) and who provided "The Matrix" (1999) with its free-wheeling battles, Mr. Lee created 30 minutes of fight sequences for his 119-minute spectacle, each sequence with its own rhythms, colors and tone -- and only one that turns bloody. 
Eighty of the 100 shooting days were devoted to these scenes. 
"We sometimes took a month on one battle," Mr. Lee said.
In this kind of film, the director and the martial-arts choreographer often work independently. 
But for the making of "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," Mr. Lee held all the reins. 
"It's not that Wo-Ping isn't brilliant," he said, "but too often in this genre, a film comes across as if it were two films in one -- one by the action choreographer, and the other by the director. 
I didn't want that to happen."
The idea was to maintain the plot's coherence without interrupting the flow with incongruous, if rousing, fights. 
Consequently, the movie maintains an unbroken, underlying rhythm -- a breakthrough for the genre. 
Just as a good choreographer uses movement and gesture to indicate developments to come, so Mr. Lee sets the stage for combat and just as consciously brings it to its natural conclusion. 
None of the fighting is mindless, for the combatants' beliefs, emotions and personalities are illuminated by their physicality. 
The more they fight, the better we know them.
The only cast members accomplished in the martial arts, besides Ms. Yeoh, were Cheng Pei-Pei, a famed martial-arts actress in the 1960's, and Gao Xian, a martial-arts instructor in New York as well as an actor and director. 
Everyone else had to take crash courses to learn the requisite skills. 
But even the professionals needed intensive coaching to be brought up to snuff. 
A good deal of the teaching fell to Mr. Gao. "Ang wanted them to look like totally professional martial artists," he said in an interview at a Manhattan restaurant last month. 
He appeared fit enough to take on the whole room if required.
"That meant not only learning the basic fighting stances, but how to wield a sword at the same time," he said. 
"Coordination and flexibility are key. 
Nothing should look abrupt. 
It might sound strange, but martial-arts encounters should be spare and beautiful. 
They take an enormous amount of control. 
Ang also wanted their body language to express their personalities -- not usually a consideration in this type of film. 
Playing an older woman, Michelle fights closer to the ground than the youthful Ziyi. 
She wants to bring her down to earth. 
Ziyi's character wants to fly."
Both Ms. Yeoh and Ms. Zhang studied ballet, which Mr. Gao says gives them a good foundation for martial arts, particularly balance, posture and timing. 
For his own understanding, Mr. Lee also took lessons. 
"He became very good," Mr. Gao said.
The first combat scene, as much a chase as a fight, occurs only a few minutes into the film and begins with a masked figure skimming over moonlit temple rooftops and silkily flying up walls. 
Like all the airborne scenes, this one was accomplished by suspending actors in harnesses from wires, a technique, borrowed from the circus, called wirework or wire fu. 
Until computers, directors would try to disguise the wires; now they can be removed digitally.
But the actors are still stuck with the discomfort of wearing harnesses, which greatly inhibit movement of the torso. 
In scenes where this could be a problem, the choreography emphasizes the fluidity of the arms and legs. 
For one stunning sequence, an aerial pas de deux, Mr. Lee took the technique to the extreme, hoisting Mr. Chow and Ms. Zhang by crane and suspending them 80 feet above the ground, at the top of a bamboo forest, with nothing below them but a shallow creek. 
"It was kind of dangerous," Mr. Lee admitted. 
"I won't do it again."
Stuntmen filled in for only the most perilous feats.
Mr. Lee sees Chinese martial arts as more about choreography than about battle, and martial-arts films as closer to musical theater than to shoot-'em-up Westerns. 
The roots of the genre bear him out. 
Although violent, these works often have a strikingly dancelike quality, even when Bruce Lee, the first international martial-arts superstar, forces his opponents to their knees in "Enter the Dragon" (1973) or when Mr. Chan leaps from buildings in "Police Story III: Supercop" (1992). 
To achieve this quality, directors draw on the traditions of Chinese opera, which combines song, dance, acrobatics, mime and swordplay. 
They also use concepts from ancient Chinese medicine that underlie the martial arts, chiefly a belief in the unity of opposites. 
Among other things, this means a martial artist should be mobile and stationary, defensive and offensive, all at the same time. 
That's why in battle scenes it is common to see swift kicks followed by abrupt rests or poses, and why as much emphasis is placed on blocking a blow as on delivering one.
In the decades since the 1920's, when Shanghai filmmakers first developed the genre, Chinese directors have mined the vast trove of popular stories -- similar to Arthurian legends and tales of the American West -- that exist in the annals of martial arts.
While Mr. Lee's film will open a new world to many Americans, other Chinese directors have used similar themes and choreographic methods. 
In 1983, the producer and director Tsui Hark, now a major figure in Hong Kong cinema, introduced groundbreaking, wire-enhanced fight choreography in his film "Zu, Warriors From the Magic Mountain."
He took it even further in "Swordsman II" (1991), in which the action-choreographer Ching Siu-Tung staged fights on top of stalks of grass and combatants swirled in the sky.
One of several Chinese action directors imported by Hollywood for their choreographic talents, the lean, cigar-smoking Mr. Tsui has made three films in the United States: "The Master" (1991), "Double Team" (1997) and "Knock Off" (1998). 
In a conversation in July, he played down the importance of his various cinematic breakthroughs. 
"It's our job to invent new elements that will generate new energy," he said, talking above the ringing phones at his production company, Film Workshop, in Kowloon, across Victoria Harbor from Hong Kong.
"Our choreography always depends on how we shoot," he said. 
"To create flow in a fistfight or during swordplay, we use long takes and a panning camera. 
The point is to be very clear and precise in order to capture the movements and gestures that best tell the story. 
The pauses between bursts of action are as important as the action. 
They increase the intensity -- just like a dancer pausing before a leap or fast turn. 
A good fight should be like a good dance work."
