
Since 1987, the beige row house at 1249 41st Street in Borough Park, Brooklyn, has been home to four generations of the Zhao family, from the great-grandmother who grew up in the tiny village of Taishan in southern China, now 97, to Yan Zhen Zhao, 16, the studious aspiring doctor who was the family's youngest, brightest light.
Like countless other immigrant families, each generation of the Zhaos had struggled and saved, investing its meager funds and rich hopes in the next generation. 
All four of Yan Zhen's grandparents came to the United States in the 1960's, toiling in Chinese garment factories until they were allowed to bring their children and grandchildren to the United States after China's Cultural Revolution.
The girl's father, Xian Ming, worked as a cook in a Chinese restaurant near City Hall, and her mother, Mila, as a seamstress in a Chinatown garment factory. 
But their children, they believed, would reach higher. 
Miss Zhao's older brothers and cousins include a biochemist, a computer programmer and a college sophomore.
But the Zhao family's faith in the future fell apart on Friday, when bricks tumbling from a school construction project struck Miss Zhao, fracturing her skull and leaving her comatose and tethered to life support.
"You work all your life and give your children the best," Mr. Zhao said. 
"But suddenly, something like this happens. 
What can you think?"
Although officials at Kings County Hospital Center refused to comment in detail on her condition yesterday, family members said that they were told on Monday that there was little chance for her recovery. 
They said they had been asked to consider the option of taking Miss Zhao off life support.
But the Zhaos were not ready to lose her. 
Family members gathered at her bedside in shifts yesterday and took turns praying for a miracle. 
"We know the chances are slim," Mr. Zhao said, weeping uncontrollably. 
"But we can't give up hope."
The accident occurred as Miss Zhao, an 11th grader at John Dewey High School in Coney Island, was walking with a friend to Public School 131, at 4305 Fort Hamilton Parkway in Borough Park, to pick up the friend's younger sister. 
School officials said a contractor doing work at the school, Espo Construction of the Bronx, was apparently using bricks to hold down tarpaulins on the edge of the school's roof, despite earlier warnings to stop the practice. 
City officials suspended the company the night the accident happened and have since inspected other schools that are undergoing construction to look for possible safety hazards.
But those steps did not lessen the anger of Miss Zhao's family. 
"How could the city allow something like this to happen?"
Mr. Zhao asked yesterday in the living room of his home. 
"This is so irresponsible."
Of his three children, Miss Zhao, who everyone calls Zhen and who is his only daughter, has always been his favorite, the pearl in his palm, Mr. Zhao said. 
She studied hard, he said, but also kept her four grandparents and her great-grandmother company and helped them prepare meals.
A cousin who emigrated from China last year said Miss Zhao helped her learn English and offered words of encouragement. 
The cousin, who did not want her name to be used, also said Miss Zhao ironed her brothers' shirts before she went to school each morning.
"She loved everybody," the cousin said.
Despite their meager earnings, Mr. and Mrs. Zhao were determined to help their children succeed. 
Two years ago, they spent $2,000 of their savings on a computer. 
Mr. Zhao said his daughter spent much of her time studying in the local branch of the New York Public Library or on the computer, mostly seeking out information on the field of medicine -- she wanted to become a nurse or a heart surgeon, he said.
And she had plenty of encouragement from her extended family in the row house on 41st Street. 
Miss Zhao's two cousins, the son and daughter of an aunt who lives on the third floor, work as a biochemist and a computer programmer. 
An uncle, Thomas Zhao, who lives on the second floor, works in a bank. 
Her eldest brother, Fong, 22, is a sophomore at Borough of Manhattan Community College, while Ken, 20, is a senior in high school.
Mr. and Mrs. Zhao became citizens some years ago; Miss Zhao, who has lived here since she was 2 years old, had recently applied for citizenship herself, Mr. Zhao said.
David Sobiloff, a lawyer representing the Zhao family, said last night that he would file notice this morning that the family intended to sue the city, the Board of Education and the School Construction Authority. 
He said he also expected to seek damages from Espo Construction.
Last evening, friends gathered at a flower-laden makeshift memorial at P.S. 
131. "She was fun and outgoing and had a lot of friends," said Angelo Soto, a classmate. 
"Everybody's just been down. 
Everybody is angry at the construction people that are working here. 
It's too late to do anything for Zhen."
Miss Zhao's family members kept up their vigil at the hospital, at a time when most Chinese families are preparing to celebrate the Chinese New Year, which begins on Jan. 
28. Relatives said Miss Zhao was especially looking forward to this year's family feast because she planned to introduce her boyfriend, Danny Lee, 16, whom she had been seeing for the last year.
Before he left the hospital yesterday, Mr. Zhao repeated his prayer over and over again: "Zhen, come home, come home."
