
The Taiwanese election marks a huge defeat for the Nationalist Party, which in the 20th century controlled first China and then Taiwan, and which presided over the emergence of the very democratic forces that ultimately upended it.
Dr. Sun Yat-sen, the great Chinese nationalist and revolutionary, formed a predecessor organization of the Nationalist Party in 1894 while he was living in exile in Hawaii. 
The party's initial aim was to overthrow the corrupt Qing Dynasty, which was already disintegrating and finally collapsed in 1911-12.
The party dominated China for the next few tumultuous decades, although power was also divided among warlords and for a time the Japanese invaders. 
Party leaders, such as Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, were initially impressed by the organization of the Soviet Communist Party and modeled the Nationalist Party along Leninist principles, even calling each other "comrade."
While they had a good deal of support from Americans, the Nationalists became detested in China because of their corruption, brutality and failure to fight the Japanese invaders. 
In 1949, the Communists under Mao Zedong defeated the Nationalists and forced them to flee and move their seat of government to the offshore island of Taiwan, which had just been recovered from Japan in 1945.
Some two million Nationalist soldiers and officials settled on Taiwan, where they were bitterly resented by many local people. 
In particular, the Nationalists were hated for massacring local people during upheavals that began on Feb. 
28, 1947, and ever since then the phrase "2-28" has been a sensitive code word in Taiwan that conjures those antagonisms between local people and the mainlanders.
The Communists might well have seized Taiwan in the early 1950's, because Generalissimo Chiang's army was in chaos and America was unwilling to help it. 
But then fate intervened: In 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea, and Americans became increasingly fearful of Communism around the world. 
The upshot was that President Truman sent the Seventh Fleet to protect Taiwan. 
Ever since, the United States has either promised or hinted that it would protect Taiwan from a mainland Chinese attack.
In ruling Taiwan, the Nationalist Party had little ideology other than self-aggrandizement and self-enrichment. 
Particularly in the 1950's and 1960's, the security forces under Chiang and his son and successor, Chiang Ching-kuo, often dragged away critics of the regime. 
Initially, they were often killed immediately; later they tended to face torture and sham trials.
The Nationalists imposed their ideas and language on Taiwan, and children were forced to speak Mandarin Chinese and punished if they spoke the Taiwanese or Hakka dialects that they spoke at home. 
There was almost no teaching of local history, and instead children learned about distant mainland Chinese provinces that they could never visit.
Yet the Nationalist Party redistributed land, promoted education and encouraged the Taiwanese people to form businesses and get rich. 
The result was an economic and educational revolution in Taiwan that laid the seeds for a political one as well.
In the 1980's, the Nationalists responded to popular aspirations and began to permit opposition party activities -- although even then critics of the Nationalists were tortured and occasionally killed. 
The playing field was never level, for the Nationalists manipulated the news media and owned companies that gave them huge economic resources, but they gradually allowed opposition figures to win local elections and form local power bases.
The greatest changes came after the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in 1988. 
Control of the Nationalist Party passed uneasily to Lee Teng-hui, a Taiwanese who as vice president was Taiwan's new president. 
Mr. Lee transformed the Nationalist Party by democratizing it, distancing it from its mainland Chinese roots, and ultimately by creating a more pluralistic Taiwan in which an opposition victory became possible.
