
Chen Shui-bian, an opposition politician who long advocated Taiwan's independence, was elected its new president today, ending more than half a century of Nationalist rule and risking dangerous new tensions with mainland China.
Mr. Chen, a 49-year-old lawyer who served as mayor of Taipei and struggled against martial law in the 1980's, won with 39 percent of the vote in a bitter three-way race. 
The Nationalist candidate slumped to third place.
The opposition's victory, the first transition of power in Taiwan's young democracy, was made possible by a schism in the Nationalist Party that led one of its stars, James Soong, to mount an independent candidacy. 
Mr. Soong, a populist former governor of Taipei province, came in second with a strong 37 percent showing; Lien Chan, the Nationalist, got just 23 percent.
For years, Mr. Chen and his Democratic Progressive Party called for independence from the mainland, which considers Taiwan a wayward region that must return to the motherland. 
The president-elect, who will take office on May 20, succeeding Taiwan's first elected president, Lee Teng-hui, has recently moderated that position, saying no declaration of independence is needed because Taiwan is already sovereign.
But Beijing has called Mr. Chen deceitful and issued dire warnings against his election, with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji all but saying last week that it could provoke a war.
To reassure nervous citizens and governments abroad -- including Washington, which has pledged to help Taiwan defend itself if attacked -- Mr. Chen tried to reach out to the Chinese in his victory speech tonight.
He avoided inflammatory references to Taiwanese "statehood," and said he would seek deeper economic ties and "a permanent peace."
He has promised that he will not declare independence or hold a referendum on the issue unless Taiwan comes under attack.
However, in a statement certain to anger Beijing, he also pledged, "We won't let Taiwan become another Hong Kong or Macao."
Those former colonies have been handed back to China, which has granted them broad autonomy.
The initial reaction from Beijing tonight was terse and noncommittal. 
Page 18.
In Washington, President Clintonsaid he saw the election as a demonstration of the vitality of democracy and an opportunity for Taiwan and China to open a new dialogue. 
"The United States strongly supports such dialogue," he said.
Some 83 percent of Taiwan's voters turned out after a campaign dominated by worries over relations with China and public impatience with the corrupt political practices of the Nationalists.
Mr. Chen faces a legislature still dominated by the Nationalists, who have ruled firmly since Chiang Kai-shek retreated here from the Communist-dominated mainland in 1949. 
The country is in for a period of unprecedented political reshuffling and uncertainty, even as it faces a possible confrontation with China.
Speaking to thousands of cheering supporters, Mr. Chen declared that his success "is not a victory for the Democratic Progressive Party -- it is a victory for democracy."
In a subtle friendly gesture to China and to some of his fiercest enemies at home -- those who fled the mainland after the Communist victory in 1949 -- Mr. Chen gave his acceptance speech in Mandarin Chinese rather than in the Taiwanese dialect he often used in campaign rallies.
But Mr. Chen refuses to accept China's hallowed notion of "One China," and in answer to a question tonight he said China's "one country, two systems" formula for enlisting Taiwan as an autonomous region "would never be accepted by the Taiwanese people."
"We are determined to defend this island but we are also determined to seek peace and stabilityI," he said.
In an effort to reassure foreign governments that he will not take reckless actions, Mr. Chen has promised to retain the current defense minister, top national security officials and the military chief of staff.
Mr. Chen, like 85 percent of the island's population and many supporters of his political party, is considered an ethnic Taiwanese, descended from people who immigrated from the mainland centuries ago.
Mr. Chen became involved in opposition as a defense lawyer for dissidents who favored democracy and independence. 
After martial law was lifted in 1987, he entered politics, he joined the Democratic Progressives who became the main opposition party. 
For many of the party's supporters, the victory tonight is an emotional culmination of decades of struggle.
The Nationalists, for their part, have been thrown into turmoil and their powerful chairman, President Lee, is now on the spot. 
Mr. Lee's feud with Mr. Soong helped cause the devastating defeat and the party could suffer a permanent split if the popular Mr. Soong tries to form his own party now, as he signaled tonight he would.
Already tonight, Huang Quen-huei, the secretary general of the Nationalists, offered his resignation.
Late tonight, a large crowd of Mr. Soong's supporters, most of then longtime Nationalists who felt Mr. Lee had betrayed the party by snubbing Mr. Soong, marched to Mr. Lee's official residence and his party's headquarters in central Taipei to shout for Mr. Lee to step down as party boss. 
Both buildings were surrounded by riot policemen and there were some scuffles.
Mr. Chen has called for disclosure of the Nationalists' multibillion-dollar investments and confiscation of any properties that should belong to the state rather than the party.
But Mr. Chen also said tonight that he bore no animosity toward his campaign opponents and that he hoped to work with the Nationalists to build a "cross-party alliance," though he did not offer specifics.
His ability to forge a coalition will be crucial to his success.
"Chen Shui-bian's immediate challenge is that he has to act as a president, not just a leader of an opposition movement," said Chu Yun-han, a political scientist at National Taiwan University. 
"Nearly two-thirds of the electorate didn't vote for him, and many are deeply suspicious of his approach to the mainland."
The defeated Nationalist candidate, Mr. Lien, had used scare tactics in the final weeks of the campaign, suggesting that Mr. Chen could bring disaster to the island.
Tonight he was more gracious in conceding, calling the transition a milestone for Taiwan's democracy. 
"I hope the new president will handle state matters properly, leading our country into a new era," he said before a crestfallen line of party leaders. 
"We can still regroup. 
From today we need to engage in self-examination and reform."
Mr. Lee remained silent and secluded in his residence, where he summoned the military chief of staff and the defense minister. 
There have been reports here of Chinese troop movements on the mainland, although no one expects imminent military action.
Mr. Chen's victory reflected, in part, a demographic trend that bodes ill for the Nationalists and also for China's hope of peaceful reunification: many younger people have no allegiance to the Nationalist Party their parents long served, and think of China as a distant concept.
Since the first presidential election in 1996, more than one million young people became eligible to vote, Mr. Chu noted. 
And fully half of them said in recent surveys that they were voting for Mr. Chen, who is seen as representing youthful energy and cleaned-up politics.
China's military threats do not intimidate such people. 
A typical example is Yang Jie-lung, a 27-year-old graphic designer. 
Approached this morning as he left the polling booth, he would not discuss his preferences until his mother, a lifelong Nationalist, was out of earshot.
"I hope Chen Shui-bian can win," he said. 
"He's the best one to clean up the problems left by the Nationalists, and as mayor he did a pretty good job."
As for the mainland's dark warnings, he said: "We are not obliged to take any advice from China. 
We are electing our own president."
Even in Mr. Lee's hometown of Sanchi, northwest of Taipei, voters rebuffed the president's plea to keep the Nationalists in power.
"Why should I listen to Lee Teng-hui?" asked Pan Yue-ching, 38, a homemaker. 
"I have my own opinions."
The voters also appeared mainly unimpressed with the threats from China. 
"It's always the same between these two countries," said Lee Fung-lin, also 38 and an unemployed restaurant worker. 
"They just shout at each other."
