
People here who know Taiwan's president-elect, Chen Shui-bian, often describe him as remote and impersonal. 
In interviews, the 49-year-old politician comes across as almost robotic, reciting policy positions with a blank gaze and a frozen smile.
Yet for many Taiwanese, not least those who swept him to victory today and ended more than 50 years of rule by the Nationalist Party, Mr. Chen's public image was fixed by a supremely personal tragedy.
When Mr. Chen was greeting supporters at a rally in 1985 after losing a county election, his wife, Wu Shu-jen, was hit by a truck. 
His supporters say the accident, which left Ms. Wu paralyzed from the chest down, was politically motivated. 
Evidence for that is sketchy, but it cemented Mr. Chen's reputation as a man who paid a high price for his beliefs.
"There are two sides to the Taiwanese spirit: the fighter, and those who want to maintain the good life," said Paul S. P. Hsu, a lawyer here. 
"Chen Shui-bian is a fighter."
Mr. Chen's grim determination has fueled a political career of vertiginous highs and pitiful lows. 
And it has now made him Taiwan's first leader from outside the long-ruling Nationalist Party.
Mr. Chen's Democratic Progressive Party formally favors an independent Taiwan -- a position dangerously at odds with that of China. 
Mr. Chen has said he will not declare independence, though it is far from certain that this will mollify the leaders in Beijing, who view Taiwan as a renegade province.
Born on Feb. 
18, 1951, in a farming village in southwestern Taiwan, Mr. Chen is the son of illiterate parents who worked as day laborers. 
Life for the Chen family was bleak. 
They lived in a mud house with little furniture and the constant fear of destitution. 
At school, the young Mr. Chen often went without lunch.
But he was an extraordinarily diligent student, and education became his ticket out of deprivation. 
He graduated from primary school first in the country. 
In 1969, he enrolled in National Taiwan University, where he studied law and graduated with yet more accolades in 1975.
In those days, Taiwan was still firmly under the grip of the Nationalists -- followers of Chiang Kai-shek who fled China after the Communist takeover in 1949 and established a government in exile on the island. 
Chiang dreamed that Taiwan would reunify with the mainland, and he brooked no dissent. 
Yet there were already stirrings of an opposition movement, which advocated independence for Taiwan. 
That movement would later became the Democratic Progressive Party.
As an ambitious young lawyer in the 1970's, Mr. Chen initially had scant interest in politics. 
He joined a prestigious maritime law firm and married Ms. Wu, the daughter of a wealthy doctor, in 1976.
Mr. Chen entered politics by accident in 1980. 
He was asked to defend two pro-independence leaders who had been charged with sedition, after a protest in the port city of Kaohsiung. 
Among the other defendants was Annette Lu, a lawyer trained in the United States, who was Mr. Chen's running mate in this campaign and will become Taiwan's first female vice president.
To nobody's surprise, in an island firmly controlled by the ruling Nationalists, Mr. Chen lost the case. 
But his political senses were piqued.
"I realized this experience was not just a legal issue," he said in an official biography published in 1998. 
"I came to accept the defendants' political arguments and ideals. 
I became a believer. 
We should have two separate countries across the Taiwan -- one country on each side of the straits."
That belief was to become both the root of Mr. Chen's appeal and a cudgel in the hands of his political enemies. 
Supporters, particularly native Taiwanese, flocked to Mr. Chen. But the Nationalists, and more recently the Chinese government, portrayed the studious lawyer as a wild-eyed zealot who was intent on dragging Taiwan into a dangerous and futile split from its Chinese motherland.
Mr. Chen began his political career with a successful bid for the Taipei City Council, where he acquired a reputation as a crusader. 
But his fortunes soon reversed. 
He lost the race in his native Tainan County, and his wife was injured. 
Worse, in 1986, he was jailed for eight months after losing a libel case filed by a Nationalist official, whom he had accused of plagiarizing a doctoral thesis.
Mr. Chen's release from prison in 1987 coincided with the Nationalist government's decision to suspend martial law and legalize political parties. 
Mr. Chen joined the Democratic Progressive Party, where his keen intellect and indefatigable work habits made him a star.
In 1994, he was elected mayor of Taipei, and swept into the city like an avenging angel, shutting down its sex trade and evicting apartment dwellers to build public parks. 
After a stormy term, during which he managed to make enemies and alienate friends, he was turned out of office.
Political analysts said the defeat matured Mr. Chen, forcing him to shed his dogmatism. 
Never the zealot that his opponents claimed, he has now become a master of political nuance. 
He recognizes that very few Taiwanese are willing to risk their material well-being on a lunge for independence. 
"You can see that he has basically abandoned the idea of a Republic of Taiwan," Mr. Hsu said.
Indeed, the verbal traps that Mr. Chen must avoid in discussing Taiwan and China may be one reason he is so programmed. 
In an interview last week, he noted that he was the only candidate with a son who would be drafted if Taiwan were invaded by China, he said, "As a father, I understand the fear of parents who don't want to put their children into danger."
