
A White House official and a leading fund-raiser for the Democratic National Committee helped devise a strategy to raise an unprecedented $7 million from Asian-Americans partly by offering rewards to the largest donors, including special access to the White House, the committee's records show.
The strategy is laid out in a "National Asian Pacific American Campaign Plan," which was among 3,000 pages of the committee's records made public over the last week. 
Those records, drawn largely from the files of John Huang, the committee's chief fund-raiser in Asian-American communities, suggest that the party's goal of raising the $7 million helped create a high-pressure atmosphere that led to at least $1.2 million in improper donations.
The records, and interviews with donors, show that Mr. Huang told potential contributors that the time was ripe for them to win the political clout that had eluded Asian-Americans for a century. 
Political contributions were the path to power, he told them. 
Writing big checks would open doors for this generation and the next.
In many instances, Mr. Huang meant that quite literally. 
His files -- including business cards, campaign memorandums and canceled checks from contributors -- leave little doubt that the quid pro quo for large donations was in many cases a face-to-face meeting with the President.
Mr. Huang and Doris Matsui, a deputy assistant to President Clinton and the wife of Representative Robert T. Matsui, a California Democrat, helped create the fund-raising strategy, the records show. 
As part of that strategy, members of the Asian Pacific American Leadership Council -- a title conferred on people who gave at least $10,000 and companies that gave at least $15,000 to the Democratic committee -- were to receive an invitation to the White House.
The plan was to "reward Apalc members by inviting them to special White House or other events" with Mr. Clinton and to "solicit input" from them, the records show. 
Responsibility for orchestrating that reward fell to the White House, the Clinton-Gore campaign and the Democratic committee.
Those meetings often featured discussions of Mr. Clinton's policies toward Asian nations, especially China, though no evidence has surfaced suggesting that the donors won changes in policy. 
Instead, the Democratic Party capitalized on decisions the President had already made -- to extend China's preferential trading rights, to come to Taiwan's defense, to seek changes to the immigration and naturalization laws -- to lure Asian-American donors.
The Justice Department is examining the legality of the donations solicited by Mr. Huang. They are also being scrutinized by a Congressional panel that asked the Democratic National Committee to make the documents available last week. 
Although Amy Weiss Tobe, a committee spokeswoman, declined to comment on the strategy plan, Lanny J. Davis, the White House special counsel, said, "We will review this document and have a reaction to it, if appropriate, in the next several days."
As the pressure to raise money intensified this spring to pay for television commercials and other campaign expenses, Mr. Huang, who joined the Democratic committee in December 1995 after a stint as a mid-level Commerce Department official, veered into forbidden territory.
He took donations improperly from foreign corporations and from people who were neither American citizens nor foreign citizens living legally in the United States. 
And when Mr. Huang's fund-raising efforts went wrong, they usually went wrong with very large checks.
In some cases, those checks were drafted on the same day that a meeting was set up with Mr. Clinton. In one case, $250,000 bought a brief meeting at the Sheraton Carlton Hotel here between Mr. Clinton and a South Korean entrepreneur who had vague plans to build an electronics plant in Carson, Calif.
The entrepreneur spoke no English. 
Rather than labor through an uncomfortable conversation, he had his picture taken with the President and then left the dinner, eating instead with his entourage at a nearby Chinese restaurant.
In another case, Mr. Clinton's meeting with three business executives from the C.P. 
Group, a huge Thai conglomerate with interests in China and elsewhere in Asia, came within days of $185,000 in contributions from a Thai-American businesswoman, Pauline Kanchanalak. 
The Democratic committee later returned those donations, saying the money might not have come directly from Ms. Kanchanalak, as required by campaign law. 
The committee has offered a vague explanation, saying the money may have been given by a relative of hers.
And there are hundreds of thousands of dollars in checks from Arief and Soraya Wiriadinata, an Indonesian couple who appear on seating charts at a private dinner with Vice President Al Gore along with Mr. Huang and Charlie Yah Lin Trie, an Arkansas restaurateur and self-styled Asian trade adviser who delivered $639,000 in improper contributions to the President's legal defense fund this year. 
Those contributions have also been returned.
In March, Mr. Trie arranged for one of China's top weapons dealers to attend a private briefing with Mr. Clinton. Mr. Clinton now says he did not know who the Chinese official was, and says his attendance at the small briefing was "inappropriate."
In total, at least $1.2 million of the $3.4 million Mr. Huang raised came from questionable sources and has been returned. 
That money has become the greatest sum of campaign cash to come under Federal investigation since President Richard M. Nixon's 1972 re-election drive.
The Asian-American fund-raising effort was conceived by the Democratic committee and coordinated with the White House and the Clinton-Gore campaign, the records show. 
It was driven by a single stark statistic: Mr. Clinton received only 31 percent of the Asian-American vote in 1992 while President George Bush won 55 percent. 
Campaign money had flowed accordingly.
To reverse that situation, Mr. Huang joined the Democratic committee in December 1995 and served on the committee's Asian Pacific American Working Group.
The group, formed in February, included Ms. Matsui, the highest-ranking Asian-American in the White House; Maria Haley, director of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, who played a role in helping Mr. Huang obtain his job as a Commerce Department official in 1994; Ginger Lew, general counsel to the Commerce Department, and several staff members of the Democratic National Committee.
Its goal was to "coordinate all White House, Democratic National Committee and Clinton/Gore 1996 activities for the Asian Pacific American community," with an emphasis on fund raising, a strategy paper in the committee's records show. 
"Legal constraints" required the committee to raise the money, but the White House would help with the politics, said the paper, drafted in March and completed in April.
Mr. Huang had already organized "the largest Asian Pacific American fund-raising event in D.N.C. history," garnering more than $1 million at a Feb. 
19 dinner with Mr. Clinton and a Feb. 
20 breakfast with Mr. Gore, the paper said. 
But the goal, it said, was $7 million. 
And the pressure to reach that goal led to the string of questionable donations.
In March, Mr. Huang was approached by the Mayor of Carson, Calif., who also was a consultant for Japanese, Korean and Chinese enterprises. 
The Mayor, Michael I. Mitoma, had a client who wanted to meet the President. 
Mr. Huang solicited a $250,000 donation -- since returned -- from the client, called Cheong Am America, Inc., the Los Angeles subsidiary of a little-known South Korean company.
The donation was illegal. 
Cheong Am had no revenues in the United States, meaning that the funds in the April 8 check, a copy of which was in Mr. Huang's files, were funneled to the Democratic National Committee from abroad.
Handwritten notes in Mr. Huang's files strongly suggest that the Democrats could have known Cheong Am had no business activities in the United States. 
A flow chart of the Cheong Am Business Group, also in the files, shows no American subsidiary.
The company's chairman, a South Korean known as John Lee, had convinced Mr. Mitoma that his company might spend $150 million to build a giant outdoor television-screen factory in the city. 
But he wanted to talk to the President about it.
"Is it possible to have Lee meet Clinton privately for 30 minutes in Korea when he visits instead of the private meeting in Washington?"
Mayor Mitoma asked in a fax to Mr. Huang a week before the dinner. 
"If possible let me know how what kind of fund raising would be appropriate. 
How should the donation check be made payable?"
In a telephone conversation, Mr. Mitoma said Mr. Lee had wanted to buy every seat at the dinner, at a cost of $500,000. 
But the Democratic committee would not let him.
So, he said, Mr. Clinton "just smiled, stood for a picture and said 'adios' " to Mr. Lee. "I would have been livid, if it had been my money," Mr. Mitoma said. 
But Mr. Lee, he said, "went away happy."
After Mr. Clinton's brief meeting with Mr. Lee at the Sheraton Carlton Hotel in Washington, Mayor Mitoma wrote the President suggesting more meetings when he visited South Korea later that month. 
He asked to introduce the President to "Chairman Chong who heads the largest industrial group in Korea," misspelling the group's name as Hundai.
He appeared to be referring to the honorary chairman of the Hyundai Group, Chung Ju Yung, who unsuccessfully ran for President of South Korea in 1992 and was subsequently convicted of diverting $62 million of the company's funds to his campaign. 
His company was convicted earlier this year of bribing former South Korean leaders.
The meeting never took place. 
A handwritten notation to Mr. Huang from another Democratic committee official, who signed the note only as "D," says: "President Clinton cannot see these folks in Korea. 
This is important."
There is no question that Mr. Huang's legal fund raising struck a chord with many Asian-Americans who felt that they had long been excluded by the political and policy-making process. 
Chi Wang, a Library of Congress employee, said he had been persuaded by Mr. Huang to buy $25,000 worth of tickets to a Clinton fund-raising party.
"I've lived in Washington a long time, 40 years," Mr. Wang said in an interview. 
"Nobody had ever asked me for a large contribution. 
Huang said Asian-Americans don't get involved in American policy. 
And he tried to tell me that I should participate."
In any case, the Asian-American vote, which was 1 percent of the total Presidential balloting, gave Mr. Clinton 43 percent, Bob Dole 48 percent and Ross Perot 8 percent. 
Yet the controversy has also angered some of the Asian-Americans whom Mr. Huang said he wanted to escort to political power.
"Now everybody asks us questions," said Richard Yeh, an executive of Kang Long Agriculture in South El Monte, Calif., whose company gave a legal donation of $12,500 at Mr. Huang's behest. 
"I think that no one now will want to donate when they are asked next time."
Correction
An article on Dec. 
28 and an editorial on Dec. 
31 about questions raised by contributions to the Democratic National Committee and President Clinton's legal defense fund misstated the citizenship of Pauline Kanchanalak, a businesswoman and political contributor. 
She is a citizen of Thailand and a legal resident of the United States; she is not a Thai-American.
An article on Dec. 
28, 1996, described a Democratic National Committee report about that year's election campaign financing. 
The report, written in April 1996 and later turned over to a Congressional committee investigating campaign finance, referred to the role of Doris Matsui, then a White House aide. 
Ms. Matsui served as chairwoman of a private group that drafted a plan to enlist Asian-Americans in supporting President Clinton's re-election.
The Democratic National Committee document asserted that Ms. Matsui's group set a fund-raising goal for Asian-Americans. 
But later investigations by Congress and the Justice Department into White House and committee fund-raising unearthed no evidence that her group played any role in fund-raising or that she ever engaged in improper conduct. 
Ms. Matsui, who left the White House in December 1998 and is now working for a private law firm in Washington, asked The Times to bring its account up to date in fairness to her.
Correction-Date: January 8, 1997, WednesdayMarch 22, 1999, Monday
