
Despite a conflict with China over pirated American computer software, movies and music, President Clinton called today for unconditional renewal of preferential trade status for China, saying the step would be "a vote for America's interests" and "not a referendum on all China's policies."
Mr. Clinton's speech began a full-scale Administration lobbying effort to win Congressional approval for the extension of most-favored-nation trade status for China, even though tensions linger over major issues like nuclear proliferation and human rights abuses as well as trade.
The President's address to the Pacific Basin Economic Council also came close to being a point-by-point response to a withering election-year attack by Bob Dole, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, on Mr. Clinton earlier this month for "weakness, indecision, double talk and incoherence" in foreign policy, especially toward the Pacific Basin.
Reviewing his Asia policy, Mr. Clinton emphasized the "firmness and steadiness" with which his Administration secured the shutdown of reactors producing weapons-grade plutonium in North Korea. 
He said the United States must also be "steady and firm" in pushing for a stable, open and prosperous China.
And while Mr. Dole had cited a merchandise trade deficit with Japan last year of $60 billion, higher than when Mr. Clinton took office, the President today countered with his own trade statistics. 
He said that the trade deficit with Japan was down 25 percent from last year.
Four years ago as a candidate, Mr. Clinton denounced President George Bush for his position that engaging China rather than threatening it with trade sanctions was the best way to promote human rights and protect America's interest in Asia. 
But once in office, Mr. Clinton came around to a similar policy of engagement.
Last week, after months of warnings regarding the violations of an agreement protecting intellectual property rights -- which include pirating of software, videotapes and music -- the Administration published a list of $3 billion of goods exported from China to the United States annually that could be subject to the largest trade sanctions ever imposed by Washington.
But Mr. Clinton has long made clear his intentions to push to continue the trade benefits, and his action today was expected. 
His speech displayed the kinds of arguments he will be making during the next few months as Congress weighs whether to vote to revoke China's trade benefits and force Mr. Clinton to exercise a veto. 
Although the President almost certainly would defeat an override attempt, the battle would make him look weaker on the world stage.
[On Tuesday, a Vice Premier of China, Li Lanqing, welcomed Mr. Clinton's effort to renew the trade status but warned Washington not to impose sanctions over trade disputes, Reuters reported.
["This, of course, is good news," Mr. Li told a seminar in Beijing. 
"I feel that it is harmful to long-term Chinese-U.S. economic and trade cooperation for China and the United States to argue about this problem each year. 
It will create psychological instability on both sides and will have no good results."
[Referring to looming tit-for-tat sanctions announced by Beijing and Washington in the dispute over copyright piracy, Mr. Li said: "I don't know who will be imposing sanctions on whom or who will be containing whom. 
I feel that this is inappropriate. 
We are not willing to see a trade war."]
Mr. Clinton noted today that China is Asia's only "declared nuclear weapons state" and has the world's largest standing army. 
In less than two decades, he said, it could be the world's largest economy.
Faced with such an economic and military behemoth, he argued, it would not be in America's interest to drive China toward isolation by denying the "most favored" trade status that is given routinely to most trading partners in the world and allows China to export its products to the United States at the lowest possible tariffs. 
The sanctions for violating the piracy agreement amount to only a small fraction of China's total imports to the United States.
Revoking the status, Mr. Clinton said, "would drive us back into a period of mutual isolation and recrimination that would harm America's interests, not advance them."
"Rather than strengthening China's respect for human rights," Mr. Clinton said, "it would lessen our contact with the Chinese people. 
Rather than limiting the spread of weapons of mass destruction, it would limit the prospect for future cooperation in this area. 
Rather than bringing stabilityI to the region, it would increase instability as the leaders of Hong Kong, Taiwan and all of the nations of the region have stated repeatedly."
Mr. Dole earlier this month spurned the conservative wing of his own party and said he too backed the current status for China, though he sharply criticized Mr. Clinton's overall policy toward Asia.
"President Clinton's long silence and his history of zigzags on China has put extension of M.F.N. in serious doubt this year," Mr. Dole said today in a statement. 
"The President still needs to articulate a coherent policy toward China and how M.F.N. extension fits into that policy."
Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr. Dole's erstwhile competitor for the Republican nomination, called Mr. Clinton's move to renew China's trading privileges "an act of economic, moral and military appeasement."
He added: "For the Republican Party this will be a defining moment: Do we stand with Bill Clinton or do we stand by the values that made us a Congressional majority. 
Do we love trade more than we loathe tyranny?"
Administration officials said Mr. Clinton would formally notify Congress of his decision to extend the trade preferences on June 3, starting the time-clock for action. 
Beginning a month later, on July 3, the House and Senate have 60 days in which they could vote to revoke China's benefits.
Republicans say that there has been rising frustration on Capitol Hill with what is seen as Administration leniency toward China as well as with Beijing's conduct on several issues ranging across the areas of trade, human rights, diplomacy and arms control. 
The White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, today also acknowledged a tough fight ahead and said that is why Mr. Clinton announced his decision early.
"We are worried enough that we are not taking anything for granted," Mr. McCurry said. 
A variety of Administration officials were to be deployed to begin making the Administration's case, with Defense Secretary William J. Perry, for example, scheduled to make an address concerning China on Wednesday.
Officials predict that the House will vote against trade preferences or make the benefits conditional because of liberal and conservative concerns alike about China's human rights record and failure to live up to international accords.
Mr. Clinton has stronger support in the more moderate Senate. 
But even there, Republicans say, the balance could tilt depending on whether the size of the House vote puts pressure on Democrats to split with the President and stand up for human rights or if the United States and China are in the midst of a trade war over intellectual property.
