
Despite the American labor movement's loss in the bruising battle over the China trade bill, supporters and opponents of the movement say that after years of decline, labor has once again become a powerful political force.
Unions provided important political muscle that helped Vice President Al Gore locked up the Democratic presidential nomination, and they are certain to be a major force for the Democratic Party in the fall.
After many people wrote off labor as an irrelevant, toothless dinosaur, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has displayed considerable muscle on Capitol Hill. 
Labor has blocked legislation to grant the president fast-track authority to negotiate trade agreements and has helped push through a higher minimum wage and the Family and Medical Leave Act.
In other signs of labor's strength, white-collar workers, including doctors and psychologists, are flocking into unions as never before, and labor registered its biggest organizing victory in 60 years by unionizing 74,000 Los Angeles home-care workers last year.
Much of this rebound has been engineered by John J. Sweeney, who was elected president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. four and a half years ago on a platform of reviving labor after its membership and influence had slipped steadily for two decades. 
To rebuild labor, Mr. Sweeney has focused on attracting new members; as the best evidence of a turnaround, he points to last year's 265,000 jump in union membership -- by far the largest rise since the 1970's.
Thomas J. Donohue, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, said it would be foolish for anyone to think that labor was weak because the House of Representatives defied it last week and approved permanent normal trade relations with China.
"Anybody who stands up and says, 'We won this thing by a couple of votes and therefore labor is weak,' they don't know how to count," said Mr. Donohue, who led the corporate fight for the trade bill. 
"Labor has a lot of money. 
Labor has a lot of forces on the ground. 
Anyone who wants to declare them weak, just look out for the next fight."
This year, the 13-million-member A.F.L.-C.I.O. has pledged to assemble its biggest army of campaign volunteers; tens of thousands will distribute literature at workplaces and make millions of get-out-the-vote telephone calls.
The labor federation's endorsement of Vice President Gore gave him much-needed assistance in the Democratic presidential primaries, with union foot soldiers helping him trounce former Senator Bill Bradley in the Iowa caucuses and capture the New Hampshire primary.
Political experts also give labor much of the credit for Democratic victories in 1998, from Gray Davis's election as governor in California, to Charles E. Schumer's triumph over Alfonse M. D'Amato for a New York Senate seat, to the party's surprising success in gaining House seats in the last midterm elections.
"It's like night and day comparing the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s political operations today with those in the 1994 elections," said Charles Cook, who publishes a nonpartisan political report. 
"It's like comparing a Model T with a Ferrari."
But labor has a long way to go to regain the economic might it had in the 1950's. 
Back then, 35 percent of the nation's work force belonged to unions compared with 13.9 percent today. 
The sectors where unions have traditionally been strongest, like steel, automobiles, mining and apparel, have been losing jobs the fastest, while the sectors where unions have the least representation, like technology, finance and fast food, are the fastest-growing fields.
Organized labor is losing about half the elections in which workers vote on whether to unionize largely because many corporations mount aggressive and expensive campaigns that urge workers not to join unions. 
As a result of such corporate tactics, unions now represent fewer than 1 in 10 private-sector workers.
"The labor movement has done very well in the public sector, organizing government employees, but in the private sector, it is still very difficult," said Richard Hurd, a labor relations professor at Cornell University.
Labor also faces other problems: the occasional embarrassing episodes of union corruption, repeated Republican efforts to weaken unions, and internal feuding among union leaders over political strategy and trade issues.
Businesses contribute 15 times as much in campaign money as unions do, and many Democrats still keep their distance, fearful of accusations that they are in Big Labor's pocket. 
And for all their efforts, unions lost the fight they cared about most in the last few years, the China trade bill.
To reinvigorate labor, Mr. Sweeney has advocated more militant tactics, like those used by thousands of striking Los Angeles janitors who repeatedly blocked traffic last month to draw attention to their low wages. 
He has also worked to reduce labor's unwanted reputation as a "special interest" by having it focus more on helping low-wage workers and by forming alliances with religious leaders, environmentalists, immigrant groups and college students protesting overseas sweatshops.
"John Sweeney has a commitment to reach out to those who have been largely bypassed by the labor movement," said the Rev. Howard Hubbard, the Roman Catholic bishop of Albany, who has helped lead efforts to rebuild the clergy's once-strong ties with labor. 
"He's reached out to the forgotten workers -- child-care workers, nurses' aides, janitors, people at the low end of the scale. 
He's made a commitment to show solidarity with the poorest workers."
With union membership falling by nearly a fourth from 1979 to 1995, Mr. Sweeney has made attracting more members his No. 1 priority. 
He often cites studies showing that labor's declining power is a major reason that after-inflation wages have declined for most workers in the last quarter-century.
Mr. Sweeney has used his bully pulpit to urge the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s 68 member unions to hire more organizers and to spend millions of dollars more each year on recruiting. 
Still, in his first three years at the federation's helm, union membership slid by 150,000 as many unionized workers retired or companies closed unionized factories and moved operations overseas.
But Mr. Sweeney's ambitions seemed to pay off last year when the Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that union membership grew by 265,000.
Union leaders say they hope those gains are not a one-time blip, but the start of a long-term upswing, although many labor experts say the jury is still out.
"I think we're starting to turn the corner," Mr. Sweeney said. 
"While we've had significant progress in terms of organizing, we still have to do a lot more. 
We can't rest on modest growth."
His ambitious -- some say unrealistic -- goal is for unions to organize one million new members each year, meaning there could be a net gain of 500,000 members after layoffs and retirements.
But there is a huge obstacle to reaching this goal. 
Only a handful of unions, most notably the Service Employees International Union and the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union, are making an all-out effort to attract more workers. 
Mr. Sweeney said he wished that more unions copied the union he once headed, the Service Employees, which devotes 45 percent of its budget to organizing -- 10 times the percentage of many unions. 
That union recruited 155,000 workers last year, many of them janitors and hospital employees, the most any union has organized in one year since 1918.
"There is still tremendous inertia among certain unions," said Kent Wong, a labor relations professor at the University of California at Los Angeles. 
"The level of activism among some unions has changed dramatically, but many unions are having tremendous difficulties changing."
In an effort to expand union membership, Mr. Sweeney has gotten the labor movement to reverse its long-held position and embrace immigrant workers, rather than oppose their taking jobs. 
In the 1980's unions were convinced that immigrants were driving down wages so labor backed a law that punished employers who hired illegal immigrants.
But this year the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has called for ending such employer sanctions and granting amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants. 
Labor changed direction because it now views immigrants as a natural audience for its message and because it sees many employers taking advantage of illegal immigrants.
One welcome development for labor is the surge in interest shown by white-collar workers. 
With managed care squeezing their incomes and professional freedom, thousands of doctors are joining unions, while in New York State, 3,000 psychologists have unionized. 
Nationwide, 10,000 podiatrists have joined unions and so have more than 20,000 customer service workers at United Airlines and US Airways.
Hundreds of I.B.M. workers showed interest in unionizing last year after their company sought to cut their pensions. 
And even a few dozen workers at Microsoft called for a union because they were angry about being long-term temporary workers, with few benefits, rather than permanent workers.
"In a lot of industries, because of the way things are changing, people realize they need some form of collective voice," Mr. Sweeney said. 
"People are seeing the problems they're confronted with are too big to resolve by themselves."
In the wake of the China trade battle, one of Mr. Sweeney's biggest problems is that many political and business leaders have pegged him as protectionist and anti-trade. 
These critics misunderstand his position, he insists.
Convinced that past trade accords have helped business but not labor, Mr. Sweeney said he told the Clinton administration that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. would oppose any trade agreements that did not protect workers rights. 
So when he learned that the administration's trade deal with China contained no worker protections, he saw no choice but to oppose it.
"I think trade is good for our country," Mr. Sweeney said. 
"It's important to our successful economy. 
We recognize that globalization is here to stay, so the question is how do workers around the world share in the fruits of globalization?"
