
The police have detained the younger brother of a Boston-based poet arrested in Beijing last week, apparently for his involvement in a literary journal that has sometimes published work by Chinese dissidents.
The poet, Bei Ling, a Chinese citizen with an American green card, was taken into custody on Aug. 
12 during a visit to Beijing. 
His younger brother, Huang Feng, 32, a writer who lives in Beijing, was detained Thursday night.
It is unclear exactly what charges are being brought against the two, although Mr. Bei, 40, is being held in criminal detention, which suggests that they could be serious.
It is at least the second time in about a year that a Chinese intellectual with permanent resident status in the United States has been arrested in Beijing. 
Last summer, Song Yongyi of Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa., was arrested in connection with studies of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, a period embarrassing to China's leaders.
An aggressive campaign by American politicians and scholars helped secure Mr. Song's release after six months. 
Similar forces seem to be gathering in Mr. Bei's defense.
At a news conference on Thursday to promote a major cultural exchange, the American envoy, Joseph Prueher, said of Mr. Bei: "We have officially expressed our concern to the Chinese government about him. 
Obviously the issue of freedom of expression is a core point."
Others noted that the Bei case could prove a public relations nightmare for China. 
Within the next three weeks both President Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, the head of Parliament, will be at the United Nations. 
Also, as part of the announced cultural exchange, a Chinese exhibit will tour American cities.
"It will cause a great deal of embarrassment to a useful cultural effort if they continue to hold him this way," said Jerome Cohen, a New York lawyer who helped secure Mr. Song's release. 
"They will not want to have demonstrators protesting outside the Javits Center."
At the time of Mr. Bei's arrest, the police confiscated hundreds of copies of Tendency, the quarterly journal he edits. 
Published in the United States, Tendency is not legally available in China.
All magazines there must have a government sponsor that formally takes responsibility for their content. 
Foreign magazines like Mr. Bei's, which combines work by Western and Chinese authors, must have permits for import, although many circulate in intellectual circles and essays published overseas are often available on the Chinese Internet.
It was unclear what level of the bureaucracy initiated the brothers' arrests and whether they were meant as a larger signal.
"Sometimes when we look into cases it's not a government plan, but the action of a small entity," Mr. Prueher said at the news conference.
