
In Ding Yaohong's tiny sitting room, mud walls are etched with deep cracks and two tattered chairs vie for space with roosting chickens, signs of this remote region's desperate poverty. 
But the new centerpiece of the room, displacing a small, rotting table, is the valuable fossilized spine of an ancient spade-toothed elephant that Mr. Ding recently unearthed -- portending a more prosperous future.
For years, the farmers here struggled to coax wheat and corn to grow on these arid, rocky hills, but the land gave little in return. 
"Plant a handful of seed and you get a handful of crops," a local saying goes.
But recently this barren, brown wasteland has yielded a lucrative new crop that stands to repay the village for its generations of suffering: a cache of nearly intact 15 million-year-old fossils, which the villagers plan to sell.
"We've been digging for fossils for more than 10 years, but this is the first time we've hit upon anything like this," Mr. Ding said.
His home is now littered with valuable specimens excavated in the last two months, including ancient crocodiles, rhinos and pigs. 
"When the experts come to buy, I hope it will be a very good harvest," he said.
As China has moved toward a market economy, peasants all over rural China have had to devise ways to buy goods and services that were once provided for free by the state, like education and medicine. 
Where land is good they farm. 
Near cities, they turn to migrant labor.
But Dingjiaergou, whose residents belong to China's Hui Muslim minority (and are mostly surnamed Ding), is 15 miles from the nearest paved road. 
The village is in a county with a per capita income of less than $100 a year, in one of China's poorest areas, the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. 
Villagers got electricity several years ago, but houses still lack running water, phones and heat, even though winter temperatures drop well below zero.
So peasants here have turned to large-scale fossil excavation to make ends meet -- a unique if dangerous (and probably illegal) sideline.
When not tending their crops, the men of Dingjiaergou can often be found tunneling like groundhogs 10 feet under the region's hills, in the hopes of finding ancient bones.
Two months ago Mr. Ding and 17 other villagers hit gold burrowing their way into the underground cache. 
Now, the three-room mud-brick house he shares with his wife and three children resembles a museum storeroom, with the spine in the sitting room, piles of skulls in the bedroom, and the huge-tusked skull of a spade-toothed elephant blocking access to the family kang, a traditional brick bed built over an oven to provide winter warmth.
Scientists have long known that this arid land in Tongxin County was once a richly forested terrain, filled with lakes and rivers, said Ye Jie, deputy director of the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.
In the 1960's and 70's some farmers picked up spare cash by digging up and selling "dragon bones" -- fossil shards used to make traditional medicines for treating stomach troubles and scars. 
In the next two decades, Chinese scientists occasionally made research expeditions to this remote region, cataloguing its past.
But farmers here say they only recently realized that there was big money in excavations, and began carving out their peculiar niche in China's emerging market economy.
"In the beginning we didn't know how valuable this stuff was," said Ding Yuzhu, a grizzled 50-year-old in a Mao jacket and white skullcap who is the younger Mr. Ding's nephew.
He said that in the last few years, Chinese scientists as well as foreign experts had come to view -- and buy -- their wares. 
"Now we have discovered we could do this to make a living," he said.
Ding Yaohong, a burly man of 38, said that even before the major discovery this spring, most of his income in recent years had come from fossils. 
He makes about $35 a year from growing wheat and corn -- and $125 a month selling the smaller fossils and bone shards he unearthed in the past.
With this year's jackpot, his second income stands to increase many times. 
He and his partners say they will price the elephant skull alone at $4,000 to $6,000. 
Mr. Ding says they plan to sell the fossils to the Natural History Museum in Beijing, but experts predict that many will end up on a lucrative black market.
Neither farmers nor local officials seem terribly perturbed that their digging might be illegal. 
"In fact we don't have much choice," the older Mr. Ding said, "since our land is so poor we would starve otherwise."
The officials have done little to intervene, noting that the region's government does not have the money for proper excavation anyhow.
Still, many scientists are concerned that these amateur fossil hunters may be destroying valuable scientific evidence with their rudimentary picks and shovels.
"Most scientists are opposed to this unscientific digging, even though it has been a convenient way to get specimens," said Mr. Ye of the Academy of Sciences. 
"The peasants' goal is to sell fossils -- not to gather related scientific information -- so things are lost. 
And because of their limited knowledge they often damage valuable things which they think of as unimportant."
To get to the fossils, groups of villagers first dig a hole down several yards into the earth, and then often tunnel laterally hundreds of yards.
This spring, the 18-man team from Dingjiaergou tunneled 500 yards before they found fossils, which Mr. Ding said could be distinguished from the surrounding rocks by their color and also their unique taste.
"We found so many things there," he said, "but it was hard since the tunnel was only 1.5 yards high -- you couldn't stand up and only one person could go in at a time."
Each fossil had to be dragged out of the narrow tunnel using ropes. 
And scientists complain that the villagers inevitably chop up large specimens to get them up through their maze, destroying evidence in the process.
It is a dangerous after-hours job that has killed two men from Dingjiaergou in the last 10 years. 
Since there are no trees in this desertlike region to provide beams to reinforce the tunnels, they are prone to collapse.
"This is our first big find after years of looking," the elder Mr. Ding said, "and two people have died doing it. 
That's why the bones are so expensive."
The villagers say that over the last few years, visiting experts have taught them how to handle the fossils more carefully and brought scientific charts that help them identify bones from ancient mammals.
But some of the fossils remain inscrutable to the peasants.
"What's that?" a visitor asked, pointing to a pear-shaped 15-inch skull on the dirt floor, with dull yellow teeth protruding at odd angles.
"Oh that, that's some kind of monster," the elder Mr. Ding said with assurance.
