
Researchers have unearthed what could be the smallest fossil ever of an adult dinosaur: a crow-size creature that could help prove the theory that birds evolved from little dinosaurs.
The 125-million-year-old dinosaur, Microraptor zhaoianus, appeared to have feathers and to perch in trees, the researchers said. 
There is no evidence, however, that it flew.
It lived about 20 million years after the first known bird, Archaeopteryx. 
The researchers, from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, suggested that the two creatures had a common ancestor. 
They reported their findings today in the journal Nature.
Like the hulking Tyrannosaurus rex, little Microraptor belongs to a group of dinosaurs known as theropods, meat eaters that walked on two legs. 
Many paleontologists believe birds evolved from theropod dinosaurs. 
But previous theropod fossils are bigger than typical birds, weakening the theory.
Xing Xu, a paleontologist who led the research, said the newly discovered creature "eliminates the size disparity."
Small size is viewed as necessary for flight in birds.
The new fossil, which stretches about 15 inches from head to tail, came from a rich fossil field in the Liaoning region of northeastern China. 
It shows some birdlike characteristics in its teeth and bones, including an extended toe that may have been used to grasp tree limbs, the researchers said.
Some researchers expressed skepticism about the find, saying was hard to tell whether the fossil really represented a full-grown adult.
They said its feet in some ways resemble those of Archaeopteryx and Confuciusornis, another early bird. 
But some aspects of its skeleton, the arrangement of its teeth and its long tail are clearly those of a dinosaur, like the birdlike, 3-foot-long Bambiraptor reported earlier this year, researchers said.
They said the new fossil may ultimately help prove the theory that flight evolved in tree dwellers, rather than in ground animals.
David Burnham a paleontologist at the University of Kansas, said Microraptor fleshed out the dinosaurs-to-birds theory because it was a birdlike dinosaur that was "getting closer in size and age" to the first birds.
