
The eminent industrialist made his prediction with confidence: If the opposition party's candidate wins the presidency next month, the Taiwan stock market will crash, no question about it, because investors fearing hostilities with China will yank out their money.
The speaker, in an interview today, was C. Y. Kao -- chairman of the National Federation of Industries, chief executive of the giant Uni-President Group conglomerate and, not coincidentally, a leader of the Nationalist Party, which has governed Taiwan for half a century and now faces possible defeat.
Mr. Kao's warning of economic catastrophe, if extreme, was one of many dire predictions by political opponents who say the election of Chen Shui-bian on March 18 would cause dangerous tensions, and perhaps war, with China.
Speculation about China's view of Mr. Chen intensified after China warned in a report this week that any step toward formal independence, or even an indefinite delay in negotiations toward reunification, could lead to a military attack.
The report did not directly discuss Mr. Chen or the Democratic Progressive Party. 
But from its founding in the 1980's, the party has called for Taiwan's formal independence -- which China calls a cause for war. 
Recently the party has moderated that stance.
The warnings about China's possible reaction and the questions about the sincerity of his pullback from outright independence are a source of endless exasperation for Mr. Chen. In truth, he argued in an interview today, perhaps only his party can -- in the manner of President Richard M. Nixon, a fervent anti-Communist who achieved a historic opening to China -- reach a lasting accord with the mainland.
"I'm a peacemaker, not a troublemaker," he insisted, his voice croaking from incessant campaigning.
His basic position, and his rationale for backing away from his original, harder line, is that since Taiwan is already an independent state in practice, there is no need to codify it.
In practice, that leaves his policy little different from that of the governing party of President Lee Teng-hui, although the Nationalists still pay lip service to a distant goal of unifying in some way with the mainland they fled after their defeat to the Communists in 1949.
Though dogged by charges that he would provoke a crisis, Mr. Chen has a good chance of winning in the race against Lien Chan of the Nationalist Party and James Soong, a longtime Nationalist who is running independently and hence dividing the party's traditionally large vote.
In his doomsday prediction today, Mr. Kao, the Nationalist and industry chief, was remarkably specific: Right after Mr. Chen's election, he said, the stock market would plummet to one-third of its current level.
"Many people will wire part of their money out of Taiwan just to play it safe," Mr. Kao said, charging that Mr. Chen, 49, and his colleagues are too young and inexperienced to guide Taiwan safely. 
And who can be sure, he and other critics ask, that once in office they will not let their true pro-independence colors show?
Told of the dire prediction, Mr. Chen smiled and recalled that his opponents made similar efforts to "terrorize people" in 1994 when he was elected mayor of Taipei.
"The day after I won, the stock market actually rose by hundreds of points," he said. 
Mr. Chen then listed, as he often has done in speeches and interviews and meetings with foreign diplomats, the new policies he and his party have adopted to avoid trouble with China.
If elected, he said, he would not try to write Taiwan's sovereign status as a "state" into the Constitution. 
He would not, as his party once promised, call a referendum on Taiwan's future or to change its official name from Republic of China to Republic of Taiwan. 
Only if Taiwan is attacked, he said, would he ask the public to consider such changes.
And as a first step toward smoother relations with the mainland, Mr. Chen said, he will -- subject to national security concerns -- ease the current government's restrictions on direct shipping, transportation and communications across the straits, and on large-scale investment projects in the mainland.
Mr. Kao made it clear today that he has never been happy about his own Nationalist Party's restrictive policy. 
"We just want to pursue trade and investment," he said of Taiwan's businessmen. 
"We hope politics won't have any impact."
This evening, the powerful industry association he heads announced that Mr. Kao will travel to Beijing soon after the March elections to discuss improving economic ties. 
He is certain to be feted by senior Chinese leaders.
As for Mr. Chen, even with his economic olive branch, he and his party may be a hard sell in Beijing. 
China may prefer almost anyone to President Lee, who has riled them by bluntly asserting that Taiwan is sovereign and equal and that the two sides should talk on a "state to state" basis.
Some finessing of concepts may be needed for China to agree to talk on those terms. 
But, realistically or not, Mr. Chen says he sees a chance to overcome deeply rooted enmities.
"The recent cross-straits tensions originate in the historical hatred between the Nationalist Party and the Chinese Communist Party," he said. 
"They can only be ended by a party without that burden."
