
In the first indication that Washington's dealing with China could become a major campaign-year argument in Congress, Senator Bob Dole appeared to back away today from years of support for extending broad trade privileges to Beijing, saying he had not decided whether to oppose the Clinton Administration's efforts to renew those trade rights this spring.
Mr. Dole has been under sharp pressure from the right wing of his party to abandon the traditional Republican position that the best way to influence China's behavior is to engage it economically. 
But as recently as a few days ago, when he canceled a major speech on his policy toward China, his advisers insisted that he was still firmly in favor of "most-favored nation" status for China, on which billions of dollars of trade with American companies -- and perhaps the economic futures of Hong Kong and Taiwan -- depend.
Today, however, Mr. Dole wavered. 
Emerging from a meeting with former President George Bush, who has just completed a trip to China, Mr. Dole said, "We'll be developing our position on it very soon."
For Mr. Dole, as for Mr. Clinton, China's trade status poses some agonizing problems. 
His home state of Kansas is the site of a major Boeing plant, where one in seven jets goes to China. 
Agricultural companies, among his biggest supporters, have warned that ending China's trading preferences would be a disaster for them.
And Mr. Dole has a long record of statements in support of trade concessions that sound much like Mr. Clinton's arguments.
"I strongly support most-favored nation status for China," he said on "Larry King Live" on March 23, 1994. 
"I think we make a mistake when we tie it to human rights."
Cancellation, he said, would "cost us a couple of hundred thousand American jobs."
In 1992 and 1993, when Mr. Clinton was wavering on the issue, Mr. Dole was urging him to "move ahead on most-favored nation status for China where, again, Republicans would support the President if he'll come out and do that."
Some Republicans have urged Mr. Dole to turn the extension of trade privileges into a referendum on Mr. Clinton's dealings with China, with an eye toward putting Mr. Clinton in the embarrassing position of vetoing a Congressional resolution to end China's trading rights here.
"It would be a very tough veto in an election year," one of Mr. Clinton's top aides said recently, worrying that the President could appear to be defending China's leadership.
American business has strongly urged the extension of China's trading rights, and successfully pressed Mr. Clinton two years ago to reverse himself and "delink" favorable trade status from China's human rights performance. 
Until today, Mr. Dole -- whose Kansas constituencies include major exporters to China -- seemed firmly in the Clinton camp.
Like Mr. Dole, the Administration is also concerned that its policies not cost America lucrative contracts. 
Just today the Export-Import Bank of the United States approved a $160 million loan guarantee for a Chinese airline to buy three Boeing jets. 
In February, Secretary of State Warren Christopher had asked the bank to suspend consideration of loans for all projects in China for 30 days until he decided whether and how to sanction China for selling $70,000 of ring magnets to Pakistan. 
But Mr. Christopher is still weighing his decision, both because of legal complexities and because the Administration is still trying to hone in on a sanction that would show American toughness but not prompt retaliation.
No decision is expected until he meets Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China on Friday, American officials said. 
Mr. Christopher is to break off from President Clinton's trip to Russia to meet Mr. Qian in The Hague. 
Officials at the Ex-Im Bank, an independent agency, said they had to move ahead because China was already giving more aircraft contracts to Europe.
The sanction Mr. Christopher has in mind would prevent the Ex-Im Bank from aiding a Chinese company that was linked to the ring magnet sales. 
But it would also hurt two major American companies, Westinghouse and Bechtel.
The Administration had hoped that its threats of sanctions against China would defuse the calls for the repeal of favorable trade status, which permits the Chinese to get the benefits that America extends to its other major trading partners -- including low tariffs for its goods. 
But liberals outraged by the human rights record of China and conservatives outraged by its threats against Taiwan are aligning in the House of Representatives to vote against the trading rights after Mr. Clinton formally notifies Congress of his intentions. 
He must do so by June 3.
"We're going to lose the House on this," a top Administration official said recently. 
"The issue is the Senate, and specifically Bob Dole."      
