
In his private trading room at a local securities firm, Millions Yang peers intently at a parade of price charts flowing across a computer screen. 
Mr. Yang, a rotund former Red Guard who earned his nickname the easy way, by making millions in the stock market, breaks into a smile.
"Today I made 100,000 yuan," almost $20,000, he says, laughing. 
"Not bad for a day."
Outside Mr. Yang's office during one recent lunch break, several hundred small investors line up, eager to place orders when trading resumes two hours later. 
Millions Yang goes to the door and they ask him for advice.
"Millions Yang!" call dozens of voices. 
"Millions Yang, what should I buy?" one man shouts. 
"Give me some tips," yells another. 
Millions Yang -- which translates to Yang Baiwan in Chinese -- chats with those in front of the line. 
Heads crane as those in back try to overhear.
"I'm trapped in a loss," one woman tells him despairingly. 
"What should I do?"
"You must be willing to take a loss," he answers, and people nod, taking mental notes. 
"If it's going down, sell it and accept the loss. 
Otherwise you'll be stuck with a bigger loss."
That's the way it is at the Chinese stock market these days. 
The market used to be just a curiosity, a sort of masquerade in which Communists cross-dressed as capitalists and waved share certificates in place of little red books. 
American financiers and journalists dropped by the stock exchanges to chat patronizingly with the traders: "So, Mr. Yang, how much money did you make today?
A dollar!
That's wonderful -- you're going to be a rich man."
 
2 Million Shareholders
No one is patronizing these days. 
Now China has two million shareholders, with the number growing by about 50,000 a week. 
The market index in Shanghai soared 167 percent last year, and these days even the small American investor can buy into the Chinese market, although some experts suggest it might be just as prudent to visit Las Vegas.
On a good day, the two-year-old Chinese market trades $350 million worth of shares, more than Hong Kong in a slow session. 
And it is growing at a prodigious rate: in the first quarter of 1993, the Shanghai Stock Exchange enjoyed a trading volume 2.2 times that of all of 1992. 
With the number of listings expected almost to double this year, some experts think that in a year or two the Shanghai market will regularly enjoy the highest volume in Asia outside Japan.
In short, the Chinese stock market is transforming itself from a curiosity to a major force. 
The metamorphosis is quite a spectacle. 
Thousands of Chinese companies yearn to go public, at home or on foreign exchanges. 
Hundreds of foreign accountants and lawyers are struggling to make sense of nonsensical Chinese balance sheets. 
Western investment banks are opening offices in China and paying huge sums for anyone who knows how to say "P/E ratio" in Chinese. 
Above all, tens of millions of ordinary Chinese are desperate to become shareholders. 
Last August, a million Chinese lined up for days under a fierce sun to buy stock -- more precisely, to pay several weeks' salary for an application form that would give them a 10 percent chance of being allowed to buy new shares. 
When the forms ran out, the would-be investors rioted. 
Securities executives in the West could be pardoned for feeling a bit envious.
The growth of the stock market is having an important effect on China as a whole. 
First, state-owned companies, perennially inefficient, begin to care about profitability. 
"You can see that when the companies issue stocks, they have to have a board of directors, they have to be audited, and they pay a lot more attention to efficiency," said Pan Muping, the Shanghai representative of Crosby Securities, a Hong Kong-based brokerage that was one of the first to be bullish on China.
More broadly, the rise of the market legitimizes the kind of quasi-capitalism that has been around for a dozen years but is steadily becoming less quasi and more capitalism.
Also, it helps create the kind of urban middle class that is the foundation for a modern civil society. 
In the past, the Communist Party was the sole source of power and prestige. 
While the party remains awesomely powerful, it is no longer the only show in town. 
Business interests are becoming an alternative power base, an alternative source of values, a rival source of prestige.
 
A Westerner Impressed
The changes impress William A. Schreyer, chairman of Merrill Lynch & Company, who was in China last month to open the firm's new office here in Shanghai. 
"The modernization of China's economy, I think, is one of the most exciting endeavors in this century," he said, "and we want to be there and be part of it."
Mr. Schreyer said he was impressed from the moment he took the road from the Beijing airport and saw what seemed a continuous construction zone. 
He grew more enthusiastic when Prime Minister Li Peng and Communist Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin both received him and expressed interest in improving corporate accounting standards.
"If I were 25 years younger," the 65-year-old Mr. Schreyer said, "I'd study Chinese and ask Merrill Lynch to post me there."
He added that Merrill Lynch is positioning itself in China in the hope of growing with the local market just as it did in Japan 32 years ago.
What?
Mention the Japanese and Chinese stock markets in the same breath?
A couple of years ago that would have been regarded as foolish. 
Now it's regarded as visionary.
"China is the world's fastest-growing economy," said Duncan P. F. Mount, managing director of CEF Investment Management Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
"There are about 300,000 incorporated companies, of which about 70 are listed. 
In time, it's obviously going to be Asia's biggest stock market, probably bigger than Japan. 
The question is how long it's going to take, not is it going to happen."
 
Some Caveats
To be sure, the same could have been said back in 1914, when Shanghai first opened a securities exchange. 
Fund managers and brokers who promoted Shanghai back then may eventually be proven to be visionaries, but from beneath their gravestones their clients will be unimpressed.
Even now, the Chinese market faces enormous challenges that Westerners do not always appreciate. 
Like the rest of the economy, the stock system is laced with corruption that alienates many ordinary citizens. 
Most of the trading is a speculative froth that bears little relationship to fundamentals, and some of the excitement seems to be of the flavor-of-the-month variety. 
At various times, other emerging markets -- South Korea, Indonesia, Taiwan, Mexico, etc. 
-- have been the toast of international investors, but often the small investor showed up as the party ended, just in time to pay the bill.
What is more, most of the Chinese companies that list stocks are from the state-owned sector, which is the weakest part of the economy. 
The companies that are behind the Chinese boom are the small township factories and private enterprises that operate on a small scale, bribe local officials, dodge taxes and keep miserable accounts. 
It is virtually impossible for foreigners to buy shares in them.
This may well be the make-or-break year for the Chinese stock market, which is still formally dubbed an experiment. 
If all goes smoothly, China's leaders are expected to decide next year that the experiment is over, and that they can implement the shareholding system on a far wider scale.
The stock market in its current form began in December 1990 with the formal opening of the Shanghai Securities Exchange. 
About the same time, the southern city of Shenzhen, next to Hong Kong, was also allowed to open an exchange.
These days the Shanghai exchange trades in 62 stocks, with several more to be listed over the next month. 
The exchange now has 600 seats; in June that will rise to 2,500. 
The Government has agreed in principle that 50 or 60 more companies from all over the country can list this year, issuing shares with a par value of $1 billion.
"Late this year or early next year, we'll regularly have higher trading volumes than Hong Kong," said Wei Wenyuan, the executive director of the Shanghai exchange. 
"Then it'll keep going up from there."
The Shanghai exchange has gradually left the Shenzhen exchange behind and become the premier market in the country. 
A half-dozen other cities are desperately trying to start their own stock exchanges, but the Government has refused to allow them to do so.
Many Chinese buy stocks with the giddy excitement they might show in entering a casino. 
Investors have heard about a few people who committed suicide after losing their money, but mostly they hear stories about folks like Millions Yang. 
The losers keep quiet. 
So the emphasis is on speculative in-and-out trading. 
Chinese speak of "chao gu," or stir-frying stocks, meaning to turn them over quickly.
Chinese do not telephone their brokers; instead they swarm into the brokerages. 
Each of the dozens of brokerages in Shanghai has a huge trading room in which individual investors stand shoulder to shoulder, watching a huge screen with share prices. 
To trade, they fill out a form and stand in a long line, sometimes for hours, to give it to a broker.
In Shanghai alone, more than 100,000 people have become professional investors. 
Some have quit their jobs; others -- in what local people say with a wink is a demonstration of the superiority of socialism -- simply don't show up at work while still being paid. 
They spend every day in the trading rooms of a brokerage.
The "da hu" -- big rollers, those with more than $90,000 in their accounts -- get favored treatment. 
At Shenyin Securities, for example, a da hu is allowed to pay $40 a month and get a pass to enter a basement room with sofas and computer monitors. 
A purchase order can be handed to a broker without waiting in line.
"A year ago we had 15 da hu here," said Zhu Weidong, a 22-year-old broker who looks after them. 
"Now we have 60."
Mr. Zhu said the richest of them once had the equivalent of almost $2 million in his account.
The securities boom has created a shortage of employees in the field. 
Companies lure brokers by paying $200 a month, several times the prevailing wage, and offering bonuses.
For now, of course, the stock markets are essentially local ones in just two of China's innumerable cities. 
But this year they are supposed to go national. 
The Shenzhen exchange just listed a company from Hainan Province, and one or two major companies from each of China's 30 provinces are supposed to go public in Shanghai or Shenzhen in the coming months.
At the same time, the Shanghai exchange is eagerly targeting investors in other cities. 
Fifty cities, in every province but Tibet, are now hooked up to the Shanghai stock computer system. 
On April 26, the exchange began to broadcast share information by satellite to a network of receiving stations all over the country, and two-way trading by satellite is scheduled to begin in November.
The transformation of the Shanghai market into a national one would be hugely important. 
It would multiply the pool of potential investors by a hundred, and allow more long-term investors to join the speculators.
 
Little Regulation
Still, the market faces a host of problems. 
One of the most important is that there is little regulatory control. 
A new Securities Regulatory Commission has been established, but nobody seems inclined to pay it much heed.
"The foundation for China's stock market is seriously inadequate, creating equally serious problems," a confidential Government report declared recently. 
The 18-page report, classified secret, strongly supported the continued development of the market but warned of far-reaching corruption, inter-ministry rivalries and other problems. 
In particular, the report warned against "power shares" -- gifts of stock to Government figures to win favors.
"We're approached by companies every day, banging on our door and saying that they want to go public," said Gao Xiqing, an American-trained lawyer who is chief counsel to the Securities Regulatory Commission. 
"It's remarkable how the whole country is so gung ho."
Perhaps too gung ho. 
Because the Government is restricting the numbers that can go public, there is a natural temptation to offer bribes.
"Some people come in and offer us X number of shares in their company," said Mr. Gao, who is in charge of public offerings. 
"They don't have the concept of a conflict of interest. 
I say I can't take it, and they think I don't have the money. 
So they say it's free. 
And then when they understand that I just can't accept it, they say it doesn't have to be in my name."
Millions Yang acknowledges that there are problems in the stock market, but he thinks they will be easily overcome. 
Shanghai, he says, will eventually become the financial capital of the Far East.
Asked whether hard-liners might close the stock market after Deng Xiaoping dies, Mr. Yang paused for only a second. 
"I don't worry," he said, then offered a novel interpretation of Marxism: "The goal of the revolution was to make people rich, and now they're rich. 
The Government won't allow folks to become poor again."
 
VARIOUS WAYS TO GET IN ON THE CHINA PLAY
ASIDE from rushing to Shanghai and "stir-frying" shares alongside Millions Yang, foreigners can participate in the Chinese stock market in several ways.
One of the simplest is to buy into one of the 30-odd China funds, with $1.3 billion in assets, offered by international securities firms. 
Some of these funds are traded, like shares, on the New York Stock Exchange and other exchanges, or are available directly through brokers.
The problem with that is that some of the funds are not what their names might imply. 
Some hold mostly cash rather than China stocks, or their "China holdings" may be almost entirely companies in Hong Kong that do business in China. 
The recent fascination with "China concept" stocks has led many Hong Kong companies to put China in their names so that they can enjoy the premium afforded to China plays.
Another possibility is to invest in Chinese companies listed abroad. 
One such company, Brilliance China Automotive Holdings, was listed on the New York Stock Exchange last year, and others hope to follow. 
In addition, nine Chinese companies are expected to list on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange later this year. 
The best known is Qingdao Brewery, which makes Tsingtao Beer.
The final possibility is to invest directly in Chinese shares. 
While foreigners are not allowed to buy ordinary shares in Chinese companies, 10 companies in Shanghai and 9 in Shenzhen have listed a special kind of foreign currency-denominated stock -- called B-shares -- that only foreigners may purchase. 
Some large brokerages can arrange a purchase of the B-shares.
However, transaction costs in B-shares are relatively high, trading volume is low and the B-shares change hands at less than half the price of the A-shares held by Chinese investors.
One reason in the past for the limited demand was that the clearing system in Shanghai did not meet standards of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, effectively keeping out many American investors. 
But the Shanghai exchange has started a new settlement system, and last month the S.E.C. agreed to allow China funds to buy B-shares.
Buying by American fund managers may give the B-shares a boost, but they would get an even bigger boost if Chinese nationals were allowed to use their United States dollars to buy them. 
China's central bank and foreign exchange agency have so far blocked proposals to allow Chinese to buy B-shares.
 
 
 
RED GUARDS TO HOT PROFITS
BEFORE Millions Yang became an investment legend, he was active as a Red Guard during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976. 
Those were chaotic years in Shanghai. 
Vehicles were instructed to go forward at a red light and stop at a green light -- the Red Guards reasoning that red, as the revolutionary color, should not be associated with coming to a halt. 
Not all drivers got the message, however, and accidents were common. 
Finally traffic lights were given special dispensation to pursue their bourgeois ways. 
A red light again meant to stop.
After the Cultural Revolution, Mr. Yang, whose real name is Yang Huaiding, found that making money was more fun than making revolution. 
He entered the securities business in 1988, buying Government bonds in rural areas and selling them in Shanghai. 
This was a lucrative business, and partly as a result it was suspect. 
While there was no clear law against it, the authorities periodically denounced such arbitrage with the ugliest of words in the official vocabulary: speculation.
When the stock market opened, Mr. Yang began reading about equities, quickly developed a knack for trading and became the nation's most famous investor. 
In China, he says, it is still pretty easy to make a quick profit. 
"In New York, the market is more mature so it's harder to get a profit," he said. 
"Here everything is still being developed, so it's a lot easier."
