
IN the remote badlands of far western Tibet lie the two remaining sites of the ancient Kingdom of Guge: Tholing, the 11th-century Buddhist monastery that was, in its time, the region's most influential lamasery; and Tsaparang, the old capital of Guge. 
At both sites, now largely in ruins, statuary and dozens of well-preserved murals in the brilliant West Tibetan style offer glimpses of a vanished age.
You are not likely to be jostled by fellow tourists as you move about these amazing remnants of a lost kingdom, since very few people get to this rugged area of Tibet. 
Tholing, near the isolated military town of Zanda, is on an escarpment above the Sutlej River. 
Tsaparang, about 15 miles away, is perched on a lonely crest of towering rock. 
Depending on road conditions, it takes about six days to drive here from Lhasa, the capital of Tibet.
It was in Lhasa last July that my friend Judy and I hired Dorje, a Tibetan guide, and Sonam, a driver, to take us by Land Cruiser to western Tibet. 
It was to be my second trip through the region. 
Along the way, we circumambulated the holy mountain of Kailash, and made a side trip to the monasteries of Tirthapuri and Gurugam. 
Near the village of Nabru we turned left onto a jolting dirt road and headed for Zanda, more than 100 miles away.
We drove through barren mountains in a fantasy of colors. 
On one side of our Land Cruiser was a pale lemon mountain spotted with dark green scrub. 
On the other, a formation of barren rock in mineral hues of green, fawn, red and ash. 
Among nomad tents, yaks browsed on a yellow-green scrim of vegetation. 
Often, we sent goats and sheep scrambling across the road. 
Dogs from the tents chased our wheels, but Sonam, a good Buddhist, was very careful.
We had lunch at a restaurant, which was a box without windows surrounded by black yak-hair tents. 
A man sold us delicious yogurt from the female yak, the dri, and tea to drink or mix with tsampa (ground roasted barley). 
Judy and I pulled out the dried salami I'd transported from Fairway in New York and lunched on yogurt, salami and tea, while Sonam and Dorje kneaded yogurt and butter tea into their tsampa.
After lunch, we descended into the badlands that surround Tholing and Tsaparang. 
From above, the terrain's colors were a tender green and ash. 
Down among the fantastic shapes -- castles, pinnacles, spires, citadels -- cut by tiny streams, they became rose-blush and beige.
Zanda, across a bridge over the Sutlej River, is the usual base for visiting Tholing and Tsaparang. 
As we approached, we could hear the sound of drilling Chinese soldiers from the nearby military garrison.
Once a Tibetan town full of nomads selling supplies from their tents and tables, Zanda is now a small Chinese military town with few ethnic Tibetans in evidence. 
There is one dusty main street lined with concrete-block shops whose goods tumble into the street. 
Shopkeepers sit at their doors playing mah-jongg with their neighbors.
We settled into a clean, inevitably dusty room in the new wing of the Chinese hotel on the main street, the only hotel in town. 
The toilet is an outhouse beside the building, next to the water spigot at which one does laundry. 
Such are the priorities that there was a TV in our room, as well as a pail of water for bathing and a thermos of hot water for tea. 
You are charged what the manager thinks you can pay. 
Bargaining is, therefore, in order. 
We settled on $10. 
The fee for foreigners for seeing Tsaparang -- about $40 at 8.28 yuan to $1 -- is steep. 
In the permit office, on Zanda's only street, the secretary, wearing a pantsuit and garden party hat and without a desk or chair of her own, answered the telephone. 
You receive 10 free postcards with your permit, but that lagniappe doesn't keep you from feeling taken.
The next morning we drove less than an hour on washboard roads to Tsaparang. 
Dorje and Sonam, excited at the opportunity to see Tsaparang for the first time, went off to find the guide who lives near the ruins while Judy and I gazed at the citadel towering above us. 
Except for a small structure at the top painted with traditional Tibetan designs and the gate at its base, the citadel was indistinguishable from the other rocky pinnacles in the badlands. 
It is a mountain among fellow mountains.
Our guide, an elderly man, was impatient at our desire to linger, so we headed up the stone path that led through the ruins.
Most of the buildings, which are either cut from rock or built of mud brick, are in ruins, destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. 
But the three primary chapels, which contain the treasures of Tsaparang, are intact. 
They lie along the path that climbs the mountain like gems strung on a necklace.
The Kingdom of Guge was founded in the ninth century after the assassination of King Langdarma, a persecutor of Buddhists. 
In the 11th century, King Yeshe O, working with the famous Sanskrit translator, Rinchen Zangpo, and the Indian master Atisha, reintroduced Buddhism to western Tibet. 
Soon Tsaparang, and Tholing, also made of mud brick, were built, along with other temples and monasteries. 
The influence of the Guge Kingdom, particularly the monastic center of Tholing, was felt from Kashmir to Assam.
In 1624 Father Antonio del Andrade, a Portuguese Jesuit, found his way to western Tibet. 
Within a few years, he had made so many Catholic converts that local Buddhists became alarmed and called in the neighboring kingdom of Ladakh to drive the new Christians from Tsaparang and the surrounding area. 
The Ladakhis were delighted to have an excuse to invade, and the end result was that the Guge Kingdom, which had tolerated the Christians, was essentially wiped out.
In 1948 a German Buddhist monk, Lama Govinda, came to Tsaparang and Tholing with his wife, Li Gotama, and photographed everything. 
That is the only reason we know what the temples looked like before the arrival of the Red Guards in 1967. 
They destroyed many of the statues and, in Tholing, a number of buildings, before closing down the sites and leaving them to the mercy of wind and weather throughout the years of the Cultural Revolution.
That morning we had Tsaparang's citadel to ourselves, with only the occasional hawk flying above us for company. 
At 14,000 feet, climbing was arduous, but the first site -- the White Temple, Lhakhang Karpo -- was not that far. 
The building is peaceful with slender, red wooden pillars ending in carved capitals, its ceiling composed of intricately painted geometric designs.
With our flashlights (a necessity, since the only illumination in the buildings is from skylights), we could make out the delicate features, fine noses and rounded chins of the Buddha statues on lotus pedestals. 
Two snarling guardians at the entrance, Tandrin in red and Dorje in blue -- their hard lacquered exteriors damaged so that the innards of straw are exposed -- are still vital in their aggressive poses. 
The brilliantly colored murals of gods and goddesses are rendered with great delicacy. 
All spaces are filled with rich painted ornamentation -- animals, flowers, trees, temples, imaginary beasts.
The Red Temple, Lhakhang Marpo, a short distance up the path, is entered through its original wooden doors. 
In the upper left panel a carved Buddha meditates between what appear to be two angels. 
To the left of the entrance, below deities in billowing scarves and elaborate jewelry, are panels depicting horses carrying timber for the construction of the temple, goats with panniers of dirt and the king and queen with visiting dignitaries, assembled for the consecration of the temple. 
Water damage and vandalism in this chapel have been repaired with stunning ineptitude. 
But at least there is no confusion as to what is original and what is attempted renovation.
The Dorje Jigje Lhakhang, a small temple farther along the path, is filled with painting of wrathful Tantric deities, but in small panels to the right of the entrance, is a scene depicting, in minute detail, people going off to market with woven baskets on their backs. 
Finally, at the top of the citadel, a lung-straining climb up stairs and through low-roofed tunnels, is the tiny, red Mandala Lha khang. 
It has no skylight. 
A platform in the middle of the room once was the setting for a three-dimensional mandala. 
Wrathful deities take up the large spaces on the wall, but beneath them are gory and macabre paintings of the eight great cemeteries of India.
We ate that night at a small Chinese restaurant near our hotel. 
We had looked into other restaurants along the main street, but found that most were really brothels for the Chinese military.
The Chinese couple who run this no-name restaurant were willing to let me go into the kitchen and assemble the raw materials for dinner or lunch -- noodles or rice, squash, any unknown vegetable I saw, onions, garlic, lamb or eggs or chicken. 
Sometimes this combination appeared as soup, sometimes as stir-fry. 
Sometimes Judy got all the lamb and I got the egg. 
Sometimes meat and egg were mixed up together. 
One day the wife showed us a potato and made slicing motions. 
We had potato chips with lunch that day. 
The plain meals were never more than $2.
The next morning we walked over to Tholing, which we could see from the second-story corridor of our hotel. 
The monastery, positioned above the Sutlej River, broad and swift-flowing at this time of year, is a complex of rectangular buildings, the most interesting of which is the Yeshe O Temple, with its open mud-brick work and red mud-brick towers. 
The complex is in the process of reconstruction, since the Red Guards tore down much of it, brick by brick.
THE admission fee for Tholing is $8.50, which you pay when you acquire your permit for both Tholing and Tsaparang. 
There is an additional $3.50 to be paid to the tiny, unsmiling caretaker, who is quite willing to let you wander at your own pace. 
Once again, we were the only people going through the buildings.
Rinchen Zangpo was responsible for building Tholing. 
The 15th- and 16th-century murals are like those in the Red and White temples in Tsaparang and represent a synthesis of Himalayan styles from Tibet, Kashmir and Nepal.
The Yeshe O Temple, with its handsome towers, is in the midst of renovation. 
New doors, with locks and brighter red paint, have replaced the rickety old ones through which I had seen, on a journey to Tholing in 1995, the row of holes from machine-gun bullets that had shattered the old images. 
In the shape of a mandala, the building used to contain several chapels. 
Other, reconstructed buildings in the complex were, like the Yeshe O, not yet open.
The Lhakhang Karpo and the Dukhang, however, were open. 
Once again, a powerful flashlight is essential. 
These temples are similar to Tsaparang's -- high ceilings, slender red wooden pillars and geometric decorations on the ceiling. 
The Lha khang Karpo is distinguished by two crudely carved deodar pillars on either side of its front door. 
The portraits inside of Tsong Khappa, Sakya Panchen and other Buddhist prelates, were painted in the 15th and 16th centuries, but still look fresh.
In the Dukhang, a single-story assembly hall, there is a series of portraits of important figures, including Yeshe O, the founder of the monastery, meticulously painted in the clothing of their time. 
Deities on the other walls sit serenely, garbed in magnificent textiles and jewelry.
Slowly our last flashlight batteries failed as we moved from picture to picture. 
Regretfully we left Tholing and wandered back to the hotel, past the watermelon seller and the dusty shops to our hotel and dinner.
After a terrible dust storm, so acute that our little restaurant had to close its door and light candles, a gentle rain fell during the night. 
The following morning we had a last glance at Tholing as we took our backpacks down to the Land Cruiser. 
We drove out through the badlands and into the mineral-colored mountains, washed in brilliant light.
 
If you go
The best time to travel in Tibet is from June to October. 
Trips to Tholing and Tsaparang can be arranged through travel agencies in Lhasa; we used the Shigatze agency, in the Yak and the Snowlands Hotels.
If you hire a Land Cruiser, you will also hire a truck. 
The latter is an emergency vehicle to haul you out of rivers and to carry extra fuel and baggage. 
The package includes the guide and the two drivers.
All of this plus the permits for each of the areas you will travel through will cost about $4,000 to $5,000. 
If you pack more people into the Land Cruiser it will cost less per person but you will be crowded under difficult conditions.
The pilgrimage to Mount Kailash is usually included in this trip. 
Returning by the shorter, smoother southern route might bring the price down a little. 
The cheapest way to go is hitchhiking (as a woman, I never felt threatened), preferably on China Mail trucks; you can bargain with the drivers, but the typical fee for a long trip is $20. 
You will also need a permit for Mount Kailash (travel agencies usually sell them). 
Other permits ($5 to $10) can be acquired in transit.
The government hotel in Tsaparang should cost around $10 a night. 
Like the restaurant, it is nameless. 
Meals cost about $2. 
Your guide will find a hotel and restaurant for you.
