
BY examining the flow of nutrients and energy in a typical Chinese farming village, scientists have found ways to increase production while reducing dependence on synthetic fertilizers.
In a paper published recently in The Journal of Applied Ecology, the scientists described an experiment conducted by Dr. James Y. Guo, now at the University of Singapore, that treated Zhang Zhuang, a small farming village in Jiangsu Province, as an ecological system that could be enhanced through proper management.
The village grew rice in the summer and wheat in the winter. 
The more than 2,300 residents also raised more than 1,500 pigs a year for their own consumption and for sale. 
The village, typical of many in China, had been a self-sustaining farming system for more than 2,000 years.
But a population growth of one-quarter of 1 percent a year for 40 years put a strain on the farming system. 
Even small crop fluctuations caused tremendous problems for the people. 
They turned to synthetic fertilizer rich in nitrogen, the use of which doubled over a 10-year period. 
And fertilizer leaching and soil erosion damaged the environment, particularly the fish ponds and water channels running through the village.
Dr. Guo's team grew grasses in the land around the fish ponds and planted water vegetation in the irrigation canals. 
The team also dug out the fish ponds to bring in more light so more algae would grow. 
The new vegetation was fed to the fish and the pigs.
The researchers also made an effort to recycle the wastes from the crops, pigs and fish to fertilize the fields. 
And they dug wastes from the bottom of the ponds to add to this manure mixture.
There was no substantial difference in the amount of crops produced or the number or size of the pigs raised. 
But the yield of fish increased 370 percent in the deepened ponds. 
And the village cut back on its use of synthetic fertilizer by 46 percent, and was able to eat better and sell more produce as a result of the new system.
"It is an analysis of traditional efforts that reminds us that it is possible to have intensive agriculture which is totally balanced and which can, if properly managed, go on for 5,000 years," said Dr. Anthony D. Bradshaw, a retired professor from the University of Liverpool in England who published the study with Dr. Guo. "I believe that if we're really going to understand our environment, we've got to do much more of it."
Less detailed but larger-scale studies have been made recently in various regions of China. 
One team of researchers from the Institute of Applied Ecology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences looked at the plains of northeastern China, where soil erosion and water shortages have become severe problems since the 1950's.
The group, led by Dr. Dazhong Wen, studied the possibilities of rehabilitating the region in order to continue farming for its fast-growing population, which is expected to equal that of the United States within 20 years. 
The study outlines several areas where government regulations could help stem practices that are devastating the land.
The study calls for more crop rotation and more planting of different crops in alternate rows to counter insects and diseases. 
The researchers also recommend using minimum tillage techniques instead of deep plowing to ease soil erosion, and shallow irrigation for rice to conserve water. 
They also stress the need for using more organic fertilizer and combining farming with animal husbandry to make better use of the crop wastes, as in the Zhang Zhuang study.
