
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES may be out of fashion in the West. 
But in one of the odder twists to the unfolding Asian crisis, his prophets have resurfaced in Beijing.
To keep the Chinese economy out of recession -- and to prevent the urban proletariat from taking to the barricades -- China's pragmatic Communist leadership is calling for a heady dose of fiscal stimulus that would have made Keynes proud.
Acknowledging that fiscal intervention is needed to sustain annual growth of more than 8 percent is one thing; delivering on that promise is quite another for the Chinese Government. 
For even if the early reports have exaggerated the amount that China will spend on roads, housing and other public works, any significant increase in outlays is bound to complicate its plans to modernize the half-socialist, half-capitalist economy.
"There's just no easy way out of their predicament," said Nicholas Lardy, a specialist in the Chinese economy at the Brookings Institution.
At first glance, the case for spending is strong. 
China's ability to modernize has been constrained in recent years by electricity and transportation bottlenecks. 
And the timing is propitious, since spending could offset economic pain. 
The combination of currency depreciation and falling output in the rest of Asia is widely expected to reduce the demand for Chinese exports by about $20 billion this year. 
Meanwhile, the continuing effort to trim China's bloated state enterprises is expected to push several million people out of jobs.
Rather than accept a sharp drop in employment and growth, Chinese leaders have said they will increase spending, with $750 billion to $1 trillion devoted to new construction over three years. 
Even by the widest definition of infrastructure spending, the Government would have to increase outlays by 60 percent to hit the $750 billion mark -- virtually impossible short of a total mobilization of the economy in the manner of Chairman Mao's Great Leap Forward.
But even a 10 to 20 percent increase, as is deemed plausible by Wing Thye Woo, an economist at the University of California at Davis, would conflict with China's other policy goals. 
The only practical way to increase spending rapidly is to funnel the cash to state enterprises -- many of which are industrial dinosaurs with a long history of wasting resources. 
"All the politics says the Government will give the money to China's equivalent of the Korean chaebols," Mr. Woo said.
Moreover, new public spending is likely to displace money that would have been used to recapitalize China's insolvent state banks. 
Bank reform can wait. 
The banks can easily meet their current obligations to foreigners, and domestic depositors have no place else to go with their money. 
But the longer the delay, the longer it will take to create the disciplined, efficient market for capital that the economy desperately needs to sustain growth.
China could try to both recapitalize the banks and prime the fiscal pump by opting to run a big deficit. 
On paper, the risks would be modest: With the cost of living actually falling in recent months, inflation is not a major worry. 
And with a very small Government debt, China would have little difficulty selling bonds to finance spending. 
But Jeffrey Sachs, the director of Harvard's Institute for International Development, warns that China's finances are more precarious than the official numbers suggest.
The state banks' bad debts, which may be the equivalent of several hundred billion dollars, are effectively part of the national debt. 
Worse, what appears to be a nearly balanced budget is actually deeply in the red because the official expenditures do not include subsidies to state enterprises disguised as bank loans. 
"China is sitting on a mountain of fiscal problems already," Mr. Sachs concluded.
All this points toward a strategy of big talk and modest action. 
China's leaders, whose political legitimacy is tightly linked to their competence as economic managers, cannot afford to look as if they are ignoring rising unemployment and insolvent banks. 
By the same token, they cannot afford to risk China's hard-won reputation as fiscally conservative -- a reputation that has prevented capital flight from Hong Kong and allowed the newly installed Government to hold the line on exchange rates.
Beijing appears to have undertaken the delicate task of having it both ways. 
"These guys know what they're doing," argued Lawrence Kreicher, chief economist for Alliance Capital.
