
WHILE the pronouncements from the Pacific summit meeting in Vancouver were short on substance, the subtext was clear enough: If the ailing Asian tigers are prepared to let free markets work their healing wonders, the industrial powers will do what is necessary to prevent collateral damage.
That message is certainly reassuring, and seemingly credible: By the benchmark of say, Latin America in 1982 or Eastern Europe in 1991, Asia is in decent shape. 
But it is far from clear that the folks who make the rules will do their part in smoothing the road back to rapid growth. 
Indeed, there are reasons to doubt they have the policy sense and political fortitude to prevent the crisis from deepening.
Consider the major players:
CHINA Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and South Korea are all counting on currency depreciation to invigorate their exports and service foreign debts. 
But increased foreign sales are likely to come at the expense of Chinese exports because China's currency, the yuan, has appreciated 25 percent against the dollar since 1994. 
If China responds by devaluing the yuan, it could set off another wave of currency instability.
China still has some leeway. 
With $130 billion in reserves, little short-term debt to foreigners and currency-conversion limits that inhibit capital flight, speculators cannot force Beijing to devalue.
But sooner or later Chinese leaders will have to let the yuan fall. 
"China's underlying problems -- an overvalued currency and an insolvent banking system -- are exactly the same as Korea's and Thailand's," says Nick Lardy, an economist at the Brookings Institution.
JAPAN Unlike the rest of Asia, Japan is a net creditor to the world with big trade and current account surpluses -- and thus needs no external help to solve its financial crisis. 
But thus far, Japan has shown little will to dig its way out by paying off depositors in insolvent banks or by forcing hundreds of moribund companies into bankruptcy. 
Nor does the Government seem inclined to try a dose of Keynesian fiscal stimulus, for fear of running a bigger budget deficit. 
As a result there is little prospect that Japan will escape another recession.
Would a chronically ailing Japan lend tens of billions of dollars to financial institutions elsewhere in Asia when the Government cannot manage a domestic financial fix?
Would a deeply depressed Japanese economy be in any position to absorb more exports from South Korea, China and Southeast Asia?
Who's kidding whom?
UNITED STATES The International Monetary Fund will have to come up with $20 billion -- and, most likely, two or three times that amount -- to allow South Korea to convert its short-term foreign currency debts into manageable long-term debt. 
But after financial rescues in Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, the cupboard is no longer well stocked and Washington is showing no signs of renewed generosity. 
"Congress refused to bail out the 'crooks' in Indonesia," noted John Makin, a senior fellow in the American Enterprise Institute's Asian Studies Program. 
"Why would they bail out the 'crooks' in Korea?"
Unlike Japan, the United States is in a position to buy the surplus consumer goods spewing out of Asia. 
Indeed, cheap imports are just what the doctor ordered to prevent the American economy from overheating. 
But what's good for America is not necessarily good for General Motors -- or 100 other industries that must compete with imports. 
And after the failure to pass legislation that would give the President enhanced authority to negotiate trade agreements, it is a safe bet that Congress will counter a ballooning trade deficit with protectionism.
I.M.F. On paper the International Monetary Fund is a creature of the major economic powers; in practice, its bureaucracy runs the show. 
And in the case of Asia, that authority could prove counterproductive.
Long used to dealing with the problems of basket-case economies with low savings rates and little fiscal or monetary discipline, the fund is demanding a balanced budget and high interest rates as the price of assistance in refinancing Asia's external debts. 
But Steve Radelet, an economist at the Institute for International Development at Harvard, argues that in Korea as well as Indonesia, the problems are institutional, not fiscal. 
"It makes no sense to ask for austerity from countries that have excess production capacity and are still saving 30 percent of their income," he added.
The global economy is surely less vulnerable to a deflationary panic than it was in 1930. 
But the sequence of events in Asia -- stock and property market crashes, followed by bank failures and competitive currency devaluations -- is eerily similar. 
And while economists have a better understanding of how to contain such a crisis, policy makers have yet to prove they have mastered the situation. 
"They're whistling in the dark, hoping it will all go away," Mr. Lardy concludes.
