
GRAB it. 
So say many economists, referring to the bold trade deal that China offered the United States in April and President Clinton rejected in what many deem a serious foreign policy blunder. 
Mr. Clinton can reverse course when he meets President Jiang Zemin on Sunday in Australia.
China wants to enter the World Trade Organization in time for the group's next meeting in Seattle in November, when the member nations are expected to embark on a new round of world trade talks. 
But before China can join, it needs the approval of Mr. Clinton and Congress. 
So it offered huge "concessions" on nearly every front.
Concessions is the lingo of tradespeak. 
But the term is wholly misleading. 
China's promise to open its economy to foreign goods and investment would serve its own self-interest yet would be largely irrelevant to the economic fortunes of the United States. 
Some concession.
Critics make three arguments for rejecting the offer. 
Delay could achieve better terms in the future. 
The deal's nice-sounding terms are unenforceable. 
And China's entry into the trade group would flood American markets with cheap textiles and apparel.
But judging from an analysis of Daniel H. Rosen and his colleagues at the Institute for International Economics, the first criticism appears weak, the second misleading and the third misguided.
The precise terms of China's offer remain unpublished, though the Administration published a summary. 
The breadth of the offer is stunning. 
China would drastically cut tariffs to levels less than those of most United States trade partners. 
It would eliminate export subsidies, phase out quotas on industrial products and comply immediately with World Trade Organization rules for protecting foreign investors and intellectual property.
China also agreed to phase out regulations that restrict foreign companies from importing, exporting, wholesaling and retailing. 
The offer would permit foreign companies to buy substantial stakes in insurance and telecommunications companies. 
China also agreed to have its state-owned enterprises make purchases on nondiscriminatory terms, based solely on price, quality and other commercial considerations.
Jeffrey Schott of the institute said that these terms were "substantially more liberal than those the United States had hoped to get out of negotiations and substantially more liberal than those which a number of existing W.T.O. members, like India, currently adhere to. 
You can't say that the terms of the agreement don't measure up."
Greg Mastel of the New American Foundation, a prominent critic, says that the deal is deficient on telecommunications and financial services. 
He has a point. 
There is, for example, no firm provision to eliminate nonperforming loans from banks, which serve as disguised subsidies to state-owned enterprises. 
This omission raises questions about China's commitment to run its state-owned enterprises on a commercial basis.
Mr. Mastel also criticizes the deal because, he says, it cannot be enforced. 
China is not, he warned, "a rule-based society" that makes decisions in ways that can be monitored and challenged. 
He points to China's repeated violations of patent and copyright protections.
But here the Administration must ask, what is the alternative?
In the absence of membership, China could continue many of its protectionist ways with impunity. 
But as a member, China is subject to the trade group's disciplinary process that has proven to be impartial and unflinching.
The United States would lose the right to impose unilateral trade sanctions against China once it joins the group. 
But the United States would gain international backing for sanctions so that every dispute does not turn into a bilateral foreign policy spat. 
Also, China would be responsible for meeting market-opening commitments that go well beyond anything the United States can now demand.
Critics point to the fact that as a member of the World Trade Organization, China would escape restrictions now in place on its exports of textiles and apparel to the United States. 
But Marcus Noland of the institute estimates that most Chinese sales here come at the expense of imports from other countries, not American manufacturers. 
Indeed, the institute estimates that American exports to China under the trade deal would rise by about $3 billion. 
Imports from China would rise by slightly more, so the overall effect on the $8 trillion American economy would be minute.
For the most part, the United States already provides China nondiscriminatory access. 
So why does China fight for admission to a club whose benefits it largely enjoys already?
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji apparently needs the weight of international commitments to help overcome domestic opposition to his ambitious plan to drive his economy away from state controls and toward markets. 
That would seem to be an ambition that Mr. Clinton would want to propel rather than sabotage.
