
WITH the cold war over, President Clinton has often explained, the fundamental challenges to the only remaining superpower have become economic rather than military.
This economics-as-war metaphor falsely implies natural conflict -- that their gain is our loss. 
And it is prone to be misinterpreted as justifying trade protectionism, that trade surpluses are good, while trade deficits are bad.
Yet, in the end, Mr. Clinton may be proved right. 
With the financial crisis gripping Asia and Europe sitting on the sidelines, America's global leadership is indeed being tested. 
But the challenge to the White House is to turn conventional economic nationalism on its head. 
To save the world from a serious recession, Washington will have to accept large and rapidly growing trade deficits for the next few years.
Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines -- and this week, South Korea -- are committed to financial reforms in return for a $100 billion-plus bailout led by the International Monetary Fund. 
But this money is no gift: it will take the form of loans that must be repaid with interest at market rates.
How will these economies meet their debt payments?
And how will they sell the torrent of goods they must produce to rekindle economic growth?
They can't look to demand at home. 
Governments won't be buying much: the I.M.F. loans require fiscal austerity. 
Nor will businesses: besieged banks will be under orders to lend only to the most creditworthy. 
Nor consumers: with corporate downsizing the order of the day, workers will be in no mood to buy new cars and appliances.
China can't help. 
While the Chinese economy is an important customer for South Korea, Beijing is in no mood to increase imports. 
Indeed, the real worry is that China will react to slowing demand for its own goods abroad by devaluing the yuan -- and in the process increase the deflationary pressure on other low-wage Asian economies.
And if China can't help, Japan won't. 
With the Japanese banking system in shambles and the economy already of the verge of recession, imports from the rest of Asia are likely to fall. 
Fiscal stimulus -- tax cuts or spending increases -- might stem the decline. 
But Tokyo is committed to cutting, not increasing, its budget deficit. 
And "if you're a pessimist like me," said Rudi Dornbusch, an economist at M.I.T., "you'd expect them to raise taxes to pay for the bailout of their banks."
Far from being part of the solution, Japan is well on the way to becoming part of the problem. 
The depreciating yen -- now 60 percent below the 1995 peak against the dollar -- will make Japanese exports less expensive, crowding out sales from high-wage Asian economies including South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.
What about the European Community?
The major European economies are clipping right along, and might be expected to suck in part of the Asian surplus as they grow. 
But Barry Eichengreen, an economist at the University of California at Berkeley, argues that on the eve of adopting a common currency, Europe is unlikely to carry its weight in the Asian rescue.
To qualify for monetary union, he notes, all the Continental economies are hewing to tight budgets. 
And once monetary union is achieved, the new European central bank will probably keep an extra-tight rein on the common money supply to prove its credibility.
In fact, if economic growth falters, the Europeans will not be averse to their own currency depreciation, which would help exporters and take the pressure off industries that must compete with imports. 
"Depreciation would square the circle" for a newly formed monetary union lacking other means to stimulate domestic demand, Mr. Eichengreen concludes.
That leaves America, which, in theory, is well positioned to serve as the locomotive of global expansion. 
The Federal Reserve would undoubtedly welcome a gain in the exchange rate of the dollar and an accompanying $50 billion to $100 billion surge in cheap, high-quality Asian imports that reduced inflationary pressures on the fast-revving domestic economy.
But it wouldn't please organized labor, which senses that the time may have finally arrived to demand higher wages. 
And it wouldn't please Detroit, which is squeezed between an increasingly restive union and vast overcapacity in the global auto industry.
The big question, then, is whether Washington can temper its inclination to protect labor and business from the fallout from Asia. 
If it doesn't, Asia's problems could spread to Latin America and Eastern Europe -- and, arguably, the rest of the world. 
"This deflation thing could be big, if it really gets going," Mr. Dornbusch said.
