
WANDERING through a flea market in Shanghai earlier this year with Craig Smith, The Times's new correspondent there, I stopped at a stall that was selling cheap cigarette lighters with pictures of Mao Zedong pasted on them. 
Flick one open, and it plays the tune of "The East Is Red."
I don't smoke, but I couldn't resist buying a handful.
Not far away, another merchant offered hundreds of hand-painted posters from the days of the Cultural Revolution. 
I bought one dated 1976, showing a smiling Mao leading a parade of workers and students into the promised land. 
We bargained a bit before settling on a price of about $5.
Say what you will about capitalism, but you must admit it has a marvelous way of turning even the most violent and earthshaking upheavals into safe, salable kitsch.
And that, above all, is why it is worth continuing to encourage Beijing to move along the path toward freer markets, private investment and open trade. 
Karl Marx (remember him?) said it as well as anybody in, of all places, the Communist Manifesto:
"The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all nations, even the most barbarian, into civilization. 
The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate."
What does this have to do with today's debate over China?
Plenty.
The choice facing Congress this week over granting China what is called "permanent normal trade relations" -- part of a deal to admit China to the World Trade Organization -- turns on conflicting views of how to best induce change in China's authoritarian regime.
On one side -- opposed to normalizing trade -- are those who argue that Congress should vote every year on China's trade status, thus maintaining outside pressure on Beijing to respond to complaints of human rights abuses. 
The annual vote should not be given up, they say, because it is Washington's only stick for persuading China to ease repression and to free dissidents. 
Treating China as a normal trading partner, they say, will just entrench the current regime and encourage its belligerence.
Opposing that view are those who believe that change inside China can exert greater leverage for reform than any diplomatic pressure. 
Through broader trade and contact with the outside world, the Chinese people will be exposed to the full range of Western life, from the sublime to the ridiculous. 
In the end, the temptation will prove irresistible. 
Treat China as a normal country, this side argues, and it will eventually turn into one.
"Openness is a two-way street," Nicholas Lardy, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said last week in a telephone interview from Beijing. 
"Already there are thousands of foreigners living in China and interacting on a daily basis across a very broad spectrum. 
That will only grow as China joins the W.T.O. 
At the same time, tens of thousands of the most promising Chinese have gone to the West as students. 
They've come back -- often to very high positions in government, banking and business -- changed for good."
I VISITED China for the first time this year. 
But even without an earlier point of reference, it was clear that though the economy remains very basic, the country has changed immensely in the last two decades.
As recently as the early 1980's, nearly everybody in Shanghai, the most Westernized city in China, still wore the famous blue Mao suits. 
Only top officials had cars; everyone else pedaled bicycles or rode buses. 
Lights were dim. 
Public restaurants and private enterprises barely existed. 
Architecture seemed frozen in a pre-World War II time warp. 
Today, everything is different: jeans and khakis are ubiquitous; cars and taxis compete with bikes on crowded streets; glass-sheathed skyscrapers abound; Shanghai throbs with activity day and night.
"We tend to forget," Mr. Lardy said, "how much change has already occurred."
As private enterprise spreads and markets open to real competition from domestic and foreign companies alike, tens of millions of Chinese are shedding their dependence on the state. 
They are richer and freer. 
It's not democracy, but it is the first step toward a genuinely pluralistic society.
And that is just the beginning.
"China now feels competitive heat across continents and oceans," Robert Wright wrote in a recent issue of The New Republic. 
"It must face the same logic the rest of the world faces. 
In the age of the Internet, even more than in the age of industry and print, granting enough liberty for cutting-edge prosperity while denying political liberty is a tall order."
