
A few years ago, Wang Junjin was a traveling salesman, a Chinese Willy Loman whose second home was a ponderous, creaking sardine can of a train carrying him 38 hours each way to the factories in Hunan Province that bought his badges and insignias.
Mr. Wang found a better way. 
He and his brother started an airline.
Today Mr. Wang, a short, boy-faced tycoon who looks much younger than his 23 years, has far more need for his cellular telephone than for a razor. 
His Sky Dragon Charter Airline Company offers seven regularly scheduled flights a week and reported revenue last year of $2 million -- some of which went into his $420 double-breasted suit and his $600 24-karat gold bracelet.
"If the Government lets us do it," Mr. Wang said, "we'll do it."
 
Profound Consequences
His boldness captures the entrepreneurial spirit in China today, and the entire Chinese economy seems to be taking off with as much energy as Mr. Wang's chartered Boeing 737's and other aircraft. 
Perhaps the takeoff will still be aborted, but there is a growing view that the incomes of China's nearly 1.2 billion people could soar for decades with almost incalculable consequences here and abroad.
China's economic revolution of the last 14 years is already in many ways more profound than Mao's revolution of 1949, for Chinese history is littered with peasant rebellions and new dynasties. 
But never before in recorded history have so many people -- or perhaps even such a large proportion of humanity -- risen from poverty so rapidly.
Based on comparisons of purchasing power, China may now have the second largest economy in the world, ranking behind only the United States. 
Such statistics, while open to conflicting interpretation, suggest that China could overtake the United States as the biggest economy in another decade or so.
 
Will China Surpass U.S.?
"It may well be that when the history of the late 20th century is written 100 years from now, the most significant event will be the revolutionary changes in China, which will soon be Communist only in a rhetorical sense," Lawrence H. Summers, the former World Bank chief economist, wrote last year.
"For more than a century, the United States has been the world's largest economy," Mr. Summers added. 
"The only nation with a chance of surpassing it in the next generation in absolute scale is China."
What would China look like if it sustains its course?
If it reaches Taiwan's per-capita income levels, China will have an economy larger than all industrialized countries in the world combined. 
It would be a bit like the rise of Japan, except that China has nuclear weapons and nearly 10 times the population.
"It's mind-boggling," said a Western diplomat who studies the Chinese economy. 
"The amount of change is truly incredible."
"I really feel that it's sustainable, because of all the unfulfilled potential," the diplomat added. 
"They haven't come close to meeting the level of productivity that they could, in both industry and agriculture."
Assuming that China continues to flourish, there is still a crucial uncertainty about what this means.
Will economic growth lead to an easing of the repression in China and the emergence of a more democratic society?
Or will it prop up the hard-liners and subsidize the guns and spies that help keep the Communists in power?
There is evidence for both propositions, but the East Asian experience suggests that prosperity and economic pluralism may eventually lead to political pluralism as well.
In the short term, the authorities seem to have demonstrated that they can combine brutal political repression with an economic miracle. 
No one doubts that China's economy is one of the most vibrant in the world.
Dwight H. Perkins, the director of Harvard University's Institute for International Development, published a book in 1986 entitled, "China: Asia's Next Economic Giant?"
If he were redoing it today, he said, he would leave off the question mark -- or at least print it in smaller type.
"I don't see what's going to stop it, unless you can tell me a story of civil war or real chaos amounting to civil war," he said.
Not everyone agrees, and many Chinese are much more pessimistic. 
They worry about the risk of chaos or even civil war after the death of Deng Xiaoping, the nation's de-facto emperor, who is 88. 
They point to immense potential problems, ranging from corruption to the gap between economic dynamism and political stagnation.
No present or former Communist country has completed the transformation from central planning to a booming market economy. 
The East bloc countries -- like Yugoslavia and Hungary -- also prospered when they first introduced elements of capitalism, but they no longer seem so inspiring.
Attitudes abroad about China's prospects have fluctuated sharply over the last two decades, mirroring the boom-bust pattern in China's economy. 
Skeptics say this is simply another peak in a love-hate cycle that will lead to new disappointment in a year or two.
In the early- and mid-1980's, there was a wave of enthusiasm about China. 
That disappeared after troops fired on Tiananmen Square protesters in June 1989. 
The rise of the hard-liners coincided with a cyclical economic slowdown, and all bets were off.
The economy suffered less damage from sanctions and ebbing investor confidence than most expected, however. 
Last year, China's gross national product grew by a stunning 12 percent, to an official level of about $370 per person -- or perhaps to $2,000 or even $4,000, according to other estimates.
As the variety of figures suggest, Chinese statistics are maddeningly unreliable. 
On the one hand, they exaggerate growth rates because they do not sufficiently take inflation into account. 
On the other hand, they do not reflect the huge and growing underground economy -- encompassing everything from sidewalk restaurants to professional scribes who write letters for illiterate peasants. 
It is unclear which factor is more important, and for all anyone knows the two distortions may cancel each other out.
 
Even a Slowdown May Not Stop Boom
Almost everyone acknowledges that the growth rate of 12 percent in 1992 -- even if the figure is accurate -- was a fluke. 
The economy appears to be overheating, running up shortages of raw materials and driving up inflation, and the Government is trying to slow growth rates a bit, something that may cool foreign enthusiasm for what is happening in China.
Yet even if a slowdown is in store later in 1993, some economists believe that an annual growth rate of 6 to 9 percent may be sustainable, on average, for another decade or more.Since 1980, China's economy has grown by an average of 9.5 percent a year, roughly the same level that Japan and then Taiwan and South Korea experienced at their postwar peaks.
At a 9 percent growth rate, economic output quintuples in just 19 years. 
In contrast, the United States economy has expanded at an average annual rate of about 3 percent over the last 12 years.
The industrial revolution in China is most evident in cities along the eastern coast, like Wenzhou, 250 miles south of Shanghai. 
The atmosphere along the cluttered shop-lined streets is very much like that of Taiwan two decades ago, with frenetic activity, multitudes of small businesses and a good deal of what Marx would have called exploitation.
"We start at 7 or 8 in the morning and go on until about 11:30 at night," said Zhou Sailu, 37, a peasant who left her village three months ago to work at a shoe factory in Wenzhou.
Many of the workers maintain that routine seven days a week, month after month. 
They sleep in cubbyholes above the factory floor and take a break only for Chinese New Year and in the slack season around June.
Ms. Zhou left her husband in the village but brought her daughter, 19, who works beside her stitching shoes. 
They each earn a bit more than $100 a month. 
When a visitor asked if her husband objected to her leaving home to work all day in a grimy factory, Ms. Zhou smiled patronizingly at the stupidity of the question.
"How could he possibly have any objections?" she asked. 
"Look how much money I'm making!"
 
Regulation Virtually Disappears
In any case, it is clear that it is no longer very useful to describe China's economy as Communist, socialist or centrally planned. 
This year, for instance, the Government says the central plan will account for just 6 percent of industrial production.
Economic sectors like agriculture and industry are already slipping out of Government hands, so overall the state-owned sector accounts for less than one-third of total economic output.
In industry, the output of state-owned companies still makes up half of production, but the share is dropping steadily. 
By the Government's own predictions, the state share will drop to 27 percent of industrial output in the year 2000, with collective enterprises accounting for 48 percent and private companies making up 25 percent.
These days, the problem occasionally seems to be not enough Government regulation rather than too much. 
In the last few years, for instance, dozens of factories have turned out useless contraptions that are supposed to make people taller or to expand women's breasts. 
A company in Shandong Province has learned enough about marketing that it is exporting what it labels in bold English letters "gourmet powder."
Apparently this is intended to evoke the cooking secrets of the exotic Orient.
In Chinese characters, the product is labeled more clearly: MSG.
 
Similarities To Other 'Miracles'
Some economists are optimistic about China's prospects in part because of similarities they see with the "miracle economies" of Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
Though the link is unproven, some people note that all these areas were traditionally influenced by Confucianism. 
They say Confucianism may have left a useful legacy of respect for education and for thrift and savings.
Perhaps as a result of the emphasis on education, China's labor force -- much more than Africa's, India's or Bolivia's -- is literate enough to power an industrial revolution. 
And the 38 percent savings rate, one of the world's highest, helps finance new investment to maintain the economy's momentum.
Like Japan, Taiwan and South Korea, China went through a process of land redistribution, soon after the 1949 revolution, that evened out the worst inequities in wealth. 
China's peasants in effect have their own land, giving them more of a stake in the system than many peasants have in Latin America. 
And in China they have a sufficient base of nutrition, health and education to work productively in the factories sprouting across the country.
China has also adopted -- in contrast to many other developing countries -- the same export-oriented growth strategy as its successful neighbors. 
It maintains a realistic exchange rate instead of a hugely overvalued currency like that of the old Soviet Union or of many developing countries.
A crucial economic advantage that China has over other developing countries is that it has brought its population growth under control. 
While China's 14-year-old family planning policies are harsh and coercive, sometimes involving forced sterilization, they give the country an economic edge over nations like Laos or Kenya, where the economy must expand by 3 percent annually just to keep up with the population.
What the statistical comparisons obscure is the powerful yearning to do business that is infecting cities and villages across China. 
It is often said that 70 years of Communism stunted the entrepreneurial feelings of Russians, but in China tens of millions of people are racing to start new restaurants or factories. 
Some say that in the current economic boom, China may be the easiest place in the world to make a fortune.
"My nephew is in California, looking after my business interests there," said Zhou Jiangning, the owner of a factory in Wenzhou that produces jade carvings. 
"But he says that it's easier to make money in China. 
Expenses are too high in America."
Mr. Zhou earned a profit of $750,000 last year on sales of about $1 million, and he says that profits and revenue are rising by about 35 percent a year. 
He is an apt representative of China's new gilded age: in the first 15 minutes of conversation, he mentions that his diamond-studded gold Rolex watch cost $16,000 and asks if it is true that middle-class Americans earn less than $100,000 a year.
"Oh," he said soberly, shaking his head sympathetically, "that's not very much."
To be sure, many Chinese find people like Mr. Zhou less inspiring than infuriating. 
The economic boom is bypassing some inland rural areas, where tens of millions live in caves or rudimentary huts, where meat is a great luxury, where parents cannot afford to send their children to school.
Life has never been fair, but to some Chinese peasants, it has rarely been so unfair. 
One of Communist China's great achievements was a relatively egalitarian distribution of wealth in a nation that historically had huge disparities; now those traditional disparities are returning with remarkable rapidity.
 
After Deng, The Deluge?
The one ingredient in the East Asian recipe for an economic boom that appears absolutely essential is stability, so investors are willing to risk their money long enough to get a return. 
That may be the weak link in China's strategy, for no one knows what will happen after the death of Mr. Deng.
"The best analogy with the economy today is with the way things were in the early 1980's," said a senior Chinese official who is on the pessimistic side. 
"Then the Government divided up the communes and freed agriculture. 
Today it has freed the cities in the same way, and there's a burst of entrepreneurship and initiative. 
But big problems will come up, just as they did with agriculture in the mid-1980's.
"Who knows what will happen after old Deng dies?" he added. 
"Maybe China will collapse into chaos. 
There's no chance that the hard-liners can take over again in the long run -- that's not the risk. 
The risk is chaos."
That view seems to be widely shared. 
Many believe that if hard-liners ever had a chance of tugging China back to the Maoist era, it was in the aftermath of the Tiananmen crackdown. 
If they could not succeed then, many Chinese say, they never will. 
On the other hand, chaos -- or luan, a four-letter word in Chinese -- pops up cyclically in Chinese history, and many economists and officials fear major upheavals that could derail all progress.
"There's a huge potential for conflicts," a Chinese journalist said. 
"There's the problem of regionalism, and then inflation will come back again. 
And as the economy develops, people will demand more of a political voice, and the Government won't want to give anything up. 
We'll see a lot more of these conflicts."
Regionalism is seen by many Chinese as a primary threat because the provinces are clearly gaining power at the expense of the central Government. 
Localities regularly ignore national laws and policies they dislike, and they establish illegal barriers to goods from other provinces. 
This reminds Chinese of the rise of regional warlords early in this century, and some fear an eventual carving up of China into states that would resemble divisions in Europe.
 
Some Threats To the Miracle
Other challenges that could threaten China's economic development over the next decade are these:
*Power struggles will almost certainly follow the death of Mr. Deng, and could lead to turmoil and a coup d'etat. 
A coup by the armed forces might not be an overwhelming problem for the economy, but some experts do not rule out the possibility of fighting among military commanders and even of civil war.
*Taiwan is suffering from an identity crisis, and there is a possibility that it will eventually declare itself an independent country. 
China has promised to intervene militarily if that happens, and the result could be an international uproar and sanctions against China. 
Economic activity might be disrupted for many years.
*Corruption is growing steadily, and at some point it may begin to sap economic growth. 
Public outrage over Government officials' demands for bribes -- along with anger over decontrolled prices and layoffs from state factories -- could lead to renewed street demonstrations that threaten the Government. 
If the Government again ordered army commanders to fire on protesters, China would once more be thrown into a crisis.
*A less cataclysmic challenge is simply the mammoth problems that China faces in developing infrastructure and training its workers. 
Investment in railroads, ports and energy production has lagged, and may not be able to support continued growth at current rates. 
Education spending is not keeping pace with the economy, so China may not have enough skilled workers to lift itself to a higher technological level of manufacturing.
The Chinese offer other scenarios in which the economy collapses, civil war breaks out and the state disintegrates into regional fiefdoms. 
Perhaps the important point is simply that there is a persistent cloud of uncertainty about where China is going.
Another cautionary point is that predictions about which developing countries will "take off" are often proven wrong. 
In the 1950's, the two East Asian economies regarded as the most promising were the Philippines and Burma. 
Compared with economies of other countries in the region, they have been going downhill ever since.
 
Will Prosperity Foster Democracy?
Even if China maintains its economic momentum, there are mixed views about whether this will encourage democratic change any time soon. 
Mr. Deng, as shrewd an analyst of China as anyone, clearly is betting that economic growth will sustain Communist Party rule rather than undermine it.
Yet the East Asian experience suggests that in the long run, economic growth fosters a more open and democratic society. 
The middle class has eventually sought a measure of political participation, occasionally even toppling leaders who brought them huge increases in standards of living.
The best examples are Taiwan and South Korea, where local leaders were forced by popular pressure in the late 1980's to start accommodating demonstrators instead of shooting them. 
The middle class was a steadying presence in each country, seeking evolutionary change rather than violent revolution.
A middle class is emerging in China numbering in the tens of millions at least, still a small proportion of the population, which increasingly supply the ranks of senior officials.
Telephones, photocopiers, fax machines, computer modems and printing presses are proliferating, and more Chinese are traveling abroad. 
While the Government can crack down on protests, it seems virtually powerless to stop the flow of information and ideas.
In Wenzhou and other prosperous cities in the economic vanguard, which may offer a glimpse into the future, there has been almost no overt challenge to the Communist Party. 
The 1989 pro-democracy protests took place on a much smaller scale in the bustling south than in northern cities like Beijing. 
Yet in these cities economic development has undermined the Communist Party in more subtle ways, costing it its relevance and prestige.
"Girls don't want a boyfriend who's a cadre," said Xiang Zhengmeng, a 19-year-old waitress in Wenzhou. 
"We'd like a businessman. 
That way, we can get more money and live a better life."
NEXT: Empire of "Avon ladies."
