
The London stock market led a widespread upward surge on European stock prices yesterday, rising to its highest close since April 15.
In China, meanwhile, profit taking took some of the shine off a spectacular rebound on its stock markets.
The strength of the European markets surprised many traders. 
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 leading shares soared 60.1 points, or 1.94 percent, in a jump unmatched since June, to close at 3,157.5.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-share index advanced by 1.5 percent, led by a strong chemicals sector, while in Paris, the CAC 40-share index ended 47 points, or 2.3 percent, ahead on lively overseas interest and strong futures.
British shares were helped by a report from the Bank of England saying that it expected underlying inflation to peak just above 3 percent in the first quarter of 1996, then fall back. 
It also said disinflationary pressures generated by the slack in the economy had been greater than anticipated.
The Bank of England's forecast was based on the assumption that the current 5.25 percent prime lending rate would not change.
Elsewhere, China's two stock exchanges gave back part of their gains from a spectacular rally on Monday that sent prices surging more than 30 percent.
Shanghai's A-share index dove 3.19 percent to 433.42 points as buying stalled just below the 500-point mark. 
The Shenzhen A index shed 1.75 percent to 125.80 points.
Brokers said Beijing's pledge to freeze all new issues and listings this year, which sent Shanghai's market rocketing by 36.14 percent and Shenzhen's up by 33.96 percent Monday, was still buoying sentiment.
Small investors and institutions alike placed great trust in Beijing's resolve to rescue the market, brokers said.
"The new measures are different from former steps taken by Beijing because they are concrete and resolute," said Yan Yulong, a broker with Guo Tai Securities.
Past attempts by China's top securities regulator, Liu Hongru, to talk up the market served only to further frustrate investors and sparked new rounds of selling.
