
The Chinese authorities disclosed today that a retired army general, the highest-ranking leader in Beijing of the spiritual movement that was banned last week, has confessed his "mistakes" and renounced his allegiance to the organization.
The admission by the general, Li Qihua, is a milestone in China's crackdown on the movement, Falun Gong, and a sign that despite widespread resistance by members, the authorities appear to be succeeding in dismantling the group's core.
Mr. Li, 81, who carried the rank of lieutenant general in the People's Liberation Army, was head of the 301 Hospital in Beijing, an extremely sensitive post because the enormous military-run hospital is where China's top leaders are treated.
He retired 15 years ago after a lifetime in the Communist cause that he said began at age 10. 
His seniority, impeccable credentials and continued access to the highest circles in China made him strategically important to Falun Gong, and equally threatening to the country's leaders.
Today, the military newspaper, Liberation Army Daily, printed a question-and-answer interview with Mr. Li in which he offered a classic Communist Party-style confession as he endorsed the party's crackdown, the nation's most sweeping political campaign in a decade,
"I felt I was cheated," Mr. Li said, according to the account. 
"The party's decision is very wise, very correct and very prompt."
In the secretive and shadow-prone way of Chinese politics, however, Mr. Li's former position and rank were not described in the article, which simply referred to him as an old cadre who had "wrongly written an article propagating Falun Gong."
To the casual reader, Mr. Li's long admission might look like just another item in the anti-Falun Gong propaganda that has swamped China's official media over the last week.
But as Chinese insiders know, Mr. Li has been identified by Chinese authorities as Falun Gong's top officer in Beijing, and the article he wrote was a critical item in the Government's decision to mount such a wide-reaching political campaign against the movement. 
Falun Gong advocates an amalgam of traditional qigong breathing exercises and meditation, with elements of Buddhism and Taoism, to enhance spiritual and physical well-being. 
The Communist Party has mobilized its vast apparatus to demand that government offices and work places all over the nation purge Falun Gong members and swear allegiance to the party's Marxist ideology.
Mr. Li's article was brought to the attention of President Jiang Zemin on May 5, 10 days after a huge demonstration by Falun Gong supporters outside China's leadership compound in central Beijing, said a Chinese political analyst with access to internal documents.
In his article, which was circulated among senior military officers, Mr. Li wrote that China's leaders should look kindly on the spiritual movement. 
What is more, Mr. Li urged leaders to study Falun Gong personally to improve their own physical and mental health.
Gen. Zhang Wannian, China's top military officer and vice chairman of the Central Military Commission under Mr. Jiang, sent a copy of the article to the President recommending that action be taken against Mr. Li.
Mr. Jiang, who was deeply alarmed by the boldness of the challenge to his authority implicit in the April 25 demonstration, wrote a sharply worded memorandum to fellow Politburo members identifying Falun Gong as a serious threat to the Communist Party's existence.
The memo was dated May 8, the day after NATO bombed the Chinese Embassy in Yugoslavia, which caused such outrage here that most Chinese saw it as an affront to their national dignity. 
The authorities permitted students to hold anti-American demonstrations, which included throwing rocks at the United States Embassy in Beijing.
If Falun Gong masters can foresee everything, Mr. Jiang wrote, how could they not predict the bombing of our embassy?
At the same time, Mr. Jiang instructed Gen. Wang Ke, the director of the People's Liberation Army's General Logistics Department, to visit Mr. Li to help him see the party's position more clearly.
Mr. Li apparently buckled right away. 
Yet his confession was only made public today.
In the confession, Mr. Li made it clear that he will now oppose the teachings of Li Hongzhi, who founded Falun Gong in 1992 and now lives in New York City. 
The two Li's are not related.
"When Li Hongzhi says that Falun Gong can cure all disease, that is a ridiculous position and must be a way to trick people," Mr. Li was quoted as saying. 
"Seeking medical treatment when you are sick is common sense. 
If Falun Gong is really so powerful, why do we need doctors, why do we need hospitals?"
Mr. Li, a veteran of the Communist military forces' Long March in the mid-1930's, the defining political event of the party's founding generation of leaders, has apparently been permitted to stay at home, while many other Falun Gong leaders have been taken into custody.
Although the organization of Falun Gong has remained mysterious, staffed by adherents who have gone to extreme lengths to protect what they believe is a sacred mission to propagate the teachings of Li Hongzhi, the crackdown is gradually disclosing clues about its structure.
The official media have reported that under the central leadership of the Falun Dafa Research Society, there were 39 provincial-level "general guidance stations" and 1,900 lower-level "guidance stations" spread all over China. 
For ordinary practitioners, the authorities said, there were more than 28,000 practice sites, mostly in urban parks and public places.
In recent days, the authorities have started producing confessions from the heads and deputy heads of "general guidance stations" in Jilin Province and Shandong Province.
In a nationwide political campaign, Communist Party leaders in each province are expected to produce the confession of the chief local culprit, in this case Falun Gong leaders, so the number who are actually brought forward may provide the best indication of how well Beijing's campaign is going.
One difficulty that Chinese leaders face is Falun Gong's amorphous nature, which makes it difficult to control. 
Another difficulty is the group's home-grown nature, which makes it hard to cast as a foreign plot, a favorite tactic in identifying a political enemy and one that was used against the democracy movement of 1989 at Tiananmen Square.
Yet Chinese officials have pointed to a foreign role in Falun Gong anyway, apparently because Li Hongzhi is based in the United States and because much of the Internet communication among the group's leaders has come from outside China.
"Hostile Western forces are using 'Westernization' and 'separatist' strategies to constantly carry out ideological and cultural infiltration," the New China News Agency reported this week.
A Hong Kong newspaper, Ming Pao, also reported that Mr. Jiang's memo specifically pointed to "behind-the-scenes involvement of foreign forces" in Falun Gong.
