
Citing environmental concerns, the Export-Import Bank refused today to help finance a huge dam in China that is intended to be the largest hydroelectric project in history.
The agency's board voted unanimously not to issue letters of interest -- a preliminary step in subsidizing loans for foreign countries to buy American goods and services -- to Caterpillar Inc. and other equipment makers that have sought to take part in the project.
The Clinton Administration had recommended against Ex-Im financing for the Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River, in Hubei province of central China. 
The dam, which is expected to cost more than $25 billion to build, is to be about a mile and a half wide and 600 feet high, flooding farmland and towns and creating a 400-mile-long reservoir.
The bank said it would reconsider if China provided extensive new information about how it would protect water quality and preserve endangered species, and meet other concerns about the project. 
But the decision not to proceed with applications for loan subsidies from American companies could be a substantial roadblock to these companies ambitions, though it is not likely to affect progress on the dam itself.
The bank's president and chairman, Martin A. Kamarck, noted that companies were free to participate without its support, and that several American companies had already sold $60 million to $100 million of equipment and services for the project. 
To date, he said, Canada was the only other nation whose export-credit agency had offered financing.
Among the American companies that are interested in the project are Caterpillar, which makes earth-moving equipment; Rotec Industries of Elmhurst, Ill., which makes concrete-handling equipment, and Voight Hydro of York, Pa., which makes turbines.
The three companies had been seeking initial approval to apply for financing of equipment sales worth an estimated $500 million, with the potential for greater sales in the future.
The bank's environmental requirements were established by Congress in 1992 in response to complaints by environmental advocacy groups that the bank was supporting destructive projects.
Mr. Kamarck said that to qualify for loans, the Chinese would have to provide plans for waste-water treatment plants upstream of the dam to reduce the pollution discharged into the reservoir. 
They would also have to supply plans for cleaning up toxic waste sites that would be flooded and for dredging contaminated sediments.
Beyond that, the bank wants a better plan for protecting endangered species, more information about how to minimize destruction downstream in the river's other lakes and estuaries, and explanations of how resettlement would be controlled to protect forests and other natural resources.
He said the bank had found no financial or technical weaknesses in the dam project, other than the environmental concerns.
Last year, President Clinton's National Security Council, citing environmental and human rights concerns, recommended against providing Ex-Im Bank financing for the project. 
Its recommendation followed a study by several Government agencies.
While the Ex-Im Bank, as an independent Government agency whose board is appointed by the President, can disregard such a recommendation, it was widely considered unlikely to do so.
Marsha Hausser, a spokeswoman for Caterpillar, criticized the decision but said that the company would continue to try to persuade the Chinese authorities to purchase American products for the project. 
Previously, company officials had described the bank's role as crucial in allowing Caterpillar to sell equipment.
"America's export competitiveness has suffered as a result of today's decision," Ms. Hausser argued.
The bank recently resumed consideration of several requests for financing of Chinese projects after delaying decisions since February because of a dispute between the United States and China over the Chinese sale of nuclear technology to Pakistan.
The Ex-Im Bank helps encourage the sale of American goods and services around the world by guaranteeing and otherwise subsidizing commercial loans, which makes American companies more able to compete with foreign concerns.
China says the benefits of the dam include protecting millions of people from seasonal flooding and producing more than one-tenth of the current annual energy output. 
China is highly dependent on coal for generating electricity, which emits extensive pollution.
United States environmental groups strongly oppose the project, and welcomed its rejection today.
So did human rights groups, who have objected to both the forcible resettlement of the local population near the dam and the repression of dissidents in China who oppose the project.
      
