
Two months before the 10th anniversary of the crackdown on student protesters in Tiananmen Square, a former top Chinese official has sent an impassioned letter to China's leaders urging them to end a decade-long "cover-up" and to renounce the order that sent soldiers to disperse the demonstrators, killing hundreds.
"I have only one thing to say and that is to urge you to reverse the assessment of the 1989 student demonstrations without delay," wrote Bao Tong, a former leading Central Committee member jailed from 1989 to 1996 for sympathizing with the protesters. 
"The events of June 4, 1989, are shameful to humanity."
China's leaders have repeatedly defended their decision to forcefully move out the protesters, who they said were involved in a "counterrevolutionary rebellion."
Mr. Bao's letter, dated today, is an opening public salvo in what is likely to be a tense prelude to the anniversary. 
Despite constant surveillance and warnings not to speak out, Mr. Bao has remained the most prominent Chinese critic of the Government's actions in 1989, expressing the misgivings that many citizens feel but dare not utter. 
The Tiananmen crackdown remains the most forbidden topic in China.
Ever the politician, he argues in the letter that the decision to fire on students must be re-evaluated because it was morally wrong and because it undercuts public support for China's ruling Communist Party.
"Letting the wrongful assessment of the events to remain without reversal means the continuation of severe pain for the Chinese people," Mr. Bao wrote.
Chinese leaders have taken pains to insure that June 4 will pass uneventfully, hoping to focus attention instead on the country's lavish 50th anniversary celebration, planned for Oct. 
1.
Authorities have recently become more aggressive in closing down political discussion groups and publications that were tolerated just a year ago. 
And several former student protesters say they have been visited by local public security officers and warned "not to make trouble."
But perhaps the biggest deterrent is that Tiananmen Square -- the only open space in this packed city of 14 million -- is currently boarded up with high walls, closed for renovation in preparation for the Oct. 
1 celebrations. 
The project was originally scheduled for completion this spring but local officials recently announced that the reopening had been postponed until July.
Most ordinary Chinese still regard June 4 as far "too sensitive" to discuss in public. 
But privately, many remain deeply chagrined about the decision to use force.
"Millions of people in Beijing and hundreds of thousands of bystanders from other parts of the country watched the events unfold," Mr. Bao wrote, adding: "The history of bloodshed remains in people's hearts; they will not forget."
In a telephone interview, Mr. Bao said he wrote the letter out of the conviction that "when each of us begin to speak out and make our own views known, it will become increasingly necessary for the leaders to reconsider the decision."
Although Mr. Bao has been warned about his "unapproved" contact with foreign reporters and the police screen visitors to his home, he is cryptically optimistic about his current situation: "My life seems free, it should be free and I hope it stays free," he said.
The letter is addressed to President Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and the members of the Politburo Standing Committee. 
In the late 1980's, Mr. Bao was chief of staff for Zhao Ziyang, then the Communist Party chief.
But in May 1989, both Mr. Zhao and Mr. Bao opposed the used of force to disperse the demonstrators. 
Both lost their jobs in the days before the June 4th crackdown.
Mr. Zhao has been under house arrest ever since. 
On May 28, 1989, a Government driver picked Mr. Bao up at his home in Beijing for a supposed meeting -- and drove him to prison. 
He spent the next seven years in solitary confinement, followed by a year of house arrest.
He was freed just before President Clinton's visit last summer and immediately started speaking out on issues like free speech and the rule of law. 
Expressing a common view on the streets in Beijing, Mr. Bao says the student leaders were naive and certainly "made mistakes," but adds that their protests were "orderly" and nonviolent. 
"Whatever they did or said should be dealt with according to democratic principles and the law," he said.
Mr. Bao, a political insider in the spring of 1989, places responsibility for the crackdown on Deng Xiaoping, China's former leader, who died in 1997. 
He takes issue with the conventional wisdom that China's current leadership could never criticize the crackdown because many were already in power at that time.
"When the tragedy happened most of you were not in the highest level decision-making positions in handling the event (except for one who bore a lesser responsibility) and had no involvement in the case," he wrote. 
"It is unnecessary for you to bear such a burden now."
The "one who bore a lesser responsibility" is a reference to Li Peng, the current head of the National People's Congress, who was China's Prime Minister in 1989.
Mr. Bao's letter also contains a Cassandra-like warning: That if the Party does not reverse the verdict, 1.2 billion Chinese will rise up and do it themselves.
"If you were to initiate the reversal of the judgment of the 1989 students demonstrations, the benefits to China would be great and the cost would be minimal," he wrote. 
"Such a course of action would be beneficial to the people and to all of you, and especially in strengthening the reputation of the Party. 
Therefore, I believe it best for me to urge you, rather than others, to take such action."
      
