
On the outskirts of town, a former Stalinist prison stands behind a row of concrete slabs. 
Undaunted by warnings from local residents who wish to remember Stalin's horrors but are acutely aware that this is still state property, the Chinese-American guest scrambled up the wall.
The guest, Harry Wu, a former Chinese dissident, spent 19 years in Maoist prisons that were modeled on the Soviet gulag system and set up with the help of Russians. 
Now that he was visiting the Russian city that was once the center of a sprawling archipelago of sub-Arctic prison camps, he wanted a better look.
"You can't go in there," cried Miron Etlis, a former prisoner who was guiding Mr. Wu on a trip to a nearby monument to Stalin's victims. 
"That's military property."
Mr. Wu, 61, jumped off the wall into the yard.
Mr. Wu is a research fellow at the Hoover Institute at Stanford University and is active on behalf of Chinese political prisoners. 
He visited Magadan, a city of 134,000, as it was commemorating the 60th anniversary of its incorporation at the height of Stalin's purges and seven years after the Kolyma labor camps opened here.
The anniversary came complete with oompah bands in the square and cheerful drunks lurching down Lenin Prospekt in the midnight sun, apparently heedless of the tens of thousands of former prisoners buried in the tundra around here -- some of the two million or so who mined gold, silver, tin and uranium in the Magadan and nearby Chukotka regions from 1932 to 1957.
Mr. Hu flew in at his own expense to speak to a crowd of just 15 at a historical conference held as part of the 60th anniversary events. 
He has repeatedly returned to China to document prison labor and the harvesting of organs from executed inmates, and said he wanted to urge Russians both to treasure their nascent democracy and the memory of Soviet repression. 
"You have to remove all the Lenin and Stalin statues and put up gulag monuments," Mr. Wu said at one point, jabbing his finger at his hosts. 
"That's the only way to keep it from coming back."
Magadan residents, like Russians in general, are ambivalent about how best to commemorate the legacy of state terror. 
On a hill outside town, a monument to gulag victims looms like a giant head from Easter Island.
Yet a street and a school are named for Eduard Berzin, the director of Dalstroi, the state company that built the camps and ran the mining enterprises, and his muscular bust stands on a pedestal in front of city hall. 
Because he was purged in 1937, officials have recast him as a gulag victim.
Lyudmila Vronchina, a city librarian who helps former inmates garner the documents necessary to apply for federal aid for ex-prisoners, said the Berzin monument "sends chills down my spine."
"He is a murderer," she said.
Aleksandr Biryukov, a Magadan lawyer whose father was a camp prisoner, has compiled a list of every one of the 11,000 people documented to have been shot in Kolyma camps by the state security organ, the N.K.V.D. 
Tens of thousands of others died from disease, cold and overwork. 
Mr. Biryukov has also begun researching the location of graves and said some bodies are still partly preserved in the permafrost.
Mr. Wu had another idea: using the old prison as a gulag museum. 
The property is currently owned by the Russian military but partly occupied by a scrap metal dealership.
After jumping from the wall, Mr. Wu charged into the old prison, yanking open doors and testing locks, trying to calculate how many prisoners occupied each cell.
The cells, whose walls have been knocked down, measured about 10 feet by 11 feet and were unlighted and unheated. 
Prisoners sometimes froze to death overnight. 
Surviving prisoners would stack the dead in the corner and eat their bread rations until the guards noticed.
"So each cell was designed for 20 people," said Mr. Wu, pacing about. 
Mr. Etlis, 71, who had found his way in through a gate, arrived to hear this. 
"Ha!
I was in a cell like this in Kazakhstan and there were 50 people," he said. 
Mr. Wu eventually concluded that up to 3,500 prisoners had been crammed into the building.
After Mr. Wu had filmed every corner, the group filed out. 
But he hung back, apparently pondering the prison's history, then beckoned to a reporter and pointed out a 1930's-era padlock bolted to a jail door.
"Get it off," Mr. Wu said. 
"I want it."
After efforts to pick it with a pen failed, he said: "Just break it. 
Break it with your hands."
The lock held. 
Disappointed, Mr. Wu walked out. 
Just such a lock had hung on his own Chinese prison door. 
"This," he said, "was the lock produced by Lenin."
