
After heavy lobbying by the computer industry and the Clinton Administration, the Senate today rejected a proposal to tighten control of the sale of American supercomputers to China and Russia and instead voted for further study of the issue.
The question of whether to tighten supercomputer export controls will now be resolved in a conference with the House of Representatives, which last month overwhelmingly passed a measure requiring a license for sales of some computers to countries such as China and Russia. 
The different Senate and House measures are attached to the Defense Authorization Act.
In 1995, the Clinton Administration greatly relaxed export controls for supercomputers, transferring to the companies the responsibility for screening buyers to insure that they were not diverting technology to military uses.
The normally arcane subject of export controls became a lively debate earlier this year when it was disclosed that Chinese and Russian nuclear weapon facilities had acquired American supercomputers without Federal licenses.
This led to criminal investigations, diplomatic protests, legislative action and industry reaction. 
I.B.M., for example, mobilized a lobbying effort that ranged from low-level employees around the country to its chairman and chief executive officer, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., who called Senators such as Republican leader Trent Lott of Mississippi, according to a company spokesman.
The Senate originally considered an amendment similar to the one that passed the House, shifting responsibility back to the Federal Government by requiring licenses for sales of certain computers to dozens of countries, including Russia and China.
But in a vote of 72 to 17 today, opponents backed a substitute amendment that retains the current system but calls for a study of the national security implications of the issue by the General Accounting Office, an arm of Congress.
Senator Rod Grams, Republican of Minnesota, argued "it is not possible to effectively control" exports of mid-level computers and doing so would be "handing the mid-level computer business to Japan and other allies."
Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen wrote a letter supporting the Grams proposal. 
And Administration officials in Madrid for the NATO summit meeting kept tabs this week on the debate, making phone calls to Congress, officials said.
But Clinton Administration arguments also helped buttress the position of those Senators who wanted to reinstitute tighter controls.
For example, one backer of tighter controls, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said the possibility of lost business was overstated, since the Pentagon and the Department of Commerce had told the Senators that "the only country likely to step in was Japan" if licensing requirements were reimposed and "they have more restrictive controls than the United States."
      
