
The White House tried last month to obtain sensitive counterintelligence information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation about Beijing's plans to influence American politics, but Director Louis J. Freeh of the F.B.I. rebuffed the inquiry, Administration officials said today.
The F.B.I. material was sought by Charles F. C. Ruff, the new White House counsel, for a briefing of Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. In a Feb. 
18 letter to Jamie S. Gorelick, the Deputy Attorney General, people who have seen the letter said, Mr. Ruff posed a series of questions about what Federal investigators knew or suspected about the involvement of Chinese officials and citizens in a purported plan to make illegal contributions to American political campaigns.
Mr. Ruff said he was seeking the information on behalf of the National Security Council. 
At the time, Ms. Albright was preparing for a trip to China, scheduled for late February.
Mr. Ruff, who said today that there was nothing improper about his request, stressed in the letter that the White House wanted "information only concerning the activities of officials and nationals of the People's Republic of China" and not American citizens.
A reply was prepared, with the approval of top Justice Department officials, but Mr. Freeh, who was traveling in the Middle East at the time, intervened and ordered the document withheld, Federal law enforcement officials said.
The officials said Mr. Freeh had decided to stick to his earlier decision that no information relating to possible influence buying by China would be provided to anyone in Congress or the executive branch. 
Mr. Freeh, officials said, was worried that whatever information was passed on would leak and that the F.B.I. would be criticized for sharing information with the President's aides, officials said.
The F.B.I. director's refusal of the White House's request was a vivid example of the tensions among the White House, the Justice Department and the F.B.I. that have escalated in the unfolding investigation of the financing of the 1996 Presidential campaign.
The dispute over Mr. Ruff's request may also help explain why Mr. Freeh has seemed so personally at odds with the White House, to the point where the F.B.I. argued publicly with the President this month over accounts of briefings that the F.B.I. had provided to the National Security Council at the start of the China investigation.
In addition, the exchange showed the extent to which the investigation has tied the relationships among Federal agencies in knots. 
Indeed, some Government lawyers suggested today that it was Mr. Freeh who had erred by withholding the information from the White House and thus leaving the Secretary of State without critical information at a time when she was embarking on a diplomatic mission to Beijing.
These officials said Mr. Freeh, who had been accused in Congress of maintaining a cozy relationship with the White House, had simply decided not to risk further criticism.
In the summer of 1993, Presidential aides were embarrassed when they summoned the F.B.I. to investigate the White House travel office. 
Weeks later, there was more trouble when some investigators said they were blocked by White House officials during their inquiry into the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the former deputy White House counsel who had committed suicide that year. 
Last year, Republicans in Congress blasted the White House for obtaining F.B.I. background files on hundreds of Presidential aides.
In his letter, Mr. Ruff said, "We seek information only concerning the activities of officials and nationals of the People's Republic of China and wish only to obtain sufficient information to enable the National Security Council to formulate an appropriate policy with respect to allegations regarding those activities."
Mr. Ruff's letter said that he did not want information that might interfere with any criminal investigation and that any information he obtained should also be turned over to the House and Senate intelligence committees.
Even so, some senior F.B.I. officials were surprised by the request, which was marked "top secret," particularly because Mr. Freeh had earlier decided not to share investigative material with the White House or Congress.
Moreover, Mr. Ruff, who is Mr. Clinton's fifth counsel, has a reputation in legal circles as a tough litigator. 
In his current post, Mr. Ruff is responsible for supervising the defense of the President in the inquiries into campaign fund-raising and some F.B.I. officials feared his request could be interpreted as an attempt to learn how much information the the F.B.I. had collected.
But Mr. Ruff and Justice Department officials called the request a legally and ethically appropriate effort by the White House, acting on behalf of the National Security Council, to obtain information that could be helpful in Ms. Albright's meetings with Chinese representatives.
Moreover, Mr. Ruff said in an interview today, under interagency rules, requests for F.B.I. information that could interfere with a criminal investigation must be made by the counsel's office.
"This was a matter being dealt with by the National Security Council in its capacity as adviser to the President," he said.
Law-enforcement officials said that Mr. Ruff's letter arrived when Mr. Freeh had left Washington on a trip to the Middle East. 
In his absence, Attorney General Janet Reno and her deputy, Ms. Gorelick asked the Justice Department's criminal division and Mr. Freeh's top deputies to decide whether any information could be turned over to the White House.
The Justice officials, along with top officials at the F.B.I. like Robert Bryant, then head of the F.B.I. national security division, and William J. Esposito, the newly appointed F.B.I. 
Deputy Director, agreed that Mr. Ruff's narrowly phrased questions could be answered without jeopardizing the investigation.
After preparing several versions of a response, several officials described the result as a "plain vanilla" report that contained little information beyond accounts already described in news articles on the suspected influence scheme by the Chinese. 
The broad outlines of the effort had been gleaned from conversations intercepted by the National Security Agency, the secretive Federal intelligence unit that eavesdrops on global communications.
But before the Justice Department turned the report over to the White House, Mr. Bryant telephoned Mr. Freeh, who objected to releasing any information. 
The reply was held until Mr. Freeh discussed the matter with Ms. Reno. They agreed to send the White House copies of documents like the briefing materials that the F.B.I. had given to two national security council aides in June 1996 when the issue first arose at the White House.
      
