
FOR SOME 1,500 YEARS, UNTIL ITS decline in the 15th century, the ancient trade route known as the Silk Road was a principal artery for goods and ideas passing from China to Europe. 
Finery, spices and porcelain were exchanged for such Western delicacies as walnuts and figs and, more importantly, gold.
Last year, my wife, Shareen, and I were privileged pilgrims on this route, following the presumed path of Marco Polo. 
Our journey only became possible after the Karakoram Highway was opened to tourism in 1986. 
Built jointly by China and Pakistan over two decades, this spectacular paved road winds from near Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, to Kashgar, an oasis city in Chinese Central Asia. 
We traveled by minivan for the first third of our trip; then, in China, we switched to bus, train and plane, passing from snow peaks to deserts on an itinerary that ended in Xian, once the caravan terminus of the Silk Road.
Although the rewards of the journey were generous, so were the discomforts. 
Lasting some three weeks and covering more than 2,500 miles, it is a trip more safely managed by a group. 
Shareen and I therefore chose to sign up on a Silk Road tour organized by the British Museum.
We joined the tour in London in late August. 
At an orientation lecture by our scholarly guide, Dr. Wang Tao, of London University's School of Oriental and African Studies, we studied our fellow travelers with guarded curiosity, having already improved the odds for congeniality by persuading three American friends to join the group of 20. 
Only after landing in Islamabad, however, were we able to take full measure of the rest of our troupe: an adventurous Tuscan matron, two Argentine women and Britons of varying vintage but with a common stiff-upper-lip demeanor. 
We guessed, during a first day spent visiting museums and mosques, that our companions had that essential steadying quality the English call bottom, and so it proved. 
We also guessed, accurately, that our tour manager, Lucy Turner, a young and energetic Briton, would be equal to the unavoidable screw-ups on a perhaps too ambitious itinerary.
On the fine clear morning of Aug. 
28, we clambered into two Toyota deluxe vans, each seating 14 passengers, along with our gear: everything from field glasses and canteens to an exotic miscellany of just-in-case pills. 
We left Islamabad for the Grand Trunk Road, begun centuries ago by a Mogul emperor, which once extended from Peshawar to Calcutta. 
Memorably described in the pages of Kipling, it churns today with an even thicker tide of humanity. 
We threaded among teetering polychrome trucks and three-wheeled pickups, the local buses, passengers protruding from their gaping rear doors. 
We slowed intermittently for herds of cattle and sheep, ambling with seasoned nonchalance.
Those of us in the lead van were accompanied by the first of a half-dozen locally assigned guides. 
He was a Pakistani of polyglot skills, who, like his successors in China, stuck mostly to a standard script, dealt vaguely with awkward questions and imparted a strong whiff of the currently correct political views.
Our first stop, an hour or so from Islamabad, was at the ruins of Taxila, in remote times a notable caravansary and monastic center. 
Its history provided a preview of multicultural themes that became familiar in the days ahead. 
Alexander the Great stayed here, so did the peace-loving and law-giving Buddhist emperor Asoka. 
Greeks settled here and so did Kushans, Scythians and Parthians. 
This cultural mix over the centuries yielded up fine Gandharan sculptures, combining Hellenic and Indian styles. 
Taxila was a civilized and civilizing crossroads in Central Asia for more than a thousand years, but it perished in flames and carnage, sacked by the horse-borne White Huns in the sixth century A.D. or thereabouts.
From 1912 to 1934, British archeologists exhumed the sprawling site, uncovering the stone and brick foundations of the Greek-built lower city of Sirkap. 
Nearby, they bared Buddhist temples, stupas and monastic cells, and later restored the most interesting. 
A rich selection of Gandharan Buddhas, with their Westernized features, and troves of coins, rings and bejeweled necklaces were also unearthed; these are well displayed in an on-site museum, complete with a guard who exacted a tip for showing us mildly erotic figures in an enclosed alcove.
In the lower city, we gathered for an introductory lecture by Dr. Wang Tao, soon to be called Tao by all of us. 
Chinese-born, soft-spoken and in his 30's, Tao interpreted Buddhist iconography and described the antique human handiworks that we would find scattered at intervals all along our route: huge rocks coated with pictographs and ancient scripts, giant statues of Buddha in improbable and inaccessible perches, caves with fading murals, old crumbling forts and roadside tombs.
WE THEN BEGAN a four-day journey along the Karakoram Highway that would take us about 600 miles through Pakistan and across the Khunjerab Pass into China. 
Engineers cut few tunnels for the mostly two-lane road, which hugs the mountainsides, challenging drivers with sudden pitches, axle-deep streams, hairpin turns and rockslides. 
More unnerving is the absence of shoulders as the road drops steeply into valleys with churning rivers. 
I confess to fixedly studying distant glaciers, the crystal skies, or the corduroy texture of slopes covered in evergreens, especially when we passed trucks or buses that had careened off the highway -- three during the trip. 
(I should add that our own drivers were exemplary and, with a single exception in China, invincibly good-natured as they kept to a tight schedule.)
Though we traveled each day from 6 to 10 hours, boredom was minimal, dispelled by a succession of natural and human spectacles.
Our first overnight stop was a riverside village called Besham, where we stayed in a simple, clean, dimly lighted motel. 
At the front desk, I happened to pick up a flier for visitors that explained why women were invisible in the valley. 
Devout Muslims in this region believe a woman should be seen outside her home only on her marriage, or in the event of hospitalization during childbirth, and in death. 
Every adult we saw that day, from shepherd to shopkeeper, was indeed male.
As our route ran parallel to the Indus River, we were becoming acclimated to the otherworldly landscape. 
After a few hours' drive, a roadside sign announced, "YOU ARE IN A UNIQUE PLACE IN THE WORLD."
Here three immense mountain chains visibly collided, leaning tilted sheets of shale drunkenly against each other. 
Ahead, in the east, lay the Karakoram Mountains, mostly velvety black, with K2 just beyond our vision. 
In the west loomed the Hindu Kush, brownish and severe. 
Southward were the bare and tawny Himalayas, crowned by the jagged whiteness of Nanga Parbat, among the 10 highest peaks in the world, and said to be still growing.
More than 150 miles from Islamabad and halfway to Gilgit, we became seasoned watchers of the dark and foaming Indus, and of the ingenious footbridges, cable cars and rope walkways that crossed it. 
At dusk, we arrived for a two-night stay at the Serena Lodge in Gilgit town, the administrative center of the region now known as the Northern Areas. 
Wedged between the frontiers of India, China and Afghanistan, this sliver of Pakistan was once, in the words of the British historian John Keay, "the hub, the crow's nest, the fulcrum of Asia."
Here, in the 1870's, the British established the Gilgit Agency, chiefly to keep an eye on ever-advancing czarist Russia, with the aid of such local warrior peoples as the Dards. 
After India and Pakistan became independent in 1947, Gilgit's Muslims rebelled against rule by Hindus, and Pakistan seized control of the Gilgit Valley. 
So sensitive is its location, so prevalent is smuggling, that the area surrounding Gilgit town remains restricted, dotted by military checkpoints.
Still a frontier trading and listening post, Gilgit town has many dust-colored brick buildings that enclose a thriving street bazaar and scattered remnants of the British raj (a cantonment, the agent's bungalow and a graveyard). 
The Serena Lodge was as good as its name. 
Its rooms were pleasant, and there was an excellent buffet and a spacious lobby, in khaki colors, adorned by polo gear (the game is still played by rough local rules on nearby grounds). 
These amenities were enhanced by well-kept gardens set against the white-capped mountains.
We kept a laptop diary and that night Shareen wrote: "Regretfully left the lodge after a delicious breakfast of yogurt and apricot compote. 
We followed the Gilgit River into the Hunza Valley: a striking assemblage of young jagged mountains with sometimes sinister overhangs. 
Our first stop was a cemetery memorializing the workmen killed in building the highway (one for each of 1,500 kilometers, according to our Pakistani guide). 
Their epitaphs were written in English, Urdu and Arabic, with a quote from the Koran and Rupert Brooke: 'There shall be in that rich earth a richer dust concealed.'
"
The last leg to the Chinese frontier took us through the Hunza Valley, said to be the charmed fictional locale of Shangri-La. 
Presiding over riverside villages and terraced orchards was Rakaposhi, with its mantle of glaciers, the most dramatic of the Karakoram peaks. 
In a garden cafe set amid blooming cosmos, whose menu promised tea "served with sympathy," we were overtaken by a kind of infectious giddiness. 
At a photo stop, we scooped garnets from a roadside cut; later we stopped for lunch at Karimabad, seat of successive Mirs of Hunza, and took a bone-crunching Jeep ride to several Tibetan-style forts.
We spent the night at Gulmit, a town near the Chinese frontier, and, in the morning, of what stretched into a long day, we drove from a Pakistani security outpost through the Khunjerab Pass, a broad plateau fringed by waterfalls, glaciers and meadows. 
Midway, multilingual tablets and heroic statuary marked the precise frontier and recorded the pass's opening to all traffic in 1982. 
After a box lunch, we switched from twin vans to a special shuttle bus, passing three Chinese checkpoints, the only notable episode being the general mystification when a People's Liberation Army private clambered aboard and shouted what sounded like "Cohens."
Shareen guessed correctly that he wanted nothing more sinister than coins.
At the checkpoint at Sust, we encountered the Chinese bureaucracy in its immemorial obduracy. 
Our papers, it appeared, were not entirely in order; we just might be delayed for hours. 
But a glowering official finally struck upon the perfect remedy: a special $60 group fine.
At Sust, we met our local Chinese guide, a young woman in her 20's, who disarmingly apologized for the delays as we boarded a brand-new red-and-green Toyota bus big enough for the entire group. 
All this was a foretaste of the frustrations and rewards in China, where personal goodwill compensated for official inflexibility.
We were now high in the Pamirs, cruising at a crisp 16,000 feet among rounded mountains tinted in orange and yellow-brown, reminiscent of the landscapes of the mystic Russian artist Nicholas Roerich. 
Tashkurghan, a grim frontier fortress town since imperial times, was less than welcoming. 
We stayed overnight at the Pamir Hotel, built in 1965 and the one truly unspeakable accommodation on the tour. 
Even the most stoic of our British companions blanched at the odious slop served at dinner, the cold and dark rooms (each with a foot-deep puddle in the bathroom) and a staff that was surly or invisible. 
Next door was a mysterious hot spot, the Princess Fort Kala OK Club (presumably meaning karaoke club).
A long day's drive took us through the Subash plateau, at more than 12,000 feet one of the highest in the Pamirs. 
Morale improved as we encountered one diversion after another: whistling ginger-colored marmots, munching herds of camels, solemn yaks and surreal dzus (half yak, half cow, with feather-duster tails) tended by Kirghiz herdsmen. 
The Kirghiz, a Turkic-speaking nomadic people, still greet foreigners with friendly curiosity, and, at two stops, we were courteously permitted to enter their richly carpeted, tentlike yurts. 
Lunch was at a cafe on Kara-Kul Lake, as cerulean as the sky.
Because all China is in the same time zone as Beijing, it was bright as noon when we arrived in Kashgar at 6:30 P.M. Auspiciously, our bus was greeted at the hotel by a troupe of whirling dancers, teenage boys and girls in flowing day-glo costumes performing a folkloric repertory with more zest than precision. 
This was our introduction to the Uighurs, an Islamic people who form the majority among Kashgar's 200,000 inhabitants and in the Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region, an area roughly as big as Alaska, with a population of 15 million.
Once a Buddhist kingdom and flourishing Silk Road entrepot, Kashgar was the springboard of militant Islam, conquered but not really subdued by China in the 18th century. 
It was thereafter a contested cockpit in the Great Game, the clandestine duel between Russia and Britain for mastery of Central Asia. 
Appropriately, our hotel, the Chini Bagh, took its name from the former British Consulate, the decaying Victorian-Gothic building set just behind it. 
Here, before and after the Bolshevik Revolution, British operatives fenced with their counterparts at the nearby Russian Consulate, now the Seman Hotel. 
More colorful if less modern than the Chini Bagh, the Seman adjoins a compound that once sheltered White Russian emigres and still encloses a handsome garden lined with poplars.
In Kashgar's main square, a huge statue of Chairman Mao sits incongruously among open-air pool tables and medieval houses, not far from the Aidkah Mosque. 
Dating to 1442 and still the largest in China, the mosque is more imposing than handsome, a magnet for thousands of believers who flock to Friday services. 
On Sunday, there is a rival magnet: the fabled market, sprawling over more than a square mile and offering everything from spices and dowry chests to livestock and marvelous varieties of headgear. 
Between shouts of "Passu!
Passu!"
(Get out of the way!) and a cacophony of moos, baas, whinnies and the chirps of caged birds, one is irresistibly drawn into a labyrinth redolent of freshly baked cakes, saffron and dung.
If our two days in vibrant Kashgar were a high point, the next two in Khotan were a low. 
It took a 10-hour drive past irrigation canals lined with graceful poplars, willows and purple tamarisk to reach this city on the Silk Road's southern branch. 
Surrounded by the Taklamakan Desert (meaning, roughly, if you go in, you won't come out), Khotan has an imposing Buddhist legacy, evidenced by the vast ruined city of Yotkan, just six miles to the west, believed to have been an imperial capital, now a gloomy assembly of brick stumps and wind-carved dunes. 
But modern Khotan is undistinguished -- a center for cultivating silkworms and producing jade knickknacks -- and our hotel harbored spiders whose bites seemed to have doubled the size of one of our number's left leg. 
Even the normally chipper Tao gave his daily lecture a downbeat title: "Why the hell are we in Khotan?"
Morale soared as we were bused to the airport to fly north across the Tarim Basin to the industrial city of Urumqi. 
Here, in the middle of nowhere and seemingly overnight, an industrial metropolis with a million-plus population has sprung up, its growth fertilized by state and foreign investment in nearby oil and mineral riches. 
To us, as we headed downtown, it seemed as if a large slab of Chicago had somehow floated to Central Asia and planted itself near the Tien Shan or Celestial Mountains. 
We were to spend two nights in Urumqi's most modern hotel, a Holiday Inn.
Not a sneer was visible as our group savored the hotel's antiseptic joys. 
We responded warmly to the city's lively restaurants, department stores and a better-than-expected antiquities museum. 
Though Urumqi has gotten a bad press from many travelers, perhaps the right way to go to the city is by way of Khotan.
After a day, we traveled on a good highway, to Turfan, a major oasis city flanked by the Flaming Mountains on the Silk Road's northern route. 
Famous for its grapes and the longevity of its people, Turfan was once a flourishing cultural and political center. 
Ruins of local rulers are strewn in caves and tombs in the desert. 
Ten miles west of Turfan is Yarkhoto, the ruins of a fortress dating to the first century A.D.; it was captured by successive warrior peoples and then abandoned in the 14th century. 
Extensively excavated and restored (with help from Unesco), the site has a melancholy eloquence. 
So also does Gaochang, another long-forsaken desert metropolis; the ancient tombs of Astana, and the Thousand-Buddha Caves at Bezeklik, a limestone warren above the roaring waters of the Murtuk River Gorge. 
Yet I confess that I was more fascinated by the elaborate system of irrigation that still brings mountain waters to the Turfan oasis by means of pipes whose depth and complexity imply millions of hours of forced labor.
Turfan was a prelude to our encounter with the great Mogao Caves at Dunhuang (meaning Blazing Beacon), an oasis town of 14,000, some 250 miles from Turfan. 
Getting there involved a new experience: going to the Turfan train depot with boxed meals, waiting in the "soft" lounge reserved for privileged passengers, being saluted like royalty as we boarded an overnight sleeper and gazing through train windows at the endless undulating ribbon that was the Gobi Desert. 
But there was a hitch: no bus was at hand on our arrival in Dunhuang. 
Two days later, we were bumped from our flight to Xian because only 15 seats were available.
There was compensation. 
Our tour leader, Lucy, negotiated a third day in Dunhuang with special benefits. 
Benefit One was a meal at the Manhattan Cafe, which we had spotted by chance from a bus window. 
Recently opened by two New Yorkers, Beth Schifter and her husband, Tom Lee, it offers omelets, French fries and lamb burgers, as well as excellent coffee.
Benefit Two was a second visit to the Mogao Caves, which are on the cliff face of the Mingsha Hills, just outside Dunhuang. 
These man-made galleries, created from the 4th to the 14th centuries, contain the world's richest trove of Buddhist wall paintings, sculptures and manuscripts. 
In the 492 grottoes are 45,000 murals, 2,000 pigmented stucco figures and, carved within one cave, a giant Buddha, 113 feet high, with toenails as big as snow shovels. 
Initially, we were pointedly taken to the cave that once held 50,000 Buddhist manuscripts, some of the best of which were taken to the British Museum, in disputed circumstances, by the scholar-explorer Sir Aurel Stein, nearly a century ago.
We then discovered that many of the best Mogao caves were either closed or required a hefty additional admission charge. 
Nor did our local official guide inform us of a superb museum adjoining the site, jointly built by the Chinese and Japanese and opened in 1995, containing admirable replicas of the major caves and a fine collection of Tibetan bronze bells and sculptures. 
The extra day enabled us to see the museum, the bronzes and a dozen special caves, gratis.
That evening, we returned to Dunhuang Airport for our flight some 800 miles eastward. 
Xian, China's former imperial capital, was the starting point of the great Silk Road caravans, and its medieval walls and streets somehow escaped destruction during two wars with Japan and three revolutions: Nationalist, Communist and Cultural. 
The city's pagoda-shaped Great Mosque, nesting in a maze of tiny shops, was damaged by the Red Guards, but its elegant pavilions and gardens were restored in 1987.
Fortunately, the real riches of Xian were mostly underground and therefore safe from political turbulence. 
In 1974, a peasant digging a well a few miles from Xian unearthed the first life-size figure in a terra-cotta army that has now grown to 6,000 strong. 
The figures, each different, were meant to protect China's first emperor and founder of the Qin (pronounced Chin, whence China) dynasty, after his death in 210 B.C. So vast and various is this army that two huge structures, big as airplane hangars, have been built to permit visitors to look down from ramps to see the ghostly soldiers on the soil from which they emerged.
One could not help but be awed by Xian, as indeed Marco Polo was in his putative 13th-century journey to China. 
I say putative because in one of his talks, Dr. Wang Tao offhandedly remarked that, of course, Marco Polo's narrative was probably fiction and, in any case, the Venetian was probably not the real author. 
Fiction?
Pressed to amplify after an audible gasp, Tao recounted current scholarly research holding that a consortium of ghostwriters assembled long-familiar Silk Road tales and affixed Polo's name to enhance authenticity. 
A learned Briton in our group added that Marco Polo somehow never mentions the Great Wall of China or the widespread custom of drinking tea.
For myself, I prefer to believe that Marco Polo did, as tradition holds, dictate his memoirs while a prisoner in Genoa, and that he had so much to recount that he simply forgot about tea and the Wall. 
I find this plausible, for I am all too aware of what I have left out of my account. 
For example, there is . . . but I digress.
 
THREE FOR THE ROAD
British Museum, 46 Bloomsbury Street, London WC1 3QQ (telephone: 171-323-8895 or 171-323-1234; fax: 171-580-8677), will offer its "Taxila to Turfan" tour again in August 1997. 
The price is expected to be about $4,500 a person, including air fare from London. 
Dr. Wang Tao is scheduled to lecture.
Smithsonian Associates, 1100 Jefferson Drive SW, Room 3045, Washington, D.C. 
20560 (202-357-4700), is offering a Silk Road tour, from Sept. 
7 to 30, that includes stops in Urumqi, Kashgar, Xian, Dunhuang and Lanzhou. 
The $7,290 price includes air fare from San Francisco.
American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, New York, N.Y. 
10024 (800-462-8687 or 212-769-5700), is planning a tour of the Silk Road by private train in April 1997. 
Stops include Beijing, Xian, Lanzhou, Dunhuang, Turfan, Samarkand, Bukhara and Tashkent. 
Prices, exclusive of international air fare, are expected to begin at about $9,000 a person.
