
FOR thousands of years, Asians have treasured the delicate sweetness of pea shoots, the gentle bite of Chinese broccoli, the zest of Chinese chives.
What is common knowledge for them is now becoming more familiar to Americans, as a greater selection of Asian vegetables moves onto market shelves, next to culinary staples like shiitake mushrooms and fresh ginger that were considered exotic here just a few years ago.
Crisp bunches of bok choy, their stems an unblemished white, their leaves dark green, can usually be found in D'Agostino markets, and tender stalks of Chinese broccoli show up at Balducci's in Greenwich Village. 
Purple-veined amaranth lurks at the Union Square Greenmarket.
"Ten years ago it was ginger, then it was dried mushrooms, dried lily buds, and now it's the cabbage family" of Asian vegetables that is endearing itself to the American palate, said Bruce Cost, author of "Bruce Cost's Asian Ingredients: Buying and Cooking the Staple Foods of China, Japan and Southeast Asia" (William Morrow, 1988). 
"The explosion has been in the last five years."
American cooks are learning that these foods are not only tasty and versatile, but also healthy. 
Many Chinese, for example, are lactose-intolerant. 
What have they eaten to get calcium?
"Cabbages and broccoli," Mr. Cost said, adding that these vegetables also provide vitamins A and C.
Chefs of many cuisines are adding Asian greens to their shopping lists. 
Gray Kunz, the executive chef at Lespinasse in the St. Regis hotel in Manhattan, finds bok choy, Thai basil and lemon grass at the Union Square Greenmarket, to his delight. 
"You can integrate them into everyday cooking," Mr. Kunz said.
Most of the vegetables taste best when cooked simply, Mr. Cost said.
Pea shoots stay tender and sweet when sauteed for a scant 10 seconds and can be a delicious substitute for sauteed spinach or watercress. 
Chinese chives can take the place of scallions when scrambled eggs are in order.
Mr. Cost, who is also a chef and a partner in Big Bowl Restaurants in Chicago, went shopping recently at the Hong Kong Supermarket, 37-11 Main Street in Flushing, Queens, where he chose a basketful of Asian vegetables.
Here is a look at some whose flavors and textures could be instantly alluring to the Western palate.
AMARANTH -- Imagine a plant whose taste resembles the tastes of chard and kale, with a hint of sorrel. 
That is the flavor of the beautiful, red-veined amaranth, whose leaves and, at most, an inch of stem are edible. 
(The rest of the stem is hopelessly tough.) Cook quickly in a bit of oil, like pea shoots. 
Varieties of the plant are found throughout the world, and the Chinese have cooked the leaves for centuries.
CHINESE BROCCOLI -- Chinese broccoli is more refined than its Western brethren, although the flavor is similar. 
Every inch of it is delectable, from the smooth, slender stalks to the silky leaves. 
Slice the stems on the diagonal, in sections an inch and a half long and a quarter of an inch thick, with the leaves left whole.
The traditional Chinese preparation is to drop the broccoli in boiling water and blanch it for 3 to 5 minutes, until the stalks are tender. 
While the broccoli is cooking, heat equal parts of vegetable oil and oyster sauce in a skillet, add a dash of sugar and mix until the sauce is blended, about 10 seconds. 
When the broccoli is ready, drain it, turn it onto a plate and drizzle the sauce over it. 
The slight bitterness of the broccoli is offset by the sweetness of the oyster sauce.
DAIKON -- This lovely, crisp, juicy radish has a subtle bite. 
Unlike most root vegetables, it has a light, refreshing, thirst-quenching taste.
Koreans, Japanese and Chinese simmer it in broth until it is translucent and so tender that it can be broken into bite-size pieces by chopsticks. 
It is also pickled, or eaten raw -- shredded into fine white strands and served as an edible garnish. 
Mr. Cost cooks it in a long-simmered oxtail stew seasoned with soy sauce, sugar, star anise, ginger and garlic. 
Before it is used, it must be peeled.
GREEN CHIVES -- These chives are longer, and stronger in flavor (onion comes to mind), than Western chives, and have the ability to scent the entire interior of a refrigerator unless completely wrapped. 
They are cooked and stuffed into translucent dumplings, cooked with noodles and Chinese roast pork, and scrambled with eggs. 
The potent scent fades with cooking.
PEA SHOOT -- This appealingly fragile and tender vegetable tastes as it looks. 
It has a sweet-pea flavor and an evanescent crunch. 
Trim and discard the stems, where the leaves stop, and saute in oil for 10 seconds at most, with a dash of salt, sugar and rice wine or sherry.
SHANGHAI BOK CHOY -- Where the more familiar bok choy has green leaves and white stems, Shanghai bok choy is monochromatically green, and when cooked turns a brilliant shade of emerald. 
Although it can grow to a foot in height, it is often available as baby bok choy, with five plants to a bunch.
To savor this vegetable, strip away the outer leaves (and save them for sauteeing, or to toss into a soup), and use just the hearts, whole or cut in half lengthwise. 
Saute them in oil for two minutes, add chicken broth, and after a minute or two, when the broth is very hot, add a dash of cornstarch mixed with an equal amount of water so that the sauce thickens slightly into a glaze.
A silky Chinese dish places braised shiitake mushrooms atop the tender green hearts. 
This vegetable is a clean-tasting foil to rich or spicy dishes.
