
THERE IS A SAYING IN CHINA: When two people talk, they tell the truth; when three people talk, it becomes a joke; when more than three people talk, it is all lies. 
Tian Zhuangzhuang, the Chinese director whose "Blue Kite" will open on Friday in New York, quoted this saying at dinner recently. 
In attendance were his translator; Lu Liping, the star of the movie and one of China's most popular actresses, and Peng Xia Lin, a director friend of Mr. Tian's. "Of course, this meeting is the exception," Mr. Tian said, laughing.
The 42-year-old director, who lives in Beijing, was in New York for a brief visit on behalf of his film, whose themes are truth and deception, face and mask, censorship and ritual -- in other words, how the domestic and the political intertwine.
"The Blue Kite," which opened last year's Cannes International Film Festival and, at the Tokyo International Film Festival, won awards for best film and best actress, is about a Beijing family from 1953 to the late 60's. 
Less obviously political than Chen Kaige's "Farewell My Concubine," which covers much the same period, Mr. Tian's film steers a course through domestic life. 
Aunts and uncles sit around tables; youngsters play on red-tiled roofs; mothers have hopes and fears for their children; the winter silence in the courtyard is broken only by a cat's meow.
The narrator is a boy named Tietou, whose childhood overlaps the Cultural Revolution. 
The kite in the title is made by Tietou's father just before he is sent away to a labor camp. 
Tietou's mother (Ms. Lu) is married and widowed two more times; other family members marry, fall ill, recover or die. 
Some are imprisoned; some are ardent Maoists; some dream of the Great Society; others merely survive. 
The child grows into a willful youngster and, by the film's end, a rebellious adolescent.
Richard Pena, the director of the New York Film Festival, which showed the film last fall, said of "The Blue Kite": "It's not about action, it's about atmosphere. 
It's the first film to really address how political and personal oppression just became a day-to-day affair. 
How you'd get up every morning and you'd live with it every day, and it affected who you married, who you made love to, where you got a job. 
Everything.
"As good as he's been in the past," Mr. Pena said of Mr. Tian, "with this new film he's reached a new level."
Martin Scorsese, who met Mr. Tian in Tokyo some years ago, was equally enthusiastic in his praise. 
"It's a film of deceptive simplicity that manages to convey the entire history of late 20th-century China," he said of "The Blue Kite."
(Mr. Tian, for his part, is an equally ardent fan of Mr. Scorsese's: on this, his first trip to New York, he had already had lunch with the director; he had seen Mr. Scorsese's "Taxi Driver" 11 times on videotape.)
While the film is not autobiographical, Mr. Tian's family, like most in China, experienced severe hardship and sorrow in the 1960's and 70's. 
His father, Tian Fang, was once head of the Beijing Film Studio, which is now an official Chinese film production unit. 
His mother, Yu Lan, a famous actress in China, is the director of the Children's Studio, which makes movies with and for children. 
Like tens of thousands of Chinese intellectuals, his parents were "re-educated" during the Cultural Revolution. 
"At that time, it was just the way it was," Mr. Tian said.
He remembers setting out one morning to say goodbye to his father. 
"He had been sentenced to hard labor, so I had to get there by 8 A.M., because that's when work began. 
I was 16, and the day before someone had introduced me to my first girlfriend. 
So the ride on my bicycle was quite pleasant. 
I knocked on the iron gates and told the guard I had come to say goodbye to my father."
He remembers hearing the sound of his father's soft cloth shoes approaching, and recalls that his father was carrying a spade. 
"It was his eyes I remember most," he said. 
"I felt like he wanted to say something, but he saw the way I looked, and he said nothing."
His father returned home after the Cultural Revolution but died a few years later. 
Mr. Tian, married and divorced, is the father of an 8-year-old son, Tian Zi, with whom he lives in Beijing.
Tian Zhuangzhuang is part of China's so-called Fifth Generation, a term used to describe the 100-plus students who were the first class to enter the Beijing Film Academy when it reopened after the Cultural Revolution and who graduated around 1980. 
The class included Chen Kaige and Zhang Yimou, whose "Raise the Red Lantern" was considered a breakthrough film for the new Chinese cinema. 
Indeed, some critics now compare China's Fifth Generation film makers with the French New Wave of the 1950's.
Yet it remains difficult for these film makers to get a movie made in China. 
Financing is scarce and dealing with the Central Film Bureau, a part of the Ministry of Broadcasting that functions as a gatekeeper for film making, can be bizarre. 
Mr. Tian learned this when making his second film, "The Horse Thief," an atmospheric work about tribal rights and Buddhist practices shot in Tibet. 
(His first project, "On the Hunting Ground," was an ethnographic movie made in Mongolia in 1985.)
The Central Film Bureau dragged out the process of approving "The Horse Thief" for eight months. 
"While I waited," said Mr. Tian, "my enthusiasm for film making almost went to nil."
He finally made a deal with the agency: He would cut whatever they asked him to cut. 
"I sat with two censors in a room," he said, "and they told me: 'You have to cut here. 
You have to cut there.'
I felt it was an insult. 
So I didn't want to make films anymore."
The film, shot in 1986, was subsequently shown at film festivals and at the Film Forum in New York in 1988.
Frustrated with working with the censors, Mr. Tian turned to making commercial movies and the usual dissipations -- drink, women, gambling. 
"I have traveled a very long and crooked road," he said. 
"But when I turned 40, I felt that if I didn't return to making the kind of films I wanted to make I would become more and more decadent."
Since Mr. Tian was on staff as a director of the Beijing Film Studio, he made "The Blue Kite" there, with money from Hong Kong. 
But when he finished shooting the film, the Beijing studio refused to submit footage to the Central Film Bureau for approval for post-production work. 
(Because China does not have first-class film editing facilities, almost all post-production work is done elsewhere, usually Japan.) Several sources said that his friends smuggled raw footage of the film to Japan and edited it there according to his written instructions.
"In China," he said, "the best way to deal with things is to wait patiently. 
And work hard. 
That's how you prevail."
Any Chinese film must also pass through the Central Film Bureau to be allowed out of the country for film festivals. 
Therefore, when "The Blue Kite" was shown at the Tokyo film festival, without official clearance, the Chinese delegation walked out in protest.
Mr. Tian says he is not interested in making films solely about history. 
"What I'm interested in," he explained, "is people in relation to the environment they are in, that has, of course, a historical setting. 
Movies should be made without aim," much less a narrow political one.
The Government, nonetheless, will not allow the film to be shown in China. 
And since no one in China can go on record as having seen "The Blue Kite," no one there can speak specifically about the film's merits. 
Instead, movie makers who still work in China talk in general about the film's director.
"Tian Zhuangzhuang is my classmate and friend," said Mr. Zhang, who directed "Raise the Red Lantern.""He's one of China's best film makers, and I'm very proud of his achievement."
Mr. Chen believes that Mr. Tian will one day be considered among the most important directors in modern China. 
"I not only admire his works but also admire him as a human being, as a film maker," he said. 
"He tries to find ways to express his feelings about almost everything -- life, the world and himself."
Mr. Tian, who returned to China last month, has resigned from the Beijing Film Studio, which makes his future as a film maker in China all that much more difficult. 
"I am interested in portraying people and their emotions," he said. 
"I like my country. 
I like my people. 
This belief is the education my parents gave me. 
I imagine my journey will be difficult."
