
WHAT makes the subject of Tibet such a tricky one for filmmakers is that the moral lines of right and wrong in the China-Tibet confrontation have become so tightly drawn in the popular imagination that there is little room left for ambiguity or subtlety.
This is not to say that China's savage treatment of Tibet has left great ambiguity, but simply that such a good-guys-versus-bad-guys relationship makes it hard for anyone to break free from the powerful field of presumptive gravity that surrounds the subject. 
No matter how authentic the sets and costumes or how "big" the director or stars, films about Tibet find themselves inescapably bounded by a determinism that grows out of what we Westerners unconsciously think about when we imagine Tibet.
We tend to see Tibet through one of the most powerful utopian mythologies of this century -- of a fabled, Shangri-La-like refuge from the outside world. 
When the Chinese People's Liberation Army marched into Tibet's capital, Lhasa, in the 1950's, it occupied not only a geographic place but this beloved Western fantasy as well. 
It violated not only Tibet but our yearning to believe that there was still a place on this shrinking planet where spiritual purity, physical isolation and natural beauty endured and where legions of Buddhist monks spent their lives meditating rather than making Buicks.
Then suddenly the specter of China, land of revolutionary violence, godless (and Buddhaless) Communism and crypto-colonial occupation, intruded on Tibet and our Western reverie. 
Where we saw a benign spiritualism, they saw an oppressive feudal theocracy and a backward serf class in desperate need of Communist "liberation."
So deeply rooted in the Western psyche is our version of Tibet that it has become virtually part of our mental DNA. 
One way or another every article, book or film on Tibet must contend with the political and cultural determinism of this myth. 
But, alas, when a film's conclusion is more or less foregone, it loses the kind of literary tension and mystery that gets us involved. 
Of course, we may feel outraged, an understandable feeling when contemplating Tibet's sad modern history. 
But outrage is rarely enough to hold our attention.
Because conclusions are incipiently imbedded in the very subject matter, Tibet presents a difficult artistic challenge for filmmakers, a headwind against which the spate of recent Tibet films -- Martin Scorsese's "Kundun," Jean-Jacques Annaud's "Seven Years in Tibet" and numerous documentaries -- have had to sail. 
And the fact that Mr. Scorsese and Mr. Annaud could not go to Tibet to shoot only made their efforts more detached from the real place and more dependent on the "imagined Tibet."
Now comes "Windhorse," a low-budget feature film (it cost a mere $300,000, while "Kundun" cost $30 million and "Seven Years in Tibet" $65 million), written, directed and produced by the documentarian Paul Wagner, who won Academy and Emmy Awards for his 1985 film "The Stone Carvers," a portrait of the Italian-American craftsmen who work on the Washington Cathedral. 
With "Windhorse," which opened April 30, Mr. Wagner wanted to pick up where these other films left off.
"No one had covered what had happened since then," he writes of the 1950's in his production notes. 
"To date, over a million Tibetans have been killed by the Chinese. 
There is no freedom of speech and no free press in Tibet, and I've heard of teen-agers being tortured with cattle prods just for wanting to practice their religion. 
That's the situation as it is, not 40 years ago."
Mr. Wagner was determined to shoot at least some of "Windhorse" in Tibet itself. 
But realizing that the Chinese would never grant him permission, he set off in the grand tradition of other Western interlopers who have stolen into Lhasa. 
Posing as a tourist, he and a crew of nonprofessionals managed to film covertly with a Sony mini-DV (digital video) Handycam. 
He says he wanted "to push the envelope in terms of the authorities," to get a sense of what it was like to live and work under China's domination.
Recognizing that certain production values would be lost by using a guerrilla mode of feature filmmaking, Mr. Wagner tried to turn this liability into an asset. 
Indeed, being forced to operate in the same politically supercharged and fearful atmosphere that permeates Tibetan life under occupation does give "Windhorse" an edgy cinema verite authenticity missing in the other, bigger-budget Tibet films. 
And the fact that actors speak Tibetan and Chinese gives the film a further feel of verisimilitude.
THE story centers on a Tibetan family that becomes ensnared in the struggle for freedom from China after a cousin, Pema, who is a Buddhist nun, is arrested and tortured to death. 
The sister, Dolkar, leaves her Chinese boyfriend and quits singing syrupy propaganda songs about "the motherland" in a Lhasa disco, while her ne'er-do-well brother gives up his dissolute life to join the resistance and help smuggle a tape of Pema's story out of Tibet.
Mr. Wagner got interested in Tibet after his own niece, Julia Elliott, who had been living in Katmandu, Nepal, was detained, stripped of her film and camera, interrogated and forced to sign a confession by Chinese police officers while on a trip to Lhasa. 
As Mr. Wagner learned more about Tibet's plight, he became increasingly incensed.
"Tibet has a kind of urgency about it," he told me. 
"It's classic David and Goliath stuff. 
And in my professional work, I love to deal with underdogs."
With Ms. Elliott as his co-writer, Mr. Wagner set off in 1996 on an exploratory trip to Lhasa and quickly fell under the sway of Tibet's unique allure. 
"It is easy to become enamored of the incredible costumes, the intensity of religious faith, the elaborate culture and above all the mountains," he told me as he was editing his film. 
"Tibet has been a temptingly unreachable place. 
For us, it is wanting what we can't have."
Mr. Wagner has captured an elusive piece of this intriguing place's history. 
Yet, as in other Tibet films, we know before we begin that Tibetans will be abused by Chinese subjugators and that there will be no cathartic moment for the victims. 
In this sense, Tibet films are something like Greek tragedies, except it is not a tragic flaw in an individual that brings about inevitable downfall, but the hopeless situation in which Tibetans find themselves.
Although old Tibet has all but vanished and Lhasa is turning into a charmless Chinese city, we Westerners still love to retreat into virtual versions reconstructed on film sets. 
As one of the characters in Frank Capra's 1937 film version of James Hilton's novel "Lost Horizon" presciently says when asked by a colleague if he believes that Shangri-La actually does exist, "I believe it because I want to believe it."
But films like "Windhorse" present such a somber vision of Tibet that it is ever more difficult to conjure up our old fantasies of this fabled land. 
China's reckless occupation has turned this dream, and Tibet's reality, into something of a nightmare. 
That nightmare binds every Tibet film into a strange, subliminal confinement, which makes it not only harder to believe in Shangri-La but also harder to make a film that surprises us with its originality.
