
In Chinese, Hua Ping, actually a flower vase, is a pejorative term for a beautiful but empty actress. 
Some Chinese-speaking moviegoers reportedly applied the words to Gong Li after her debut in Zhang Yimou's 1988 film "Red Sorghum."
But the criticism abated after Mr. Zhang's next two films -- "Ju Dou" in 1990 and "Raise the Red Lantern" in 1991 -- in which Gong Li played the leads.
Last year's "Story of Qiu Ju," with Gong Li in the title role, may have silenced the skeptics forever. 
The film, which opens on Friday at the Lincoln Plaza in Manhattan, won the top prize at the Venice Film Festival, and Gong Li took the award for best actress. 
When "The Story of Qiu Ju," also directed by Mr. Zhang, played last fall at the New York Film Festival, Janet Maslin of The Times praised the actress for emerging once again "as a figure of astonishing fortitude."
The film, a jab at the pervasive bureaucracy that cripples China, is a comedy about how society bruises one of its members -- literally. 
The 27-year-old Gong Li portrays the pregnant wife of a chili farmer, Quinglai, who has been kicked in the groin by the village chief for commenting that the chief fathers only "hens."
Qiu Ju trudges frustratingly through rural and urban courts just to get an official explanation for this offense. 
When she enters a life-threatening labor, the chief helps to save both mother and newborn. 
The child being a son, all forget the now-repaired damage to Quinglai's masculinity. 
Only then do the police arrive, with less than impeccable timing, to arrest the chief.
In drawing the character of Qiu Ju, Mr. Zhang recalled the gestures and speech patterns of expectant women in his birthplace, Shanxi, the city in northern China near the village where the film was shot.
"When they get pregnant, they walk slowly, and they're short of breath," he explained. 
"So when I drew this character, I made her short of energy. 
I told Gong Li, 'Slow -- psychologically and physically.'
Qiu Ju represents the perseverance of Chinese women, which contrasts with her slowness."
In preparing for her roles, Gong Li typically reads a script, then lays it aside until just before each take. 
Her performances are instinctive, she says, and her abilities as a mimic enable her to adopt regional accents quickly and convincingly.
"An actor should not memorize every line but should allow new things to happen," she said. 
"I need a collaboration with the director and other actors, something at the location that allows something else to emerge."
For two months before the filming of "The Story of Qiu Ju," Gong Li lived in a small farming community, committing herself so strongly to the role of a pregnant peasant that she wore only the heavy pads and oversized flannel jackets that enhance the frumpiness of the character.
Like Qiu Ju, she is persistent. 
Says Chen Kaige, who directed her in the recent Hong Kong-Chinese co-production "Farewell to My Concubine": "She would say, 'I don't think this dialogue is going to work. 
Think about it. 
You're the artist and decision maker.'
"
Her attitude toward her craft is workmanlike. 
"I like my job very much," says Gong Li, the daughter of a university professor and an archivist from Shantung province, in northeastern China. 
"I don't think of myself as a star. 
An actress is nothing remarkable."
Nevertheless, she notes a difference between her approach and that of more commercially minded actors in Taiwan and Hong Kong (despite her own occasional forays into the less arty fare that is characteristic of assembly-line film making in Hong Kong): "Those actresses don't have time to experience the lives of their characters, but I'm willing to take the hardships."
The 43-year-old Mr. Zhang and Gong Li are personal as well as professional partners. 
The film maker, who was married at the time, discovered the actress while casting "Red Sorghum," when she was a sophomore at the Central Academy of Drama in Beijing, and their relationship began soon after. 
In "Red Sorghum," Gong Li played a purchased bride, a role that displayed her physical beauty more than her dramatic talent, prompting some critics to brand her a hua ping.
In "Farewell to My Concubine," which will compete next month at the Cannes International Film Festival, the actress is a former prostitute named Juxian, who is married to one of two homosexual lovers from the Beijing Opera. 
As the character ages 40 years, Gong Li exhibits a new range of talents. 
"She comes completely alive at the moment when the camera starts rolling," says Mr. Chen. "She becomes a very different person."
Juxian and Qiu Ju extend a trajectory of portrayals by Gong Li that have become increasingly more complex. 
In "Red Sorghum," she ultimately instigates a village revolt against the occupying Japanese. 
Her young wives in "Ju Dou" and "Raise the Red Lantern" also rebel, gradually evolving into vengeful adultress and madwoman, respectively. 
In "The Story of Qiu Ju," she is quietly outspoken and independent: she fights what should be her husband's battle. 
At film's end, the camera frozen on her unadorned face, she seems to be preparing for yet another round of attacks on an elephantine system. 
While celebrating the strength of Chinese women, this final close-up also signals a victory for Gong Li over the stigma of hua ping.
