
The Moroccans who were working on "Kundun," Martin Scorsese's movie about the Dalai Lama's boyhood, seemed unimpressed by the transformation of their hometown into the capital of Tibet, complete with Buddhas painted on the hillsides and golden rooftops topping houses in the casbah below. 
Then again, Jerusalem was just down the road, where Turner Network Television had recently shot "David," its latest work in the "Bible" series. 
Perhaps the locals are just inured to strange sights.
Into this town, where tempests are usually strictly of a meteorological variety, came the news that the Chinese Government had denounced "Kundun."
The Chinese have been anything but blase about the goings-on in this town, a gateway to the Sahara nestled in the foothills of the snowcapped Atlas Mountains.
On Nov. 
22, the news broke that the Chinese Government was complaining about the Walt Disney Company's involvement in producing "Kundun."
The movie chronicles the life of the Dalai Lama, who has called for Tibetan independence from China.
"We are resolutely opposed to the making of this movie," a Chinese official said last month. 
"It is intended to glorify the Dalai Lama, so it is an interference in China's internal affairs."
Those on the set when China's denunciation of "Kundun" broke preferred not to discuss their reactions, though the movie's screenwriter, Melissa Mathison, said: "I'm glad it's all out in the open. 
I'm sort of surprised at the dimensions, but I'm not surprised the Chinese would try to stop the movie."
The story has raged on in newspapers around the world, with Disney saying that it will go ahead with the domestic distribution of "Kundun" next year. 
For those involved in the project, which will finish shooting by the end of the month, this is yet another chapter in what has been the long, incident-filled story of the movie's development.
That story begins with the Dalai Lama. 
In 1937, a 2-year-old boy was identified as the 14th reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, the spiritual and political leader of Tibet. 
The boy, Tenzin Gyatso, and his family were taken to Lhasa, the country's capital, where he grew up in the Potala Palace. 
He spent his childhood in study, cared for by other lamas and abbots from the country's greatest Buddhist monasteries.
In 1950, China, led by Mao Zedong, invaded Tibet, its neighbor and former trading partner. 
In response, the Dalai Lama was officially enthroned, at the age of 15. 
At first, the Tibetans thought the Chinese would be supportive, but in 1954, when the Dalai Lama made an official visit to Beijing, it was clear that this was not the case.
"Religion is poison," said Chairman Mao, making his intentions clear.
Despite Chinese occupation, the Dalai Lama and his Tibetan Government refused to make concessions. 
When he turned to the West for help, it did not come. 
When the Dalai Lama's summer residence was shelled, the cabinet decided that he had to leave the country.
In 1959, he crossed into Dharmsala, India, where he still lives, heading a Government in exile.
Ms. Mathison, a screenwriter best known for "E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial," first heard of the Dalai Lama when she was a student at the University of California at Berkeley. 
"Even before I wrote 'E.T.'
I had thought that this would be a great movie," she said.
"I am sort of famous for little-boy stories, and this was a fantastic little-boy story, a story of destiny and nurturing and tragedy, the idea of finding a 2-year-old child and then investing in him everything that is good about human beings, your people and about your beliefs, and then asking that he try to save your country."
In 1990, she wrote a proposal and asked the actor Richard Gere, a well-known supporter of the Tibetan cause, for help in getting it to the Dalai Lama. 
The Dalai Lama himself wrote back to say he would be interested in discussing the project. 
A meeting was set up for April 1990, when he was to be in California to receive an award.
Ms. Mathison recalled that she and her husband, Harrison Ford, went to meet the Dalai Lama at the Red Lion Inn in Santa Barbara. 
"I did a pitch, basically," she said. 
"He said: 'Yes, you may do the movie. 
I'm going to Santa Cruz to rest for two days. 
Why don't you come up and we'll talk?'
"
They accepted that invitation, as well as the next one: to come to India.
A year after first meeting the Dalai Lama, with a draft of a screenplay completed, Ms. Mathison and Mr. Ford went to Dharmsala. 
For six days they talked, and Mr. Ford read the script aloud to him.
"His Holiness would make corrections, or his memory would be jogged and he'd say, 'This reminds me of something' and tell us a story," Ms. Mathison said. 
"And when Harrison got to the end of the script, his Holiness said: 'Good. 
Very good. 
Very strong. 
Very beautiful.'
"
Back home, she began the process of trying to interest a director in the project. 
The one she wanted was Mr. Scorsese, largely because she thought the issues would appeal to him.
"First of all," she said, "it's the story of the male society. 
Secondly, the story of a loyalty to an idea and this man who had the strength, with all of the universe working against him, to stand up to that idea. 
The religious overtones I knew would appeal to Marty. 
I saw it as a story of a kind of wise guy, and I knew he would get what it was about."
She was right.
"There was no doubt," said Mr. Scorsese. "Whether I like it or not, a lot of my movies have religious elements or themes. 
But the key for me in this story is the concept of how you live a life of compassion. 
And I think that goes all the way back to the first lines of 'Mean Streets': 'You don't make up for your sins in a church. 
You do it in the streets. 
You do it at home.'
"These are things that have always fascinated me. 
I've always been torn between what is preached in church and what is acted upon, how people really live. 
And how does one answer such incredible violence and upheaval with nonviolence?
Why is the man who is nonviolent actually stronger?"
After he agreed to take on the project, Mr. Scorsese worked with Ms. Mathison on the script, which he describes as a "story about a little boy who loses a lot in life and gains in other ways."
In March, Mr. Scorsese, Ms. Mathison and others went to India to begin preparation for the film they assumed would be shot there. 
The complex task of casting fell to Ellen Lewis, who has cast all of Mr. Scorsese's movies since "New York Stories," in 1989.
"To do it with people from Tibet is the only way you can do this kind of film," Mr. Scorsese said. 
"You go right back to the lesson of De Sica and Rossellini at the end of World War II. 
You just do it with the people in the street."
He added: "I've worked with a great many nonactors in the past 25 years, although I've never worked with nonactors from a different culture. 
Almost half the speaking cast in 'Casino' was nonactors. 
Many of the people in 'Goodfellas' were nonactors, including my mother."
MS. LEWIS EMBARKED on an elaborate tour of rural India -- "video camera in hand, cows mooing in the background," she said -- to gather people to play the 34 speaking parts, including four to play the Dalai Lama at various ages. 
From New Delhi, she went on to Dharmsala, where the largest population of exiled Tibetans now live.
She was accompanied by Namlha Taklha, the movie's chief technical adviser, who is the widow of Lobsang Samden Taklha, the Dalai Lama's brother. 
They traveled through India, visiting Tibetan enclaves. 
Since they needed Tibetans who spoke English, Ms. Lewis also visited a variety of American and Canadian cities. 
In the end, she cast 15 people from India and the rest from North America.
Although she found the Tibetans receptive to working on "Kundun," which in Tibetan means "the presence of a great incarnation," many were eliminated from consideration because they could not speak English. 
She also found casting difficult because "Tibetans are not an emotive society, they don't show emotion, and that doesn't work for acting."
Some of the cast were chosen solely on the basis of videotape auditions. 
Others had ties to the Dalai Lama's family. 
Mrs. Taklha's nephew, for example, plays the Dalai Lama as an adult. 
The Dalai Lama's niece plays his mother.
Ms. Mathison had already begun trying to get permission to shoot the film in India. 
"I did my stint in the ministers' office, sitting for hours, drinking cups of tea, hoping to talk to somebody," she recalled. 
When Mr. Scorsese became involved, he also tried. 
"We spent a year meeting with the Indian Government to try to get permits to shoot there," Mr. Scorsese said. 
"We met with practically everyone and tried everything. 
But when I went back this past April, we became aware that it was difficult for the Indian Government to give us permission for political reasons. 
China is on their border. 
Ultimately we were told that they 'could not make a decision at this time.'
"
Morocco was suggested as an alternative, partly because its high desert and mountains are extraordinarily similar to those of Tibet, and it is here that many members of the production staff have been working since May.
The production designer Dante Ferretti's journey, like Ms. Lewis's, began in India, where he met four times with the Dalai Lama, who made drawings of the layout of the interior of the Potala, which is controlled by the Chinese.
Mr. Ferretti also met with Mrs. Taklha, and benefited from her finds, including a tiny booklet about the enthronement and snapshots of the actual event. 
Fabrics for the sets and costumes were bought in India.
"I was overwhelmed to see the Tibetan civilization that no longer exists be re-created in Morocco," Ms. Mathison said.
Many of the Tibetans in the cast had seen Tibet only in photographs. 
Ms. Mathison said one young woman had said, on seeing the costumes, "Was Tibet as rich as this?"
Then she hid herself in a corner and wept for what was lost.
Mr. Scorsese witnessed similar displays of emotion. 
"The first day, when many of them had just arrived, I showed them the set of the Potala. 
A number of them prayed, and a few of them were crying."
About a 15-minute drive on the route to Marrakesh from Ouarzazate's hotel zone, the parking lot outside L'Hotel Oscar is filled with beat-up movie trailers. 
The hotel was built for a James Bond film and later appeared on an Egyptian street in "The Jewel of the Nile."
Lhasa rooftops have been affixed to existing structures. 
A sound stage has been built here, as has a replica of the facade of the Dalai Lama's summer palace in Norbulingka, near Lhasa.
Several tents are set up to house 1,600 costumes, including monks' robes and Chinese military uniforms, as well as elaborate Tibetan and Chinese headdresses, all made by hand. 
The budget for the film is $30 million.
On this brilliantly sunny November day, 550 extras were roaming around before the filming of the enthronement scene began on the sound stage. 
Draped in maroon robes, the 129 real Tibetan monks, some from the Dalai Lama's own monastery, were impossible to distinguish from 73 other Tibetans and about 350 Moroccans, who, with their shaved heads, had achieved a similar look.
Inside, the Palace's throne room was thick with the smoke of hundreds of yak butter candles (actually, honey-colored wax), which glinted off the ornate gilt Buddhas.
As the monks took their places, Mr. Scorsese headed for the set from his rickety trailer nearby. 
Despite his surgical mask and a hat to keep out dust from a sandstorm, he looked dapper. 
Tossing a maroon scarf around his neck, he announced wryly, "We love these windstorms."
Because of the intensity of the Chinese reaction to the project, a few of those connected with the film worry that there will be repercussions for some of the Tibetans involved. 
There has already been some discussion of altering their names in the credits, to conceal their participation. 
Even more troubling for the film makers is the fact that the parents of the man playing a main character still live in China.
Asked if there is a possibility that China would ban future Harrison Ford movies because she wrote the script for "Kundun," Ms. Mathison said she was not at all concerned, and pointed out that they had not banned any movies starring Mr. Gere, perhaps the most vociferous advocate of the Tibetan cause in Hollywood.
"It's a wonderful movie, and it's going to be released no matter who releases it," she said in her apartment on Central Park West in Manhattan the day the story about China's reaction to the project was emerging in The New York Times. 
"Disney has said they're very high on it."
Another movie being filmed in Argentina, "Seven Years in Tibet," has apparently escaped censure by the Chinese. 
Based on a book by the mountain climber Heinrich Harrer, "Seven Years in Tibet" is being directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud for Columbia Tri-Star and stars Brad Pitt as Mr. Harrer.
"It's interesting that suddenly, in 1996, a number of these movies are being made," Mr. Scorsese said. 
"It's very good for the cause of Tibet. 
And hopefully, one doesn't take away from the other."
 
North Africa's Tinseltown
THE MOROCCAN TOWN of Ouarzazate, 125 miles southeast of Marrakesh, bears a name that in Berber means "city of silence."
But this outpost, which was developed by the French as a garrison in 1928, is now anything but. 
First the tourists came, and then the movies. 
Ouarzazate (pronounced WAR-za-zat) has gone Hollywood.
dd French, Arabic and Berber are native tongues, and many film crews speak Italian or English. 
When Martin Scorsese scouted the location 10 years ago for "The Last Temptation of Christ," Ouarzazate had two streets and no electricity. 
There were no cars. 
Today, many still live without electricity or plumbing.
The only movie theater in town, population 20,000, closed six months ago, so it is doubtful whether "Kundun" will be seen here until it is released on video. 
But it has already become a custom to declare an official holiday here when TNT's Biblical productions are shown via satellite, since televisions are plentiful. 
The local residents, many of whom work as extras, are eager to see themselves and their hometown on the screen.
Since 1951, more than 50 movies have been made here. 
The draw is a ready-made Biblical setting that looks more than 2,000 years old and cheap labor. 
A scene from Bernardo Bertolucci's "Sheltering Sky" was shot here, as were Elaine May's "Ishtar," Franco Zefferelli's "Jesus of Nazareth" and David Lean's "Lawrence of Arabia," as well as "The Jewel of the Nile."
An airplane from that film still sits in back of the soundstage where part of "Kundun" is being shot.
Over the past four years, TNT has made six films here; the fifth, "Samson and Delilah," was shown this month. 
And filming for the network's "David," with Jonathan Pryce and Leonard Nimoy, has just been completed.
While on location, actors and crew can stay at the 225-room Berbere Palace hotel, built in 1991. 
In recent weeks the call sheets for "David" and "Kundun" were posted in the lobby.   JEAN NATHAN
