
SAMUEL L. JACKSON WAS PACING backstage on the set, waiting for his cue. 
Decked out in a checked suit as a world-renowned violin expert, he was working on an attitude of weary sophistication. 
Although the film was being shot in English, he was practicing his French.
"Ca va?"
Mr. Jackson asked a production assistant. 
"That's cool, man. 
C'est bon."
It was the fourth day of shooting for the Canadian segment of "The Red Violin," which represents the first big international co-production of New Line Cinema. 
(Fine Line Features, a division of New Line, released "Shine," the hit film biography of the pianist David Helfgott.) Equally significant, "The Red Violin," which stars Greta Scacchi in addition to Mr. Jackson and features original soundtrack music by John Corigliano, is the second collaboration between Francois Girard and Don McKellar, who wrote the acclaimed 1994 movie "Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould."
"The Red Violin," which traces the imaginary history of a 1681 Italian instrument over three centuries, is as sweeping and ambitious in scope as "Thirty-Two Short Films" was intimate and insular. 
Though technically a Canadian film, with a modest $10 million budget, it is an international effort, co-produced by companies in Canada, the United States, England and Italy. 
It is being filmed in five countries: Canada, England, Italy, Austria and China. 
Each episode represents a different era, and the casts and languages change accordingly.
The tale puts forward a fictional Italian master, a maker of string instruments who paints the violin of the title with a varnish made from the blood of his beloved dead wife, in an attempt to keep her spirit alive. 
By 1792, the instrument has wended its way to the Austrian Alps, where a young prodigy determines to play it at the court in Vienna. 
From there, it is taken up by Gypsies, acquired by a Dionysian composer in England and, in 1966, sent on a boat to China, where it is hidden during the Cultural Revolution. 
Finally, in the present day, it lands at an auction house in Montreal, where the violin expert played by Mr. Jackson becomes obsessed with it.
As might be expected, there is already excitement about "The Red Violin" in musical circles. 
The soundtrack, to be produced by Sony Classical, is being created by Mr. Corigliano, whose work includes the opera "The Ghosts of Versailles" and the scores for the movies "Altered States" and "Revolution."
The American violinist Joshua Bell will play concerts on the East and West Coasts in the fall featuring a rhapsody written by Mr. Corigliano inspired by the film.
"Most music films are basically sports films with a music scenario," Mr. Corigliano said. 
"They have a competition and a superstar who is out to beat everybody else, like running the four-minute mile. 
Although there are virtuosi in it, 'The Red Violin' is a completely different look at music. 
It's more the idea of how music has gone through the ages, and the passion that people feel for it going through time."
Channel 4 in England, which has produced movies like "Four Weddings and a Funeral," is a backer of this film. 
"What first interested me in 'The Red Violin' was the script," said the channel's director, David Aukin. 
"I've never come across a story quite like this, and I was intrigued to see what someone of Francois's sensibility and talent would bring to it. 
It struck me as entirely unusual and idiosyncratic."
For the Canadian team at the heart of "The Red Violin" -- Mr. Girard, Mr. McKellar and Niv Fichman, the producer -- this is a far more ambitious project than "Thirty-Two Short Films," which was shot for less than $2 million. 
That movie, which looked at the artistic genius and personal eccentricity of the great Canadian pianist Glenn Gould from a variety of angles, was an unexpected critical hit when it opened in the United States. 
It "brilliantly breaks with tradition and gives us a movie that actually inspires us to think about what it was like to be this man," wrote Roger Ebert in The Chicago Sun-Times.
As a result, Mr. Girard received a number of proposals for films about musical figures. 
"I thought I wouldn't want to do another film about music," he said in French-accented English. 
"But then this idea came to me, of a violin traveling through time. 
It's not five stories; it's one story in five steps. 
And the auction is where the different stories finally meet."
Here, now, was the ornate auction room, which had been created in a former municipal swimming pool on Amherst Street. 
It was a grand space, ringed by a gallery and filled with gilt chairs. 
Extras wearing Gucci pumps and pearl necklaces stepped gingerly over wires. 
At one end, standing at a podium, was Colm Feore, the Canadian actor who portrayed Gould in "Thirty-Two Short Films," now playing the auctioneer.
Behind him stood a lone violin on a pedestal, an actual Stradivarius, which the cellist Yo-Yo Ma had helped the producers procure. 
In the script, it was being auctioned just before the red violin. 
The crew was proud to have the Stradivarius, valued at $1.8 million, on the set. 
"It could be the world's most expensive prop," said Mr. Fichman.
Mr. Jackson appeared at the back door of the auction room. 
"My character here is someone who looks at an instrument and knows its value, knows how music is created," he said later.
Playing the part of a violin connoisseur is a departure for Mr. Jackson, who has appeared in "Pulp Fiction" and "A Time to Kill."
Mr. Fichman said that he and his partners did not want to make a film that was completely "white and Eurocentric," hence the casting of a black actor for the part.
It didn't hurt, of course, that Mr. Jackson was a big star. 
He, for his part, was interested in making another low-budget film.
"The crafts services' food is not as good," he said. 
"But the passion that's surrounding me here is totally different from the energy that goes into a studio production."
For months, Mr. Girard and his team have been embroiled in lengthy talks with the Chinese Government, negotiating a deal to allow them to film in Shanghai. 
Resistance arose among officials, because the segment was to be set during the Cultural Revolution, a period the Government would rather not dwell on. 
But the latest news is positive: Mr. Fichman, who went to China in March with Mr. McKellar, has received word that the project has now met with a positive response from the Chinese Government. 
Although the film awaits one last stamp of approval, the crew is preparing to shoot in Shanghai in late June.
"We've come up with a script that is agreed upon by both sides," Mr. Fichman said. 
"We understand what their concerns are. 
We're not setting out in any way to denounce Chinese culture."
After filming in Montreal, the production traveled to Vienna, and to Cremona, Italy, and will shoot in England in late May. 
Since each segment is being shot in the language of its country, most of the film will be subtitled.
"It was very important to me that the film be shot in the different languages," said Mr. Aukin, of Channel 4. 
"To me, that was the whole point of the movie, that music is a universal language that goes beyond other languages and unites people. 
Everyone can understand the violin when it's played."
Mr. Girard finds deep significance in the immortality of the red violin. 
"I don't think we're making a movie just about music," he said. 
"If you ask me what this film is about, I would say it's actually about love and mortality. 
It's about surviving mortality through art, beauty and craft.
"I think that's what all artists are doing," he added after a pause. 
"This is the afterlife that art can give us."
