
COULD it be that one of today's most important film artists -- the critic J. Hoberman calls him "the world's greatest active narrative filmmaker" -- is a Taiwanese director virtually unknown here?
American audiences, accustomed to gauging a movie's importance by its advertising budget and buzz, may understandably scoff at such a claim. 
Regardless, the director in question, Hou Hsiao-hsien, is a star of the international circuit. 
Six of his last seven pictures have been shown at this year's New York Film Festival, which ends today, yet none were released in the United States theatrically. 
His movies are considered "difficult" -- and they are, compared with the latest action picture. 
Yet it says something about how incurious American audiences have become that they must be "protected" from great, demanding cinema from abroad. 
The fault is not entirely ours: Mr. Hou's producers have sometimes made unrealistic demands for foreign sales.
Now Wendy Lidell, vice president of WinStar Cinema, is taking the chance. 
She has put together a package of seven Hou Hsiao-hsien films to tour nationally, beginning at Lincoln Center's Walter Reade Theater, on Wednesday through Oct. 
27; eventually the films will be issued on video and DVD. 
(The Walter Reade series will be fleshed out with three other Hou titles and will include a weeklong run of Mr. Hou's magnificent "Flowers of Shanghai.")
Mr. Hou's significance is that he is both a great humanist storyteller and a great formalist. 
Imagine a cross between the character-rich, domestically observant cinema of Satyajit Ray or Vittorio de Sica and the rigorously framed, meditative aura of Yasujiro Ozu and Robert Bresson, with gritty urban echoes of Martin Scorsese thrown in. 
His films constitute a running commentary on Taiwanese identity, while drawing deeply on classical Chinese art. 
If Mr. Hou's style bridges the old traditions and the jagged, modernist edges of rootless global culture, it is partly because he himself embodies those contradictions.
This maker of contemplative masterworks is, at 52, youthful-looking, roguish and a hard-drinking karaoke habitue, as we see in "'H.H.H.: Portrait of Hou Hsiao-hsien," an intriguing documentary by Olivier Assayas that is included in the Walter Reade series. 
We learn that Mr. Hou had a wild youth; many of his gang cohorts met violent ends. 
After military service, which settled him down, he was unsure whether to aim for pop singing, acting or filmmaking. 
He joined a movement of cinematic progressives (including Edward Yang, in whose "Taipei Story" Mr. Hou played the lead). 
The New Taiwanese Cinema identified with the French New Wave, rebelling against the previous Taiwanese studio comedies and melodramas and favoring real locations and socially conscious material. 
Their first effort was an omnibus film, "The Sandwich Man" (1983); Mr. Hou directed the title section, and already one can see his patient observation of ordinary people caught in a trap. 
Other early Hou films, "The Boys From Fengkuei" and "A Summer at Grandpa's," displayed a fresh, open storytelling approach that captured the irregular rhythms of growing up. 
But it was not until the more autobiographical "A Time to Live and a Time to Die" (1985) that Mr. Hou made his first genuine masterpiece.
He chose the story of a schoolteacher, much like his father, who transplanted his family from mainland China to Taiwan in 1948 for work reasons, then was unable to go back after the Revolution. 
The first generation's tragedy was that they died in Taiwan deluding themselves that they would one day return.
THEIR children, Mr. Hou's generation, accepted that they belonged in Taiwan, though that meant subscribing to an uneasy, fractured identity, buffeted politically between the Nationalists and the Chinese Communists. 
These larger tensions are reflected in the story of an exiled family, much like Mr. Hou's, in which the death of both parents led to the adolescent children's delinquency.
Praising the movie's "attractive plainness," Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times: "Much of the film is about suffering and loss, detailing the painful circumstances in which family members, one by one, grow ill and die. 
It has been photographed, most effectively, with a streamlined ordinariness that amounts to a kind of eloquence."
Mr. Hou's camera records, with anthropological interest, life's task-laden dailiness, which continues through dramatic disruptions. 
The mournfully consoling noises and rituals of everyday go on in the surround (you can't even say "background," because the key dramatic action is not always in the foreground).
The performances also mimic a nonprofessional style, which makes you forget you're even watching acting, so absorbed is the camera with real-time behavior. 
For instance, there's a stunning, throwaway moment when the mother, who has throat cancer, is being clumsily strapped into a rickshaw by its driver, to be taken back to the hospital. 
You watch the rain falling, the driver buckling the straps around the mother, her own stolid, indrawn expression, her grown children more or less assisting. 
The scene's restraint lets you feel, and swallow, the full effect of severe illness.
Without overgeneralizing, perhaps one might speak in broader terms of a Taiwanese cultural sensibility, which is melancholy and fragilely quotidian, reflecting the apprehensive circumstances of this island's modern history (occupied for 50 years by the Japanese, then placed under martial law for 40 years by the emigre Nationalists). 
Hong Kong films tend toward the brashly kinetic; Chinese mainland films, toward the panoramically epic; Taiwanese films, toward the quietly moody. 
Mr. Hou's trademark poignant stoicism, humor-flecked, has been aided immeasurably by his two wonderful screenwriters: the novelists Chu T'ien-wen and Wu Nien-chen.
Mr. Hou's next work, "Dust in the Wind," based on Mr. Wu's autobiographical script, focused on the problems of country youth moving to the big city and getting lost in the shuffle. 
A small, wrenching film, it features some astonishingly beautiful long shots, which, like Chinese landscape painting, assign us humanity's place in a larger picture.
From this point on, Mr. Hou steadily perfected his technique, moving from that "attractive plainness" to a level of refinement justifying Peter Sellars's assessment that he was "one of the last great craftsmen in cinema."
Visual elegance permeated his subsequent film, the haunting "Daughter of the Nile," which portrayed disaffected Taipei teen-agers trapped in the aqua fluorescent glare of Burger Kings, and, even more, his ambitious, three-hour "City of Sadness," which won the grand prize at Venice in 1990.
"City of Sadness" was a breakthrough for Mr. Hou in many respects: by telling the taboo story about the "February 28 incident," a massacre of thousands of native Taiwanese in 1947 by the Nationalist Chinese, he struck a national chord (the film set box-office records in Taiwan). 
By layering so many characters and themes with a minimum of orientation, he created a new kind of epic, both richly textured and austere. 
The film traces the fortunes of a family, led by Older Brother, a brusque, gravel-voiced, irrepressibly endearing gangster, who tries to honor the codes of family, clan and professional confederates, while keeping wife and mistress happy. 
Meanwhile, we learn a lot about the Japanese occupation, competition from Shanghai gangsters, leftwing political movements.
The film's narrative reach, violence and fatalistic undertone owes something to that other gangster epic, "The Godfather," which Mr. Hou says inspired him. 
In "City of Sadness," violence often erupts from seeming tranquillity and then spends itself, the site returning to calm. 
A man is slowly walking up a mountain road; a rickshaw appears in the middle distance; the man turns and strolls toward the rickshaw occupants, then pulls a samurai sword and starts thwacking at them. 
This spasmodic aggression gets swallowed by the mountainous landscape.
(There is also a hint of Godard -- another influence of Mr. Hou's -- and his droll shootouts between gangsters in long-distance.) "I always tell my cameraman, 'Pull back!
More detached!'
" says Mr. Hou. By striving for a detached, objective point of view, without leading us ideologically by the elbow, he compels a more active spectatorship. 
It must be admited, though, that "A City of Sadness" is not easy to grasp in one viewing.
Mr. Hou's reputed difficulty for American audiences is only partly because he dwells so specifically on Taiwanese matters. 
Those particularities can be overlooked; more crucial is a willingness to surrender to a different pace and vision. 
American scriptwriters are taught to make one point per scene and move on. 
With Mr. Hou, you feel your way into a scene, sorting as you go the characters' relationships and objectives. 
As Kent Jones, co-curator of the Lincoln Center series, has written: "There is truly nothing but in medias res in Hou."
After a while you abandon your quest for the "key action" and surrender to the perplexing, multifarious life unfolding before you.
In a sense, Mr. Hou's work is not difficult at all: you need only slow down your metabolism and submit to the pace, the images, the information on screen.
What he offers, finally, is a plenitude of life as it accumulates in the moment; the screen fills with being like water in a fish tank. 
Mr. Hou forces you to attend to the unfolding present -- a quality he shares with other "ontological" filmmakers like Andrei Tarkovsky, John Cassavetes, Jean-Luc Godard, Andy Warhol and Frederick Wiseman, all of whom allow the moment to flower, rather than coercing it into plot functions.
"He probably understands framing better than any director in the world," observed Richard Pena, the New York Film Festival's director. 
He often subdivides the frame, with lattice or door frames, letting several actions go on at once. 
Increasingly, each scene is presented as a self-controlled whole, without interior cutting, which places more pressure on camera movement and choreographed action within the shot. 
Yet if you're not always sure why you're watching what you are, given his abjuring of transition shots, a second viewing of any Hou film reveals that it has been very tightly constructed, with no narrative flab.
"City of Sadness" was the first in a historical trilogy, which also included "The Puppetmaster" and "Good Men, Good Women."
Both paid their respects to the resilient optimism and sacrifices of an older generation, as a way of trying to understand Taiwanese history and to contrast it with the malaise and pessimism of young Taiwanese today. 
Having performed this filial duty, Mr. Hou next made "Goodbye, South, Goodbye," in which he brilliantly cut loose. 
Here he gives us Taiwanese punks talking on cell phones, riding motorcycles through the mountains (a joyously lyrical scene), hanging out after botched suicide attempts and trying to pull off harebrained cons. 
We also see how dominant the cultures of America and Japan are on the young Taiwanese. 
Mr. Hou paints Taiwan as a society so corrupt and lawless -- "pure" capitalism -- that only a frayed system of familial and clan loyalties is left to adjudicate disputes. 
There is an amazing nightclub scene that begins with an elderly man crooning a karaoke song about women and betrayal; then the camera moves to a row of banquet tables, where a senator and a policeman on the take discuss with a gangster how best to mediate a kidnapping. 
Around them sit various friends and retainers of both sides, eating with decorous politeness as the bribes are worked out.
In his most recent film, "Flowers of Shanghai," Mr. Hou abandoned Taiwan for the first time and focused on a period drama set in various brothels in turn-of-the-century Shanghai. 
This gorgeous, remorselessly controlled film is shot entirely in interiors: a succession of dimly gaslit parlors where background colors are muted -- plums and golds that open to reveal the players half-concealed in the shadows -- and where no one is ever left alone for long, though their inner isolation remains untouched. 
Elaborate rituals of opium pipes, feasts and gambling underpin the carnal intimacies and duplicities.
Mr. Hou takes the conventions of geisha melodrama -- the cruelty of sexual commerce, the women's debts, the madam's bossiness, the self-protective, two-faced nature of a courtesan's attachments -- and strips down the genre to its essence, by way of formal blackouts, frontal compositions, and gyroscopically rigorous camera movements, which capture each scene in a single setup. 
At the film's emotional center is a handsome, unhappy patron, Master Wang, played by Tony Leung, who is addicted to the pleasure quarters, not so much for reasons of sexual titillation as for the loneliness, lostness and languor obtainable there. 
We are left to witness the enormous gulf between male and female, as Wang gazes at his sometime-mistress Crimson, wondering what is going on inside her, while she prepares his pipe.
"Flowers of Shanghai" is one of the cinematic highpoints of the 90's, a tribute from one fin-de-siecle to another, by a master who keeps growing.
