
After pouring billions of dollars into China in recent years, Taiwan's investors are slowing their activity there and are looking elsewhere at countries in Southeast Asia.
The slump in Taiwanese investment has accompanied a sharp slowdown in general foreign investment in China. 
Late last month, China Daily, an English-language newspaper in Beijing, reported that contracts for foreign investments for the first five months fell 45 percent from a year earlier, to $32.7 billion from $58.76 billion.
Taiwan's attitudes toward China have fluctuated wildly in the last decade, from virulent anti-Communist isolationism to wary and tentative contacts with the mainland to a flush of enthusiasm by small and medium-sized businesses in Taiwan.
 
 
The Fever Has Broken
But the mixed economic performance of many investments in China, the country's lack of legal protections and guarantees and the slaughter in March of a boatload of Taiwanese tourists in eastern China have soured many Taiwanese business people on the nation that lays claim to their island.
"Mainland investment fever is finished," said Chiu Chen, a lawyer here who advises investors on business in China. 
Many of her clients, she said, are now spreading through Southeast Asia. 
"All the provinces are reporting sharp drops in investment," she said. 
"Me personally, I would never put a dime in China."
Although precise data are unclear, Taiwan has emerged as the largest foreign investor in Vietnam. 
But investors have also been drawn to Indonesia and the Philippines, a foreign trade official said, following a "go south" policy that the Taiwanese Government started this year.
"Whenever Deng dies is overhanging people's thinking," said the official, alluding to the fragile health of China's 89-year-old leader, Deng Xiaoping. 
"They think it will have an effect on the economy in China and on their business. 
But by and large, the risks they face are commercial risks, not political risks."
 
 
Cheaper Labor
The rapid growth of Taiwan's economy, the increasing cost of labor and a shift away from labor-intensive manufacturing to high-technology and service industries, had made China attractive to many Taiwanese manufacturers.
"Traditionally, Taiwanese businessmen have not been very international," T. C. Lee, a banker at Citibank in Taipei, said. 
"But in the last two years, the tension between the two sides, between Taiwan and China, has been loosening. 
And that's why a lot of businessmen have started to make business in China."
Mr. Lee continued: "Here there are lots of labor-intensive industries -- garments, shoes, toys. 
All of them started to look outside to invest. 
They started to relocate initially to Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and in the last two years, China, to enjoy cheap labor, cheap land, cheap living costs."
Estimates of the size of Taiwan investments in China vary wildly, from the Taiwanese Government's figures of about $9 billion to estimates of independent economists that range from $15 billion to $20 billion. 
The discrepancy results partly because Taiwan businesses must use foreign subsidiaries or shell companies, since the Taiwanese Government does not officially permit its citizens to invest directly in mainland China.
Yet Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs recently released figures suggesting that Taiwanese business investment in China fell more than 60 percent last year, from slightly more than $5.5 billion in investments in 1992 to just $2.1 billion last year.
"A Taiwanese businessman who walks around China feels very comfortable," said Diane Ying, the publisher of Commonwealth, Taiwan's leading business monthly. 
"But the degree of freedom, property rights, privacy -- that's not there."
 
 
'A Lot of Problems'
Michael M. C. Lin, the president of the Hiclin International Company, a group of companies in Taiwan that make furniture, mirrors and glass and do printing, built a furniture factory in Guangdong Province in China three years ago. 
Despite making money, he remains wary of prospects on the mainland.
"Labor costs were the most important thing for us," Mr. Lin said. 
"Of course, China has a lot of problems, political problems, transport problems, a crazy bank system. 
But every country has problems, of course. 
So we built near Hong Kong so we can take advantage of its ports, its banks. 
So we are making money."
But Mr. Lin, a stocky, tousle-haired executive, said he would never bet his company on China. 
"I think there should be a balance," he said, "so that not everything is in China."
As Mr. Lin and some fellow China investors sat recently in the office of a small trade organization they created to help other businesses invest on the mainland, the talk was of the March 31 massacre of 24 Taiwanese tourists who were boating on Qiandao Lake in the Chinese coastal province of Zhejiang. 
The Chinese Government insists that three young men committed the murders, but many people here think a renegade group of Chinese soldiers was responsible.
"For businessmen and people in Taiwan," Mr. Lin said, "Qiandao Lake has made them see clearly what is China. 
Most Taiwanese know what the reality is there. 
They can change their policies very quickly there. 
It's not a lawful society."
 
 
'Like Speculation'
This perception that China lacks a credible legal system is at the root of much of the concern here, said Wu Rong-i, president of the Taiwan Institute of Economic Research, a private consulting and research organization.
"Chinese investment is like speculation," Mr. Wu said. 
"You don't have legal protections. 
In China, it's easy for provincial officials to have different interpretations of the law. 
It's quite natural for the Chinese to squeeze the Taiwan investor. 
Taiwan investors now think that China is not such a good place to invest. 
In some cases, you can have a very big profit, but in other cases, very small."
Mr. Wu also argued that too great a concentration of investment in China, as opposed to diversification across Asia, would create both economic and political difficulties.
"If our market depends too much on China, that is not healthy," he said. 
"After Deng Xiaoping dies, there are many economic scenarios about what could happen there.
"This even affects politics here," he continued. 
"There's a hot debate now. 
Some people say, 'How can you ignore such a big market?'
Other people say, 'No, China will use business to influence policy here.'
So we are trying to diversify our investments and markets."
 
 
Not Always Profitable
A recent survey by the Taiwanese Government indicates that China has not been a completely profitable investment. 
Only 31 percent of the 400 investors surveyed said they had made money on their operations in China, while nearly 40 percent reported losses. 
Another 26 percent gave ambiguous answers, suggesting that their operations might be profitable. 
The rest had no response.
So far, Taiwan's large business groups have resisted the lure of China. 
But there are now signs that the sharp drop in investment by small and medium-sized businesses may be followed by a surge in investment by large Taiwanese companies.
One senior executive of a big Taiwanese developer, who insisted that he not be quoted by name, said his group was looking at buying real estate in China. 
And Mr. Lee of Citibank also said he was seeing some signs of movement into China by bigger groups.
"In the past 12 months, there are more bigger investments, not so many little ones," Mr. Lee said. 
"A lot of the investment is going into real estate, and a lot into industrial development."
But, he concluded, 'a lot of businessmen do not put everything in China."
