
By some measures, the Xingzhi primary school in western Beijing is a huge success. 
Started in 1994 with just 9 students, it now has 1,266 students from all over the country, and had to turn away hundreds of applicants this fall.
Its founder, Li Shumei, and her husband, Yi Benyao, who both moved here from a dead-end town in central China, have taken this private school from a hut in a vegetable patch to the converted grounds of a paint factory in just five years. 
While its classrooms may be crowded and a bit shabby, the sing-song recitations and the happy riot at recess testify to real school spirit.
But the school is unauthorized and unlicensed, and its booming growth attests to one of China's most enduring social tensions: the degrading treatment of the tens of millions of rural Chinese who seek better lives in the cities but are consigned by law and habit to second-class citizenship.
Ms. Li, 38, and Mr. Yi, 37, run their school on a shoestring, trying to provide education for some of Beijing's 100,000 children of so-called migrant workers -- most of whom are actually long-term residents of the city whose work in construction, vending, garbage collecting and other low-end jobs is vital to the city's life.
Schooling is supposed to be compulsory for Chinese children, and cities are supposed to make sure migrant children get an education. 
Beijing and other cities have complied with the letter of the law -- by allowing migrant children to attend public schools if they pay stiff fees that few can afford.
"It's definitely not fair, but we all feel there's nothing we can do about it," said Mr. Yi, whose school -- named, hopefully, after a famous early 20th century educator -- gets no government aid. 
More than once, the school has been driven off a new site by the police.
In the last few years, according to one recent survey by government researchers, more than 100 unlicensed schools, most of them much smaller than Xingzhi and some run by people with no more than a junior high school education, have sprung up in Beijing. 
The educational plight of the migrant children is so acute that some official newspapers have carried exposes, and students and faculty members from teacher colleges have given volunteer help.
A horrified journalist, chronicling a visit to an especially desolate migrant school for The Beijing Youth Daily, was stunned to see how far removed from the mainstream the children were. 
"Suddenly," the writer noted, "I realized that they were not wearing the red scarf," the near-ubiquitous Young Pioneer kerchief that is obligatory for Chinese schoolchildren.
Yet, the reporter added, these pupils were "luckier than the children still playing in the vegetable markets every day."
While many of the three million or so migrants in Beijing are single and work here temporarily, a growing number stay on for years, if not for good. 
Lacking the treasured permanent residence certificate, they must annually prove they have a job and apply for new temporary permits. 
Others, unable to obtain the needed papers, must dodge the periodic police sweeps.
The country's system of residential permits was originally established by the Communist government to control the movements of people and prevent the growth of vast urban shantytowns. 
Now, in a freer society and a fast-developing economy that demands labor mobility, it appears increasingly outdated, and the authorities seem to be at a loss to cope with a "floating population" that may surpass 100 million people nationwide.
For China's leaders, the permit system still serves a crucial political purpose: it protects urban workers from competition that would push down wages and spread both unemployment and the urban worker unrest that the authorities most fear.
The legalized privileges of official urban residents, who make up less than one-third of the national population, seem certain to rankle more and more in the years ahead, especially after China enters the World Trade Organization and opens up markets for agricultural products. 
The new global competition is expected to kill off marginal producers and force farming to become more efficient -- driving more rural people to search for work in the cities.
The migrants already face a raft of prejudices. 
They are blamed in official residents' everyday conversations for virtually all of Beijing's crime, crowding and dirt. 
Even in official discourse, they are invariably referred to as "outsiders," and social mixing with permanent residents is rare. 
Many migrants live in illegally built rented rooms, subject to demolition during crackdowns.
But the discrimination is more than cultural. 
To protect the incomes of natives, some cities, including Beijing, have legally banned the hiring of nonresidents for many jobs above the lower rungs.
An article in The Economic Daily this month stated baldly: "Workers without an urban residence permit suffer from general social discrimination. 
They are not only treated unequally in wages, housing, medical care, unemployment insurance and schooling for their children, they also face the risk of being fired at any time."
Ms. Li and Mr. Yi are trying to make the best of a bad situation. 
Ms. Li, a former teacher in their home province of Henan, was working in a Beijing street market in 1994 when some relatives' children needed schooling. 
She started with just nine children, but was soon besieged by other migrant parents.
In the fall of 1995, with enrollment at 50 and rising, her husband moved from Henan to become principal of the expanding school. 
They were finally able to rent the former paint factory off a litter-strewn alley through the $10,000 gift of a Chinese-American in Los Angeles who had read about their struggles in a newspaper for Chinese overseas. 
They have transformed the factory into something approaching a school, with classrooms surrounding a well-used exercise yard, and have rented a separate building for teaching fifth and sixth graders.
But the budget, built from the grateful payments of migrants who want their children to have a chance at better lives, remains paltry. 
"We are eating next year's food to get by this year," Mr. Yi said. 
"We can barely manage."
The tuition for each child is $36 per semester, plus $7 for books. 
Adding up to $86 per year, this is just feasible for the workers, who are often earning less than $100 a month.
To attend public schools nearby on the outskirts of Beijing, migrant applicants must pay special fees of at least $360 per year, as well as the $80 for books and fees that official residents pay. 
In the city center, all these fees can be much higher.
Mr. Yi is the first to admit that a lower budget takes a toll. 
Only one-fourth of the school's teachers are certified, teaching classes with more than 50 children each -- "but we still have to reject so many students who want to come in," he said. 
Only with volunteer teachers can nonbasic subjects like art and music be taught.
The school uses some of the same textbooks as the public schools, and gives the same final exams as a way to check on progress. 
In the early grades, the migrant children at Xingzhi do just about as well as public school students, Mr. Yi said, but by fifth grade they are falling behind.
Since the school is not certified, even the best students may not be able to gain entry to high school. 
A few cities in China have begun to give accreditation to similar migrant schools, Mr. Yi said, but in Beijing, he added, the response to numerous applications has been, "be patient."
Without any legal status, the school was driven out of several previous locations by developers or the police. 
The education department still refuses to license the school, but with the help of some well-connected sympathizers, Xinzhi has obtained tenuous permission from the police to keep operating at the factory site.
"Both the students and the teachers constantly worry that this school may be closed down," Mr. Yi said. 
"They always feel ill at ease, and it's not good for either of them."
But one of the biggest obstacles to educational progress, Mr. Yi said, may be a less tangible one, resulting from the pervasive ostracism and ridicule of poor, rural migrants in the big city.
"The kids feel they must be inferior to the public school kids," he said. 
"We spend a lot of time telling the students that they don't have to feel inferior."
