
In 1994, the Harvard Business Review featured a long interview with David R. Whitwam, the chief executive of the Whirlpool Corporation, entitled "The Right Way to Go Global."
In case anyone doubted the value of Mr. Whitwam's wisdom, a chart accompanied the article, showing how Whirlpool's returns to shareholders in the 1990's were far outdistancing those of the stock market in general.
Shortly thereafter, though, Mr. Whitwam went from hero to goat on Wall Street. 
Whirlpool, the maker of major home appliances, or "white goods," that is based in Benton Harbor, Mich., stumbled in Europe, sending its stock tumbling from a peak of $74 a share to less than $50 in a matter of months. 
And two months ago, with continuing European problems compounded by heavy losses from more recent investments in China, Whirlpool told shareholders it needed to set aside $350 million -- more than its projected earnings for all of 1997 -- to retrench.
It's not easy going global. 
Companies typically dream that breaking into foreign markets will provide hordes of new customers. 
But for all the benefits, the reality all too often is also overexposure to volatile currencies and troubled relationships with foreign partners. 
In developing countries like China, vague and shifting laws governing taxation and commerce add to the riskiness of big investments. 
And in developed markets like the United States and Europe, the rules may be clearer but there are often so many entrenched players that newcomers pay heavily for the slightest tactical slip-up.
It is hard enough for the leaders of high-technology industries like Intel in semiconductors or Boeing in aerospace to conquer new territory. 
Nor have icons of American culture like Coca-Cola, Disney or McDonald's been able to simply waltz into foreign markets after laying down barrages of advertising.
But the business Whirlpool is in may well be among the toughest for corporations with global ambitions. 
The marketer's home run -- a truly global brand name like Coke or Marlboro that is capable of capturing both mass markets and premium prices -- may be beyond anyone's reach in the $80 billion white goods industry. 
Not only are there countless variations in what consumers in different countries want from cooking, washing and refrigeration products based on how they live, but in most countries there are already well-established local competitors that cater to those preferences.
"The home is the most culture-bound part of one's life," said John A. Quelch, a Harvard Business School professor who studies globalization issues. 
"Consumers in Paris don't care what kind of refrigerator they are using in New York."
That condemns multinational appliance companies to nation-by-nation trench warfare. 
"This is the most competitive of all G.E.'s businesses," said David Cote, head of the General Electric Company's appliance operations, which are based in Louisville, Ky., and had revenues last year of $6.5 billion.
Virtually every company Whirlpool competes with also has globalization bruises. 
Its latest bad news came just months after Electrolux, based in Sweden, announced a $320 million write-off to pay for shedding 12,000 workers and closing 25 plants in several countries. 
It is just two years since the Maytag Corporation sold its Hoover subsidiaries overseas, giving up on a six-year effort to penetrate Europe that cost it several hundred million dollars. 
And G.E. fled Brazil in the 1980's after incurring heavy losses there.
Overcapacity is particularly endemic in Europe, the biggest foreign market. 
Unlike the United States, where the top four manufacturers account for 90 percent of sales and Whirlpool, G.E. and Maytag all have enjoy double-digit operating margins, the top four in Europe have just 55 percent of sales and face off against more than 300 local manufacturers. 
Many of these smaller rivals are willing to initiate price wars and other scorched-earth tactics to increase or at least preserve their market share.
"They know that Europe is going to end up consolidating like the United States and that the companies that might buy them are not looking for last year's profits but space on the retail shelf," said Susan Anthony, an analyst at Schroder Securities in London, said of the small companies.
Market saturation is also a problem in China, where the number of local and foreign manufacturers plunging into the appliance business has outstripped the spending power of the Chinese consumer.
So why not stay home?
Though globalization has become a bit of a corporate cliche -- with endless talk of the global economy, global markets, global competitiveness, global forces, global imperatives and even global citizens in a global village -- even skeptics see attractions for those who stayed focused.
Developing countries are the only places in the world where major appliance sales are growing at double-digit percentage rates. 
Even as it suffered in Europe, Whirlpool had sales growing at a 25 percent to 30 percent rate in Brazil in recent years.
There's also the potential cost savings in global procurement and manufacturing; the opportunity to profit from being the first to transfer new technology between continents, and the benefits in recruiting management talent from a bigger, more diverse pool.
For all the difficulties, most of the big appliance makers have concluded they must remain engaged in the globalization fray. 
The issues are how to dodge setbacks where possible and try, try again where necessary. 
Thus, G.E. last year reversed direction and bought a Brazilian stove maker in an effort to return to Latin America's biggest market. 
Whirlpool contends its European business is growing and will be back in the black by 1998, and Mr. Whitwam calls its decision to sell two of its four ventures in China a "temporary retreat."
Maytag, although still sour on Europe, has a $35 million year-old joint venture producing washing machines in China and plans to invest a similar amount to expand into refrigerators.
At the moment, Mr. Cote of G.E. would be more likely to get a call than Mr. Whitwam if the Harvard Business Review wanted to revisit its 1994 subject. 
His cautious tactics have emphasized preserving G.E.'s industry-leading operating margins. 
While all its major rivals have invested in manufacturing capacity in China, for example, G.E. bought 80 percent of a Chinese distribution company and has used that venture to find Chinese companies to make G.E.-designed products under contract. 
Total sales this year will not amount to much more than $20 million but, with very little money invested, they will generate a positive return on assets.
Similarly, though G.E. has a strong base in Britain through Hotpoint, which it operates as a joint venture with Britain's General Electric Company (the two namesakes are unrelated), it has chosen to nibble at the luxury end of rest of the European market. 
It courts noted kitchen designers and wealthy customers familiar with its name by importing products rather than pay a premium price to acquire a European manufacturer big enough to allow it to fight an all-out war with leaders like Electrolux, Bosch-Siemens and Whirlpool. 
And it licenses some European manufacturers to sell their products under the G.E. name.
"Our goal is to be the most profitable appliance company," Mr. Cote said. 
"We don't necessarily have to manufacture."
But other international giants are going all out to make G.E.'s current strategy look short-sighted.
Electrolux, the world's largest appliance maker, may face the biggest struggle. 
It has made itself the European leader through acquisitions, but has produced disappointing earnings as it struggled to integrate them better. 
In the United States, it acquired big-name brands -- notably Frigidaire in 1986 -- but underestimated how much investment was needed to rebuild them.
The challenge of sorting Electrolux out fell early this year to Michael Treschow, a 53-year-old executive who had been running Atlas Copco, a Swedish mining and metals multinational that like Electrolux is part of the constellation of public companies controlled by the Wallenberg family. 
Within a month of switching jobs, Mr. Treschow delighted analysts by announcing Electrolux's huge streamlining program.
"We are trying to get margins, which are now under 4 percent, back up above 6.5 percent in the next two years," Mr. Treschow said. 
One aim is to develop more products like the new Euro-oven, which attempts to address the varied product preferences of Europe's fragmented markets with 46 minor variations on a single platform. 
The goal is to simplify everything from procurement and manufacturing to customer service.
Also on the move is Bosch-Siemens, a joint venture of two of Germany's biggest companies, Robert A. Bosch G.m.b.H. and Siemens A.G. 
Three years ago, Bosch-Siemens acquired Brazil's largest maker of cooking appliances, and has since built factories to make refrigerators and washing and drying machines in that country, and started construction of a refrigerator factory in Peru. 
Its newer ventures have begun taking share from both Whirlpool, the market leader through its majority control of Brasmotor S.A., and Electrolux, according to Roger Wright, an industry analyst at Garantia, a Brazilian investment bank.
Whirlpool stepped up its investment in Latin America recently but is also committed to recovering from its international missteps. 
It has the most on the line in Europe, where it became a big player overnight in 1989 by acquiring the appliance arm of Philips N.V., the Dutch conglomerate. 
Part of the $2 billion deal, which was completed in stages, required Whirlpool to replace the famous Philips brand with its own within five years, thus imposing a huge marketing burden that helped drive the business into the red after a promising start.
But such challenges have neither dampened Mr. Whitwam's optimism nor caused him to recant much of what he said in 1994 when Whirlpool was riding high. 
"Everything we based our strategic plans on has happened and we are further along than I envisioned," he said in a recent interview at Whirlpool's headquarters in Benton Harbor.
"We have probably realized no more than a third of the benefits of creating an integrated global company so far," he said. 
"We never expected this industry to get there in the 90's."
