
In the dead of night, especially when there is no moon, the boats from mainland China slip through the mists and into the waters of Kinmen, this fortress island once known to the world as Quemoy and still manned by thousands of Taiwan Army troops.
The intruders quietly leap onto the enemy beaches here and at Matsu Island to the north, working feverishly to disgorge their loads undetected. 
Then they slip away, back into the night.
In an earlier era, when artillery barrages were a fact of daily life and submarines and frogmen plied the waters on this side of the Taiwan Strait, it might have been a well-executed commando raid.
But these mainlanders were delivering the groceries, part of the large-scale -- though still illegal -- commerce flourishing between old enemies in this longtime war zone.
Though tensions are rising between China and Taiwan on the big issues of China's sovereignty over what it considers a renegade province and over Taiwan's push to be seated at the United Nations, the war here is over.
Where old enemies have been facing each other for four decades, where China's efforts to retake Quemoy and Matsu brought it to the brink of war with the United States in 1958, an extraordinary thaw is occurring. 
Old lines of trade are being re-established despite the continuing efforts of Taiwan's Government to forbid contact between the residents here and the mainlanders, who are determined to do business.
"If the Chinese military came to this island, it would be to make money, not to make trouble," said Yang Zhongxing, 77, a veteran and a survivor of the 45-year-old cold war with China.
"No one cares about military or security matters anymore, they just want to make money and raise their children," said Mr. Yang, whose ancestors 18 generations ago settled in this small village on the northwestern tip of Quemoy, now known by its Chinese name as Kinmen (pronounced JEEN-men).
Recent estimates indicate that 60 to 70 percent of the daily produce, fish and meat that are sold in the markets here are unloaded from mainland Chinese boats, in trade that is being encouraged by the Chinese authorities.
Even when mainland China this summer fired ballistic missiles and conducted other military exercises to intimidate Taiwan, the local residents hardly winced.
"In the old days, when the artillery bombs came almost every day, we would sit down to dinner thinking this might be our last meal," said Huang Qingwen, a 66-year-old noodle maker who was chopping and wrapping his daily production of fine, flour noodles when a visitor happened by.
"That was a real war," he added. 
"So why should we be afraid now when there is just some fake war with this testing of missiles?"
For more than four decades, this strategic outpost and the one on Matsu (pronounced mah-zoo) have signified the unfinished civil war that left China and Taiwan divided in 1949, with rival Communist and Nationalist Governments, each determined to obliterate the other.
If Asia had a Berlin wall, it was here. 
These islands were fortified as a barrier to contain the Communists and to protect the Nationalists, who had joined the Allies in World War II to defeat the Japanese.
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, the Nationalist leader who fled with most of his troops to the big island of Taiwan, ordered his commanders to hold on to Quemoy and Matsu because they represented strategic staging areas for a Nationalist counteroffensive to retake the mainland.
It was the counteroffensive that was always promised, but never begun.
In the years that followed, a garrison of tens of thousands of Taiwan troops burrowed into the rocky underground of this island, lacing it with tunnels, command posts, munitions depots and even an auditorium to entertain the troops. 
Quemoy and Matsu became fortresses that could withstand the fiercest onslaught from the mainland.
But after an initial, disastrous attempt by Communist troops to retake Quemoy in late October 1949, that, too, never came; there was only a long standoff.
The gun emplacements of the Chinese mainland still loom in the mists across the narrow band of water. 
People still remember the artillery barrages that sent hot shrapnel ripping through their homes and destroyed the tranquillity of their lives.
"More than 70 artillery shells landed around this village," Mr. Yang said, referring to the October 1949 mainland assault on Quemoy with 10,000 troops.
"Most of this part of the island was destroyed, and the only reason Kinmen survived was due to the participation of the Americans," he said. 
"If there had been no Americans, there would be no Kinmen today."
Official histories estimate that Chinese Communist forces fired 41,000 artillery shells against Quemoy on Aug. 
23, 1958, opening a campaign to dislodge 80,000 Nationalist troops, who were being supplied from Taiwan, 125 miles away.
For several generations of young Taiwan soldiers drafted into the army for two-year stints, the caves and tunnels and pillboxes of these islands became as familiar as their living rooms back home.
The islands remained under martial law until 1993, but now tourists are starting to come to see the places where their sons, fathers, uncles and nephews have stood the watch.
A military reduction began quietly after 1990, and force levels today are estimated at only 10 percent of the peak levels of the 1960's and 1970's.
"The strategic status of Kinmen and Matsu ceased to exist after the policy of trying to recover the mainland was given up," said a leading policy adviser in Taipei. 
"After that, it was also clear that it cost too much to have a lot of troops stationed at Kinmen and Matsu when there no longer was a strategic interest there."
Four decades of invasion fever are simply dissolving. 
The elaborate propaganda operations that carried on into the 1990's using loudspeakers and helium balloons to reach the mainland with news of the Tiananmen massacre in Beijing in 1989 seem out of place at a time when Taiwan businessmen are heavily represented on the mainland, with $20 billion invested in more than 25,000 enterprises.
"They are not our enemy anymore," Chen Zhigong, a fertilizer salesman from Taipei, said as he peered out from a pillbox at the end of a long underground tunnel that tourists can now traverse.
"We are all Chinese," Mr. Chen said, and then smiled so widely in satisfaction that a red tributary of betel nut juice escaped down his chin from the wad he was chewing.
Some commanders on Taiwan seem to agree with this sentiment. 
In July, when a Chinese warplane flew over Matsu, the local air defense commander did nothing to stop it.
Here on Kinmen, the 24,000-watt loudspeakers that used to blast Taiwan's propaganda across the waters from a rocky promontory are now used to belt out the love ballads of Deng Lijun, the Taiwanese crooner whose voice is as familiar to mainlanders as that of the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, no relation.
And just a few weeks ago, a local commander was feeling so mellow about his Chinese brothers across the water that he decided to bring down the flag of the Republic of China that had always flown above the loudspeaker station.
The next day, to his delight, the Chinese commander across the water took down the red flag of the People's Republic of China.
"You could say that we were just removing ourselves as a target," a young officer said, "but you could also say it was a friendly gesture."
Increasingly, the Taiwan Army is having to cope with the fact that the waters surrounding Kinmen and Matsu are becoming overrun with Chinese fishermen, especially since President Lee Teng-hui's visit to the United States set off an atmosphere of crisis.
Taiwan Army commanders, who have the authority to shoot at mainland fishing boats that violate Taiwan waters, are more and more reluctant to do so.
On a recent afternoon, a visitor to an army outpost here asked a young soldier why he seemed to be ignoring two Chinese fishing boats that were violating Kinmen's waters just a few hundred yards offshore.
Gazing over the water, the soldier agreed that the boats were "absolutely over the line," but he explained his inaction by saying, "Now is a sensitive period, and no one dares to shoot because they don't want to take a chance that they would get in trouble."
Taiwan fishermen, conversely, are constrained and operate under a strict curfew. 
Many complain that when they return to their overnight nets at dawn, they discover that their catch has been liberated by the mainlanders and the nets often hauled up and stolen.
"We are fishermen, but now we buy our fish from the mainlanders because we cannot catch fish ourselves," said Chen Caifa, 29. 
"The army tries to scare us because they don't want us involved with the Chinese boats, so we have taken down our flags and taken the numbers off our boats."
"Now," he added, "the army cannot tell who is Taiwanese and who is Chinese."
      
