
Hsiao Hsi Yuan Puppet Theater
Taipei Theater
McGraw-Hill Building
1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 48th Street
(212) 373-1850
Recommended ages: 8 and up
Tonight through Sunday
The Hsiao Hsi Yuan troupe, which is pronounced syao-syi-YUWEN and means "little west garden," prides itself on carrying on an ancient Chinese puppet art form. 
It is the only such troupe in Taiwan to have won three Heritage Awards from the Government, for preserving this Chinese tradition. 
The company performs mostly in Taiwan; its presence in Manhattan is an event for serious puppeteers, who can take a master class with Hsu Wang, the artistic director. 
For aficionados, the chance to see these hand puppets in their elaborate Chinese costumes and to hear traditional north-pipe music (a type of percussive melody the Chinese call pei kuan) is an opportunity to dip into a history and culture far removed from American soil.
The company is presenting "Reunion at Ku-cheng," a 90-minute opera about three brothers in which the youngest two are separated from the oldest during a civil war. 
The tale is drawn from a famous Ming Dynasty novel, "Romance of the Three Kingdoms," which details betrayals, loyalties and misunderstandings from China's early history. 
The show is operatic in its depictions of war, brotherly love and women: the older brother has two wives, who are captured by the enemy but protected by the younger brothers. 
"In Asia at that time," said Duo-Lin Peng, the production manager at the Taipei Theater, "you could have as many wives as you could handle."
The puppets look like dolls and perform in a carved and gilded puppet stage. 
Their movements are subtle and nuanced: the heads and hands move both slowly and quickly, as if they're real actors. 
A lady curtsies; a man turns imperiously.
The programs are tonight and tomorrow night at 7:30 and on Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets are $15 for adults and $10 for children and can be bought at the box office or through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171.
 
Children's Street Fair
Harrison Street, between Greenwich and Hudson Streets
TriBeCa
(212) 274-9403
Recommended for all ages
Monday
Growing up in the desert in southern Israel doesn't necessarily preclude living in TriBeCa as an adult and owning a restaurant. 
Yaffa Faro likes to defy the odds. 
She also likes to dress in black and white. 
When she walks her Dalmatian, you're not always sure where she ends and the dog begins.
Yaffa, who is known by her first name, is a serious free spirit who owns Yaffa's Tea Room, a TriBeCa restaurant offering party brunches and foods like couscous. 
She says that growing up in the Negev was idyllic. 
She and her seven older siblings played hide-and-seek in a graveyard in a deserted town that was 5,000 years old.
To repay the gods for her childhood, says Yaffa, whose own son, Paul, is 8, she has organized a street fair for children; the profits are to go to Children's Hope Foundation, a charity that takes care of children who have AIDS.
From 1 to 8 P.M., a city block will be cordoned off and packed with booths, bands, food and, it is hoped, sunshine. 
The booths will be set up for children to design T-shirts and make hats, belly-dancer outfits, mosaics, capes and restaurant menus.
Many businesses in the neighborhood are donating items and food. 
Admission is $10, which includes food and activities for the whole day.
