
Recently several prominent former officials and economists have called for abolishing the International Monetary Fund. 
Congress is also holding back its next deposit to the fund, $18 billion, because a Republican Congressman, Chris Smith, won't allow the U.S. contribution to be made unless the Clinton Administration drops support for any worldwide family-planning program that includes abortions. 
Since all these smart people seem to think the world doesn't need the I.M.F., I say junk the place. 
Here's what the world would look like a year later.
WASHINGTON, June 13, 1999-- On the first anniversary of the closing of the I.M.F., the Russian ruble hit a new low today of 50,000 to the dollar. 
Russia's President, the former army general Aleksandr Lebed, who ousted Boris Yeltsin in a coup after the Russian economy collapsed six months ago, announced a new export program for getting Russia's economy back on its feet.
"From today forward," said President Lebed, "any Russian company capable of exporting any device, technology, weapons system or natural resource -- including highly enriched uranium -- is encouraged to do so to anyone who can pay hard currency. 
The U.S. 
Congress says it will sanction us for selling nuclear technology to Iran or India. 
Hah!
What more can they do?
Since they closed the I.M.F., 35 percent of Russia is unemployed. 
The Russian army has not been paid in six months. 
How's that for a moral hazard!"
Meanwhile, the former U.S. allies Korea and Thailand, with their economies in a tailspin from the lack of I.M.F. support, decided to go to the only other potential lender of last resort -- the U.S. 
Congress. Korea's President, Kim Dae Jung, told Congress: "We have been loyal U.S. allies for 40 years. 
I am the first liberal democrat elected President of Korea. 
All my years as a political exile, America was my model. 
You're not going to abandon me now?
With 30,000 U.S. troops in my country and North Korea up there with a bomb in the basement?"
The Koreans have enlisted two former U.S. 
Treasury Secretaries, George Shultz and William Simon, along with the former Citibank chief Walter Wriston, to lobby Congress for an emergency $10 billion aid package for Seoul. 
Unlike I.M.F. bailouts -- where the burden is shared by many countries -- this Korean bailout will have to be a direct loan from the U.S. to Korea, with America bearing all the risks and costs alone.
That loan was jeopardized yesterday, though, when the U.S. 
Embassy in Seoul was ransacked, along with the Coke and Pepsi bottling plants, by an angry Korean mob. 
The mob was outraged by the conditions that the U.S. 
Congress wanted to impose on Korea in exchange for U.S. help: an end to all birth control in Korea and the right for any U.S. company to buy 100 percent of any Korean company.
"Too bad we don't have the I.M.F. around to impose these conditions, so everyone could blame it instead of us," mused House Speaker Newt Gingrich, in a rare moment of candor.
Elsewhere in Asia, human rights activists were appalled as Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia all declared martial law so their Governments could close down newspapers and stop rioting against businesses owned by ethnic Chinese, who tend to dominate Southeast Asia's economies. 
China warned that if the anti-Chinese rioting was not halted, China's navy would "not stand idle."
Meanwhile, Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, denounced the I.M.F.'s closure as yet another conspiracy to weaken southeast Asia, mounted by "the global Merchants of Venice -- and you know who I mean."
America's trade deficit hit an all-time high of $400 billion, as cheap exports from all over Asia's battered economies flooded the U.S. 
The Dow fell again today, to 6,660, as the dollar hit 300 yen.
The latest New York Times/CBS Poll showed two nativist-protectionists, Patrick Buchanan and Ross Perot, running neck and neck in the year 2000 Presidential race, after Al Gore and George W. Bush both dropped out because of lack of support.
Finally, the U.S. called for an emergency meeting of the world's leading industrial nations to try to establish some sort of international monetary fund to deal with the crisis. 
America offered to hold the meeting in a quiet estate in New Hampshire called Bretton Woods, but the other world powers, showing contempt for weak U.S. leadership, insisted on Shanghai.
