
The only senior Communist Party leader imprisoned after the 1989 pro-democracy uprising here today publicly challenged the basis for his continued detention at a remote police hideaway with no access to a lawyer, a doctor or a telephone.
The former official, Bao Tong, 63, completed a seven-year sentence on May 27 and has since been held under close guard at a guest house in the hills west of Beijing. 
Now, Mr. Bao says in a letter dated today, he has been informed by police authorities that he may never be allowed to go home.
Instead, the police said they want Mr. Bao and his family members to agree to relocate to an unspecified new home to live in what Mr. Bao called a "cage" of police supervision and indefinite house arrest.
"In this cage, there is no law, there is no lawyer, there is no doctor, there is no telephone and there is no time limit," Mr. Bao wrote in the letter, which was smuggled out of China and made public by human rights organizations. 
Mr. Bao and his family members have told the police that their actions are illegal.
Mr. Bao's letter represents a direct and open challenge to President Jiang Zemin and the Politburo, which is supervising Mr. Bao's case. 
He has accused them of taking the law into their own hands to prevent a prominent voice of party reform and democracy from lawful emergence.
Mr. Bao was the principal aide to the reform-minded Communist Party leader Zhao Ziyang, who was ousted over his refusal to approve the martial-law crackdown on student demonstrators in 1989.
Chinese legal experts said tonight that there seemed to be no legal basis for preventing a prisoner who has completed his term from returning to his home or from consulting a lawyer or a doctor. 
Family members say Mr. Bao has a low white blood cell count that makes him vulnerable to any infection.
"Bao Tong served his sentence right up until the last day and yet he is not free," said Robin Munro, the Hong Kong director of the New York-based Human Rights Watch. 
"They didn't do this in the past with prominent political prisoners. 
What are they afraid of?"
      
