
SCIENTISTS exploring a Chinese quarry have found fossils of a monkey the size of a mouse that is among the earliest known primates.
The quarry was likened to a "Garden of Eden for primates" by one expert not involved with the discovery because its fossils show a variety of early primates from about 45 million years ago, suggesting that Asia was a cradle for early primate development.
Dr. Mary Dawson, an author of a report on the findings, said, "People tend to think of Africa as being the center of origin of this group."
But the findings, she added, are "opening up the strong possibility that Asia was indeed a cradle for the development of early primates."
Primates include monkeys, apes and humans as well as other animals like lemurs and tarsiers. 
In all, five new types of early primates were found at the site.
Some of the fossils were those of what is believed to have been a small, early monkey. 
They included three jaw fragments with teeth, some toothless jaw fragments, about a dozen isolated teeth and parts of elbow and ankle bones, Dr. Dawson said.
The fossils are from a period long before humans evolved. 
Australopithecus afarensis, the human ancestor from Africa best known for the partial skeleton known as "Lucy," is thought to have lived as early as four million years ago.
The discoveries are reported in the current issue of the journal Nature by Dr. Dawson and Dr. Chris Beard, both of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, and colleagues from Beijing.
 
Oldest Family Fossils?
The fossils were unearthed between 1987 and 1993 from natural crevices in a limestone quarry near Shanghuang in the Jiangsu Province of eastern China. 
Dr. Dawson said the small primates may have lived in the fissures, or predators may have dropped their bones there.
The quarry is dug out of two sides of a hill that rises above rice paddies. 
The fossils were found in three towering, nearly vertical cracks about six feet wide that were filled with dirt and rock, Dr. Dawson said.
Three monkey teeth found earlier in Africa have been regarded as the oldest known fossils of the monkey-ape-human family. 
Dr. Dawson said the Chinese fossils may be older, although she leaned toward the view that they were not.
But Dr. Richard Kay, a fossil primate expert at Duke University, said the ages of the Chinese and African fossils are so uncertain that the Chinese creature may well be older. 
He said that the Chinese fossils were probably from a monkey but that other scientists might disagree. 
Dr. Kay, who had discussed the findings with Dr. Beard, said that if they are, then "he's got practically the Garden of Eden for primates" in the Chinese site.
The findings also included a dozen teeth revealing the earliest known tarsier, a big-eyed, tree-dwelling creature now living in Asian rain forests. 
The discovery pushes back the fossil record of tarsiers by about 30 million years. 
Dr. Dawson said the teeth are nearly identical to modern tarsier teeth, suggesting that its diet has changed little.
Researchers also found the remains of a squirrel-size creature from a primate family that lived about the same time in the American West, and remains of another small primate related to those known to have been in Europe at the same time. 
The findings show more migration occurred than had been thought, Dr. Dawson said.
