
ONE evening last June, So Hon Wah sat backstage at the Hong Kong Cultural Center and pulled a pair of gold-trimmed boots off his callused feet. 
He was only changing costumes, he explained on the telephone from Hong Kong, but to him the gesture epitomized his title role in "The Last Emperor," Wayne Eagling's tragic new dance for the Hong Kong Ballet. 
Like Bernardo Bertolucci's 1987 film of the same name, which won nine Academy Awards, the dance chronicles the epic life of Pu Yi, from his coronation at age 3 to his final years as a gardener during the Cultural Revolution.
With the crown colony's handover from Britain to China then four weeks away, one might have expected a ballet about political upheaval and its psychological aftermath to strike an eerie chord with both audiences and dancers. 
Yet, at its premiere last year, few dancers drew parallels between the collapse of the Qing Dynasty on the mainland and the end of British sovereignty in Hong Kong. 
"I'm just a ballet artist," said Mr. So, a local dancer who alternates with Michael Wang, a Shanghai native, as the adult Pu Yi. 
"I wasn't thinking about the political situation."
Such disregard for democracy may not be as callow as it sounds to Western ears. 
In some respects it was even prescient, for it turns out that the new Hong Kong functions quite like the old one, even if fewer Britons and tourists are queuing up for the ferries that ply Victoria Harbor.
The Hong Kong Ballet is now embarking on its own journey, to New York where starting Wednesday it will give six performances of "The Last Emperor" at City Center. 
Hong Kong's only classical ballet troupe came to the United States once before, in 1993, with narrower ambitions. 
This time the magisterial sets by Liu Yuan Sheng, the dean of stage design at Beijing's Central Academy of Drama, barely fit on stage.
It's a daring move for a company that began with five dancers in 1979 and just commissioned its first full-length ballet last year. 
With luck, ticket sales will cover half the cost of bringing 39 dancers, 15 staff members and 23 tons of gear halfway around the world for a one-week run. 
Essentially the troupe and its Hong Kong backers hope to gain enough exposure to make smaller tours feasible in the future.
Coming of age at the onset of Chinese rule presents the company with complex questions about cultural identity and the role of classical ballet in today's Hong Kong. 
The troupe had not even performed a dance set in China before "The Last Emperor," which features ornate period costumes by Wang Lin Yu, the chief stage designer at Beijing's Central Opera Ballet Theater, and a densely orchestrated new score by Su Cong, who won an Oscar for his work on the Bertolucci film.
As many of Hong Kong's cultural institutions become more Chinese, the company shows signs of moving in the other direction. 
In the waning months of British rule, it sent to London for a new artistic director, the former Royal Ballet star Stephen Jefferies. 
He, in turn, has recruited young dancers from Australia and Canada, suspended a series of workshops for aspiring local choreographers and commissioned new work almost exclusively by choreographers with ties to Covent Garden.
During a visit to New York in January, Mr. Jefferies said he was trying, in part, to re-create the company in the image of the Royal Ballet, where he distinguished himself over a 25-year career as a dancer of great technical and dramatic ability. 
It's no fluke that most of the current repertory, from Frederick Ashton's "Two Pigeons" to Peter Darrell's "Nutcracker" to Graham Lustig's new take on "Peter Pan," can be traced to the Royal Ballet, its school or its sister company, the Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet. 
"We're an international ballet company," Mr. Jefferies said. 
"That means we take the best dancers and choreographers we can find, worldwide."
Where he sees a way to build a first-rate troupe, some observers see a lingering British imperialism at work. 
Bruce Steivel, who preceded Mr. Jefferies as artistic director, doubts postcolonial Hong Kong will support a Chinese version of the Royal Ballet. 
"The director needs to be someone who is Chinese," he said. 
"Someone who understands the Chinese mentality and understands what Hong Kong needs."
It may not be that simple. 
In fact, to succeed in Hong Kong, the director must walk a cultural tightrope. 
If the ballet becomes too British or too cosmopolitan, it may jeopardize its financial support from the powerful Urban Council, which has been earmarking more of its money for Chinese arts and culture. 
But unless it raises its stature abroad, it will remain dependent on the Arts Development Council, which has lately been accused of subsidizing the Hong Kong Ballet and five other performing-arts groups too heavily. 
The ballet draws three-quarters of its $5 million annual budget from the public purse.
Dancers describe Mr. Jefferies as a man capable of working in two distinct modes. 
When rehearsing a classic ballet like "Swan Lake," they say, he stresses precision and uniformity. 
But when preparing a new work like "The Last Emperor," he gives his dancers dramatic license. 
Mr. So described it as a kind of method acting: "He helps you pull the character out of your heart."
With 14 of the company's 41 dancers coming from Hong Kong, and 3 more from the mainland (most of the rest are Westerners), Mr. Jefferies occasionally lets the troupe show its Chinese side. 
Recently he commissioned a dance by Yuri Ng, a local choreographer. 
Last year he turned to Mr. Eagling, a former roommate who is now artistic director at the Dutch National Ballet, for the piece about Pu Yi.
Mr. Eagling had come across crumbling empires before. 
While dancing with the Royal Ballet in Kenneth MacMillan's "Mayerling," he evoked the psychological disintegration of Crown Prince Rudolf of the Hapsburg dynasty. 
And in 1989, to mark the dissolution of the Soviet bloc, he choreographed a colossal performance of Pink Floyd's "Wall" in Berlin.
After watching the Bertolucci film, Mr. Eagling combed the autobiography of Pu Yi and the memoir by his Scottish tutor, Reginald Johnston, for insights into the Emperor's character. 
"For me, the most interesting thing about Pu Yi was the torment of his sexual and intellectual impotence," he said in a telephone interview from Amsterdam. 
"He was a prisoner all his life."
The choreographer makes no claim to authenticity. 
"It's not a Chinese ballet," he said. 
By way of example he cited a scene with two Manchurian dowagers on platform heels that were modeled from archival photographs. 
"I invented what I imagined it might be like to walk on those shoes," Mr. Eagling said.
The production has drawn criticism in the Chinese press for using a Western choreographer. 
Mr. Eagling, a Canadian who grew up in California, cordially dismissed that critique. 
"Do I have the right to tell a Chinese story?" he mused. 
"I guess the answer is yes. 
You don't have to be Russian to tell the story of Eugene Onegin.
"I was just trying to tell a story," he added. 
"An interesting story about a man rather than about a country and its history and its politics."
