
Shortly after the 1992 election, President-elect Bill Clinton was jogging through the streets of Little Rock when an old friend, Charles Yah Lin Trie, happened to drive past the moving entourage of Secret Service agents and television camera crews. 
Mr. Trie, according to several acquaintances who heard him recount the story, leaped from his car to salute Mr. Clinton, and was rewarded when the President-elect trotted over to shake his hand.
Mr. Trie, a Taiwan immigrant known as Charlie, later spent considerable effort trying to obtain a copy of the network videotape of the moment. 
"He tried to get the tape from CNN," said Martha A. Shoffner, a former employee of Mr. Trie. "He was just so excited. 
He told that story all over Little Rock."
For Mr. Trie (pronounced tree), a videotape of the handshake, which he apparently never acquired, would have held far more than sentimental value, his associates said. 
Like other bits of evidence documenting his friendship with Mr. Clinton -- a photograph of the two men together in the White House, a "Dear Charlie" letter from Mr. Clinton written five days after the 1992 election -- the film would have been precious currency for a man trying to trade on his White House connections to establish a lucrative new career in international commerce.
When Mr. Trie and a group of investors were bidding to take over a Little Rock hotel in 1994, he included in his proposal a copy of the letter Mr. Clinton wrote to congratulate him on forming a new trading company. 
The next year, when he was heading to China on business, he pleaded for a White House photo session with Mr. Clinton.
"He was just begging for that picture," said Julia Hughes Jones, a former Arkansas state auditor and a friend of Mr. Trie. "He needed the picture because he was going to China and wanted to show his relationship with Clinton. 
That's Charlie. 
He loved to show that picture."
Mr. Trie is not the only Arkansan who has tried to use his credentials as a "friend of Bill" to open the doors of commercial power, particularly in Asia. 
But perhaps no aspect of the fund-raising investigation engulfing the Clinton Administration is more improbable than Mr. Trie's transformation from a Chinese restaurateur of apparently modest means into a jet-setting businessman with the capacity to raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for Mr. Clinton and the Democrats.
Restaurateur Moves Into the Spotlight
Five years ago, Mr. Trie was the hard-working, friendly proprietor of Fu Lin Chinese Restaurant, a popular place near the state Capitol that was known for its hot-and-sour soup, cashew chicken and garish red decor. 
Bill Clinton was a regular customer as Governor.
Today, Mr. Trie, 47-year-old naturalized American, is at the center of a Justice Department inquiry into his raising of $639,000 from questionable sources for a legal defense fund for President Clinton and his wife, Hillary. 
Mr. Trie's name has repeatedly emerged in reports examining whether Mr. Clinton's re-election campaign, his legal defense fund, and the Democratic National Committee solicited and accepted illegal contributions from foreign citizens and businesses, and whether those contributions influenced foreign policy decisions.
Many questions remain about Mr. Trie's journey from restaurateur to White House intimate. 
It is unclear exactly how he raised the money for the legal defense fund, much of which came from followers of a religious leader named Suma Ching Hai. 
It is also far from clear how Mr. Trie, his family and his company afforded more than $200,000 in contributions to Democratic campaigns over the last three years.
Mr. Trie did not respond to requests for an interview.
 
Plenty of Energy, But Few Successes
Mr. Trie's associates describe him as a hustler, in the admiring sense of the word, but few can recall business deals that actually produced significant income for him.
"I don't know if I want to use the term wheeler-dealer type, but he's on the move," Gary K. Middleton, a Little Rock printer who went on one of the many good-will missions to China sponsored by Mr. Trie, said. 
"You can't get him to sit still for five minutes. 
He moves from one project to the next."
Whether any of those projects yielded fruit is uncertain.
When Mr. Trie and two Asian investors, Ng Lap Seng, a hotelier and developer from Macau, and Mana Han Xiao, a restaurant owner from Beijing, bid to take over the dilapidated Camelot Hotel in downtown Little Rock, they lost despite promising $8 million in renovations, a better financial package than was offered by their competitors.
When Mr. Trie acted as a broker for the W. D. Mask Cotton Company of Memphis to sell cotton to a Chinese firm, the deal broke down after payments of perhaps $20,000 to Mr. Trie's company, said one person familiar with the transaction.
After Saad Taha, the president of American Fiber Industries in Little Rock, met with Mr. Trie to discuss the possibility of marketing a new cigarette filter to the Chinese, he never heard back from Mr. Trie.
Neither did Paul C. McLeod, an associate professor of applied science at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, who met with Mr. Trie to discuss the possibility of marketing a research device that measures knee motion. 
A company formed by Mr. Trie to manufacture and market a new type of ratchet also bombed out, said people involved in the project.
Building Connections With Family Business
Mr. Trie was born on Aug. 
15, 1949, in Taiwan, shortly after his family fled the mainland to escape the Communist takeover. 
He moved to Little Rock in the late 1970's, following his older sister, Dai Lin, who had married an American serviceman and opened a Chinese restaurant here.
During the next 15 years, the family owned and operated at least four Chinese restaurants in the Little Rock area, culminating with Fu Lin. 
Mr. Trie is remembered by diners as an energetic and gregarious host who made a point of getting to know his patrons and making them feel welcome. 
Friends said he was particularly solicitous of those in positions of power, whether Mr. Clinton, local government leaders, or executives with the Lippo Group, the Indonesian conglomerate that had financial interests in Little Rock.
The restaurant was known for its ambiance more than its cleanliness. 
Health inspectors regularly gave it a score of 65 out of 100, pointing out during visits in 1989 that dishes were not sanitized properly, workers did not wear hair restraints, and cooks smoked cigarettes while preparing food. 
Also that year, the Border Patrol fined the restaurant $500 for employing an illegal immigrant from Mexico.
It seems doubtful that Mr. Trie, who has offices in Beijing and Washington, pocketed large sums from the sale of his restaurants. 
Ernest E. Miller, a partner in Fu Lin along with Mr. Trie and his sister, said they made "not so much" from the sale of that restaurant in 1990.
The restaurants were not always profitable. 
In 1983, for instance, Fu Lin posted a loss of $20,872 on revenues of $490,090, according to a United States Small Business Administration loan document. 
In 1984, the restaurant received a $60,000 loan from Lippo Finance and Investment, a joint venture between the Lippo Holding Company, which is owned by the Riady family of Indonesia, and Stephens, a prominent Little Rock investment firm.
Mr. Miller said Mr. Trie was "not a wealthy guy."
In Little Rock, Mr. Trie owns an extremely modest house and two automobiles, a 1993 Honda Civic and a 1989 Lincoln, both purchased with bank loans.
Several friends of Mr. Trie also said he had left a trail of gambling debts in Little Rock, accumulated during years of placing $500 and $1,000 bets on football games.
"I remember being with him someplace and he'd say, 'We can't go in there, I owe that guy lots of money,' " one acquaintance said, insisting on anonymity.
But Mr. Trie and members of his family have given more than $140,000 to Democratic campaign committees since 1994, according to financial disclosure records. 
One of his businesses, Daihatsu International Trading, has given an additional $70,000 to the Democratic National Committee.
Mr. Trie apparently did not make personal contributions to the Clintons' legal defense fund. 
But last spring, officials of the fund returned the checks and money orders that Mr. Trie had delivered to them in a pair of manila envelopes in March.
After hiring private investigators to determine the source of the money, the trustees of the defense fund became concerned that the donations might violate self-imposed rules that limited contributions to $1,000 and required that they come from United States citizens and from clearly identifiable sources.
The investigators determined that much of the money came from devotees of Suma Ching Hai, the religious leader. 
The investigators also concluded that many contributors did not appear to have the financial means to write $1,000 checks. 
And they were disturbed that many of the postal money orders had sequential numbers, bore signatures in the same script, and included the same misspelled words.
Suma Ching Hai said in a recent interview that she encouraged the contributions after learning of Mr. Clinton's legal troubles from Mr. Trie, who visited her earlier this year in Miaoli, Taiwan.
Mr. Trie also has come under scrutiny because he has acknowledged in published reports that a $15,000 contribution given to the Democratic committee by one of his companies, the San Kin Yip International Trading Corporation, might have been illegal because the money was generated outside of the country.
Mr. Trie also is credited in Democratic committee records, along with John Huang, a leading fund-raiser among Asian-Americans, with soliciting a $325,000 donation from Yogesh K. Gandhi, an Indian businessman. 
It was returned after Mr. Gandhi declined to provide evidence that the money was his own.
In 1995, according to The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trie and another former Lippo executive, Antonio Pan, arranged a dinner for Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown in Hong Kong. 
Several of the Asian businessmen and socialites in attendance told The Journal that they were asked by Mr. Trie and Mr. Pan to make political contributions that would have been illegal.
Questions also have been raised about a $12,500 contribution to the Democratic committee from Keshi Zhan, from Arlington, Va., who works occasionally as a hostess for Mr. Trie at his Washington office and apartment in the Watergate complex. 
The contribution amounts to more than half of the $22,408 annual salary that Ms. Zhan receives as a county records clerk. 
She has maintained that she gave her own money.
Money-Raising Prowess Seems to Open Doors
Whether because of his friendship with Mr. Clinton or because of his fund raising, Mr. Trie clearly had access at the White House in the President's first term. 
White House records show he visited at least 23 times, as recently as Dec. 
13 for a dinner for Democratic fund-raisers.
On Feb. 
6, 1996, Mr. Trie escorted a leading Chinese arms dealer to a small gathering with Mr. Clinton. The President has since described the arms dealer's presence as "clearly inappropriate."
The arms dealer, Wang Jun, is the chairman of the Poly Group Corporation, whose subsidiary, Poly Technologies, is owned by the Chinese Army, according to intelligence sources, and is a major vendor of missiles, tanks and jets to developing countries.
Amy Weiss Tobe, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee, has said Mr. Wang was allowed into the meeting, a coffee for Democratic contributors, as "a favor to Charlie."
Mr. Trie also won an appointment from Mr. Clinton last April to the Commission on United States-Pacific Trade and Investment Policy. 
The appointment came less than four weeks after Mr. Trie delivered the lion's share of the contributions to Mr. Clinton's legal defense fund. 
White House officials have denied any connection between Mr. Trie's fund-raising activities and his appointment to the trade commission.
The trade commission was a significant improvement over Mr. Trie's last appointment from Mr. Clinton: a 1988 assignment to Arkansas's Fire Extinguisher Board, which set standards for fire extinguishers and regulated those who sold and maintained them.
