
THE pavilion, shimmering across a pond, might be a mirage. 
Atop the bamboo-shaped tile roof sit hunched animals, guardian spirits of tranquillity. 
Red lacquer benches offer rest beneath two coiled dragons in blue and gold. 
One dragon oversees Westchester County, said Daisy Yau, director of Asian-Pacific and Asian-American Affairs for the county, while the other casts wide eyes over Jingzhou, Westchester's sister city in Hubei Province, China. 
Ms. Yau said stone dragons in front of the pavilion represent China and Westchester.
The 19-foot pavilion occupies a quiet corner of Lasdon Park and Arboretum here. 
It is a gift to the county from Jingzhou, a city of six million in the Yangzte River delta, which attained sister city status in 1996. 
The relationship, which Ms. Yau said was formed to promote friendship as well as an economic and cultural interchange, was reaffirmed in a recent ceremony. 
A delegation of government officials and businessmen from Jingzhou, besides presenting County Executive Andrew J. Spano with the pavilion, also toured county offices, the Westchester Medical Center, Westchester Community College and other sites.
The pavilion might have been lifted from a classical Chinese painting. 
It was constructed in China according to a traditional process, which took 80 artisans nearly 8 months to complete, dismantled and then reassembled here by visiting Chinese craftsmen. 
The team, working with members of the county's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, spent a month re-erecting the pavilion, which will be the centerpiece of a planned Chinese culture garden.
Bamboo, flowering cherry, dogwood and willow trees are now flourishing near the lake, and Ted Kozlowski, the County Forester, and Mark Morin of the parks department recently planted three ginkgo trees -- an ancient species native to China. 
By fall, according to the parks department, a new lawn will be growing around the pavilion.
In September, a new chapter will be added to Westchester's relationship with China. 
Mr. Spano, Ms. Yau and a group of business representatives will make a 10-day visit to Jingzhou and other cities.
