
Following are excerpts from the House debate today on the trade bill that would grant permanent normal trading relations with Beijing, as transcribed by The New York Times.
 
THE MINORITY LEADER, RICHARD GEPHARDT OF MISSOURI -- This debate is testament to what makes the United States the greatest country that's ever existed in the history of the world based on the ideals of freedom: freedom of expression and freedom and liberty of religion and political speech.
These ideals are what cause me to finally be against this bill.
This debate would not happen in China. 
This freedom of expression that we are exercising on this floor and outside this building and in rooms all over this country in the last days would not happen in a country like China. 
In fact, if you insisted on speaking against the policy of the government, you would be arrested. 
. . .
Some would argue that this is just about trade. 
I would remind them that our greatest export is not our products and our services. 
Our greatest exports are our ideals and our values. 
Getting acceptance of these ideals is also vital for trade. 
A country that fails to respect basic rights of people will not respect the rule of law. 
And without the rule of law in China the rights of our businesses will not be accepted.
China has not obeyed the agreements that they have made with us on trade. 
We've been promised access; we haven't gotten it. 
We've been promised protection of intellectual property; we haven't gotten it. 
Our trade deficit is now $85 billion with China, the highest of any country in the world. 
We export more now to Singapore, a nation of 3.5 million people, than we export to China, a country of 1.3 billion people. 
The track record is poor on compliance with treaties. 
Let's not reward them before we get them to comply. 
. . .
 
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, J. DENNIS HASTERT OF ILLINOIS -- While there is one bill being debated here today, there are actually two debates going on, two questions that have to be answered: one, is granting this status to China in the best interests of the United States and the American people?
And two, is granting this status good for the people of China. 
I believe the answer to both is yes.
Among other things, this debate is about American economic security. 
American negotiators have reached a tough but fair agreement for China's entry into the World Trade Organization. 
It is, in fact, a one-sided agreement, China gets nothing from us they don't already have. 
And we get lower tariffs and easier access for our exports going to China. 
And who makes those exports?
American workers do.
Regardless of whether we grant normal trade status to China, the Chinese market is opening. 
Someone is going to have the opportunity to sell to this vast new market. 
The question is who will be there when the door opens?
Will it be the United States or will it be Europe and Japan?
There will be new and larger markets for farm commodities and manufactured goods in China. 
Who will produce those products: American farmers and American workers or European farmers and European workers?
This vote today is about whether American firms set the ground rules and standards for business in China.
The potential for American economic growth is huge. 
If we pass this legislation, U.S. agricultural exports to China would increase by $2 billion every year. 
That means American farmers will be selling more corn and more wheat and more citrus and more soybeans. 
Last year, the wireless telephone market in China was $20 billion. 
By 2003, that market will be up to $45 billion. 
Our high-tech firms would thrive in the Chinese marketplace.
It's clear that passing this legislation is in the best interest of American economic security and that's why Alan Greenspan supports it. 
And that is one reason why we should vote yes. 
. . .
 
DAVID BONIOR, DEMOCRAT OF MICHIGAN -- We're told we need this trade deal to open up the vast markets for American goods. 
But these Chinese workers can't even afford to buy the products they make themselves. 
How are they going to buy our cars?
Our cell phones?
Our computers?
You can have free markets without free people, but it doesn't often come to a good end -- Chile's Pinochet, Indonesia's Suharto. 
We should have learned the lessons of Nafta -- jobs lost in food processing, in consumer products and high tech, 100,000 good auto worker jobs lost forever since Nafta.
And where are those men and women today?
Oh, they're working. 
They're working in nursing homes, at gas stations, at convenience stores, and making a fraction of what they once earned. 
And the jobs they used to have?
They're now performed by workers making pennies on the dollars in Mexico's economic fire zone called the Maquilladora.
But harsh as life can be in Mexico, China is far worse. 
It is a police state. 
. . .
The advocates of this trade deal tell us that prosperity is a precondition for democracy. 
And with all due respect, they're wrong. 
They have to grow together. 
. . .
 
CHARLIE NORWOOD, REPUBLICAN OF GEORGIA -- Every year, every year I've been here, we are asked to approve normal trade for China based on existing and potentially other progresses with these three concerns in mind: jobs, bombs and Bibles.
We are told every year that if we'll just extend normal trade for one more year, that jobs in this country will not be adversely affected. 
My district has lost manufacturing jobs to cheap Chinese labor every year I've been in Congress. 
And there are others of you who fit in that category. 
This is not just cheap labor, my friends. 
This is also slave labor.
We are told if we just will extend normal trade for one more year we won't have to worry so much about Red China dropping nuclear bombs on us because they're going to be much friendlier. 
Our relationship is going to be greatly improved.
Yet every single year that I've been in Congress, China has increased its nuclear arsenal with technology stolen from us and increased its threats to use them against American cities if we dare oppose their invasion of our allies.
We are told that if we extend normal trade relations for just one more year, the human rights in China will surely get better. 
The Christians will not be jailed for having Bibles, and Muslims will not be jailed for having the Koran, the Tibetans won't be jailed for simply following their traditional religion.
Yet every year that I've been in Congress, persecution of anyone in China who believes in a higher authority has gotten much worse. 
All of these things, all of them are worse after five years of what we have described as normal trade relations with China. 
. . .
 
THOMAS M. DAVIS, REPUBLICAN OF VIRGINIA -- I rise in strong support of this rule and for the resolution.
You know, for America this agreement is a one-way street. 
Our markets are already open to the Chinese. 
If there's going to be job loss, we've seen it in terms of some of these low-wage markets that have already moved to the Pacific Rim and to China and these other areas.
What this does for the first time, and by adopting P.N.T.R., China's markets are now going to be more accessible to American companies, American products: 1.2 billion Chinese. 
America only has 5 percent of the world's consumers. 
China is the largest -- second-largest -- economy in the world; 100 million Chinese today making $40,000 a year annually. 
A middle class that is burgeoning and growing, and this is going to increase the pressures for democratization inside of China.
China already joins the W.T.O. regardless of what we do here today. 
That already happens. 
The question is: Are American products, are American corporations, are American workers going to get the W.T.O. preference by our granting P.N.T.R. and does America get the benefits of the World Trade Organization tribunals for resolving trade issues that we don't get if we just go on to an annual basis?
Under P.N.T.R. the answer is yes. 
. . .
