
On the morning of President Clinton's 50th birthday party at Radio City Music Hall last August, Charlie Trie bounded into the Democratic Party's office in Manhattan and delivered an envelope stuffed with $100,000 in political contributions.
Mr. Trie, a former Arkansas restaurant owner who is a longtime friend of Mr. Clinton, had rounded up the checks in just a few days to help John Huang, a Democratic fund-raiser, meet his goal for the glitzy event. 
That was a feat for Mr. Trie, whose full name is Yah Lin Trie, because he had only a few connections in the New York City area.
"Charlie was proud he had come up with the $100,000," said a former top Democratic official who saw the 15 or so checks when they were delivered. 
"He was just kind of proud of himself."
But some of the people whose signatures are on the checks cannot be located. 
In addition, just 12 days before the birthday party, a powerful Macao businessman, Ng Lap Seng, wired $200,000 from a Bank of China account in Macao to an account in Washington that he shared with Mr. Trie, a business partner.
The timing of the transfer has provoked the curiosity of investigators in the Senate and in the Federal Bureau of Investigation who are looking into whether foreign money was illegally funneled into the Democratic Party's coffers as part of its huge push to bankroll Mr. Clinton's re-election. 
Their inquiries are now focusing more intensely on Mr. Trie.
Questions about Mr. Trie's fund-raising first surfaced last fall, when Mr. Clinton's personal legal defense fund revealed that it had returned more than $600,000 in donations, most delivered by Mr. Trie.
But his delivery of the money for the Democratic Party at the birthday celebration, which has never been described publicly, and the coincidence of the transfers from Mr. Ng sharpens the issue of whether Mr. Trie was a conduit for foreign money into the political campaign. 
For Senate investigators, scheduled to begin hearings on Democratic fund-raising next week, Mr. Trie's activities go to the heart of their inquiry: Did foreign business interests illegally pour money into the Democratic Party through fronts?
As a result, investigators are also examining more closely the relationship between Mr. Trie and Mr. Huang, who has been linked to some contributions from foreign sources. 
Interviews and records show that Mr. Trie played a greater role in helping Mr. Huang raise money for the Democrats than had been previously known.
Mr. Trie's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, declined to answer any questions about Mr. Trie's fund-raising. 
Mr. Ng's lawyer, Samuel Rosenthal, did not return telephone calls seeking comment.
Mr. Trie, an American citizen who lives in China now, has refused to testify before the Senate committee, saying he would assert his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
In an interview in Shanghai with NBC-TV last week, Mr. Trie adamantly denied wrongdoing, adding that he had no plans to return to the United States and might even stay in Asia for 10 years. 
"They'll never find me," he said.
 
Questions Grow As Hearing Nears
The Senate Governmental Affairs Committee is set to start its hearings on Democratic fund-raising next week, and the timing of Mr. Ng's transfers to his account with Mr. Trie will probably be discussed. 
Mr. Ng, a real estate developer born in China, lives in Macao and has invested with Mr. Trie in projects in the United States. 
Last year, he wired a total of $470,000 in six transfers into the joint account, which was at the Riggs National Bank.
Late last week, the Senate committee voted to give limited immunity from prosecution to two women who have said that Mr. Ng arranged for them to give $25,000 to the Democratic National Committee for a fund-raiser on Feb. 
19, 1996, at the Hay-Adams hotel in Washington. 
Both women, who are homemakers in Gaithersburg, Md., are related to an employee of a trading company owned by Mr. Ng and Mr. Trie. The source of the $25,000 is unclear, but the committee is considering whether any of it came from a $150,000 transfer made five days before the fund-raiser.
The Democratic committee has returned the $25,000 and at least half of the $100,000 that Mr. Trie raised for the President's birthday dinner because officials could not confirm that the donations had come from the people listed on the checks.
Federal election law generally bans political contributions from foreigners who are not legal residents of the United States. 
The law also requires donors to identify themselves and prohibits the reimbursement of contributions by third parties.
Since questions about Democratic fund-raising first emerged last fall, the exact nature of Mr. Trie's role has eluded investigators. 
In the 1980's, Mr. Trie, a native of Taiwan, ran several Chinese restaurants in Little Rock, Ark., including one that was a favorite of Mr. Clinton, then Governor. 
After Mr. Clinton became President in 1993, Mr. Trie tried to capitalize on his relationship with the President by becoming an international trade consultant doing business in China and Taiwan.
Since 1994, Mr. Trie and his wife, Wang Mei Trie, have given more than $200,000 of their own money to the Democrats. 
Mr. Trie also opened an office in Washington. 
In 1995, he began to work closely with Mr. Huang, raising money for the party. 
Mr. Huang, a former Commerce Department official, joined the Democratic committee in December 1995 as its chief fund-raiser soliciting Asian-Americans. 
Mr. Trie and Mr. Huang raised nearly $4 million from Asian-Americans. 
The Democrats have since returned $1.6 million that Mr. Huang raised and $645,000 that Mr. Trie donated or raised.
To some, Mr. Huang and Mr. Trie's alliance was odd. 
"John was low-key and unassuming," said one former committee official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. 
"Trie was real outgoing and somewhat erratic. 
At night, John would go home to his family. 
Charlie would go out drinking. 
They were opposites."
In Washington, Mr. Trie represented several United States companies in China, where he was close to several Government officials. 
In another controversial move, Mr. Trie arranged for Wang Jun, the chairman of the board of Polytechnologies, China's most prominent arms company, to attend a White House coffee in February 1996.
One of the biggest questions now facing investigators is whether some of the $470,000 that Mr. Ng sent to his account with Mr. Trie ended up financing any contributions to the Democrats.
 
Investigators Look At Gifts From 2 Women
For the February 1996 dinner, attended by Mr. Clinton, the two Maryland women donated $25,000 at the request of Mr. Ng, who was prohibited from contributing because he is not a legal United States resident. 
At least one of the women has told Senate investigators that the women were reimbursed for their gifts.
The women, Yue F. Chu and Xi Ping Wang, are the spouse and cousin of Ming Chen, who works for Mr. Ng and Mr. Trie.
Investigators say the reimbursement plan was first discussed at a 1996 Chinese New Year's celebration at Ms. Chu's house. 
Both women "were solicited to front money for Ng Lap Seng," a Senate investigative memorandum says, and Ms. Chu told investigators that she had participated "in the scheme as a favor to her husband's boss."
But Mr. Trie also longed to help his old friend of 20 years, the President, who had racked up more than $1 million in legal bills defending himself in the Whitewater investigation and other matters.
In late March of 1996, Mr. Trie arrived at the Washington office of the Presidential Legal Expense Trust with $460,000 in contributions. 
He carried two large manila envelopes that contained several hundred checks and money orders of up to $1,000 each, many of them from members of a Taiwanese Buddhist sect with temples in the United States.
The fund's directors returned all the money within two months because many donors had failed to list their addresses or were students orwaiters of modest means. 
Some donations also came through money orders with identical handwriting.
Meanwhile, Mr. Trie continued to help Mr. Huang raise money. 
In May 1996, Mr. Trie helped bring in a $325,000 contribution from Yogesh K. Gandhi, a great-grandnephew of Mohandas K. Gandhi. The Democrats later gave the money back because they did not believe that Mr. Gandhi had enough money to make such a donation himself.
 
President's Birthday Drew Odd Donations
Mr. Trie also helped Mr. Huang with a gala for Asian-Americans in Los Angeles last July 22. 
"I've heard that the event was just laden with Chinese nationals, just tens of them," one former party official said.
The President's New York birthday party, featuring a concert at Radio City Music Hall and a dinner, came about a month later. 
For party officials and investigators, that fund-raiser has come to embody how Mr. Trie and Mr. Huang worked together and how they came to leave such a long trail of questions in their wake.
Mr. Huang went to New York about a week or two before the event at the request of Marvin Rosen, then the Democrats' finance chairman.
But Mr. Huang was worried that even though he had once worked for a bank in New York, he did not have many contacts left there. 
So he asked Asian-Americans there to route any concert or dinner tickets they sold through him.
One of them, Ethel Chen of Queens, said Mr. Huang had told her that it was only by consolidating their donations that Asian-Americans would get the kind of political clout that Jewish groups have. 
Ms. Chen and others handed about $10,000 in checks to Mr. Huang, most of it raised through sales of $250 concert tickets to Asian-American lawyers and business owners.
Mr. Huang also asked Mr. Trie for help. 
And that led to the largest, and still most mysterious, contributions.
Early last Aug. 
19, the President's birthday, Mr. Trie rushed over to a rented party office in the Bear, Stearns building on Park Avenue to hand over the 15 checks to a group of party officials who included Mr. Rosen. Party officials who were there recall that they had been "dead tired and groggy" but that the checks had given everybody a lift.
But since then, Democratic Party investigators have been unable to find some of the people whose names are on those checks. 
Some of the biggest checks for the New York dinner came from people listing addresses in Ohio and California.
For instance, Kun-Cheng Yeh, who donated $10,000 through Mr. Trie, listed the address of an electronics company in a Los Angeles suburb. 
But an employee there said Mr. Yeh lived in China and had not been to the United States for several years.
Mr. Trie also solicited a $3,000 check drawn on the New York City bank account of a Michele Lima. 
Democratic Party officials previously said that Ms. Lima had died years ago, but they said more recently that the donation might have come from another Michele Lima who lives in Queens. 
But her phone number has been disconnected, and relatives have refused to tell reporters how to locate her. 
Party officials cannot explain why Ms. Lima's check was written in the same handwriting as that of another person who gave $4,000.
At the hearing scheduled to begin on July 8, the senators plan to explore questions about how much the White House and the Democratic committee knew about the questionable fund-raising practices of Mr. Trie and Mr. Huang.
Harold M. Ickes, then the White House deputy chief of staff, has acknowledged that he knew Mr. Trie had brought in questionable donations for the legal defense fund in early April of 1996. 
Yet Mr. Trie continued to raise money for the Democrats because Mr. Ickes never told party officials about the problems with him.
"Had we been informed earlier, we would have looked into those concerns and taken appropriate action," said Steve Langdon, a spokesman for the Democratic committee.
Now the Senate plans to zero in on Mr. Ickes in an effort to pin partial responsibility for Mr. Trie's fund-raising practices on the White House. 
One investigator said, "The warnings that the White House had that Trie was out of control are very fertile territory."
