
Soybean prices rose sharply on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday on speculation that China had bought or was seeking to buy United States supplies this week.
On other markets, coffee prices fell after a truck drivers' strike ended in Colombia.
Traders speculated that China bought two or three cargoes of American soybeans for delivery during May and June and also wanted soybean meal, a livestock feed. 
A cargo usually totals 50,000 metric tons, or 1.84 million bushels. 
Chinese trade officials declined to comment.
Such sales would come at a time when robust domestic and global demand threatens to deplete United States inventories, which the Agriculture Department forecasts will drop to a 20-year low of 125 million bushels by September.
"Soybeans are probably the most powerful market we have," said Tim Elrod, an analyst with the Pacific Futures Trading Company in Seattle. 
"There just aren't any more beans, and demand from China is insatiable."
Soybeans for July delivery jumped 19.5 cents, to $8.675 a bushel. 
July soybean meal reached $278.50 a short ton, up $7.70.
In a sign of strong domestic demand, the Census Bureau said on Thursday that United States soybean processors crushed 130.1 million bushels during March, a record for that month and up 3.9 percent from last year.
Coffee prices fell after Colombian truck drivers ended a strike that slowed shipments to port warehouses and threatened to reduce exports from the world's second-largest grower.
Truck drivers voted to end their five-day-old walkout after the Government agreed to demands that it set fixed rates for shipments between cities. 
The Government threatened to declare the strike illegal if no agreement was reached.
The accord eased concern that a protracted strike would delay coffee exports from Colombia at a time when United States inventories lag 30 percent compared with last year, according to the Green Coffee Association, and exchange stockpiles are even leaner.
July coffee fell 4.95 cents, to $1.9325 a pound on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York.
