
Prices for copper contracts jumped yesterday as investors scrambled to buy amid indications of renewed demand.
On other commodity markets, crude oil futures surged, while grain and soybean futures advanced. 
The Commodity Research Bureau's index of 17 commodities rose 0.38 point, to 240.59.
Chinese trade data released during the day showed that 1995 brought a sharp rise in Chinese copper imports. 
China imported 107,680 tons last year, up about 37 percent from a year earlier.
The news spurred speculation that China would buy more copper before April to beat an import tax deadline, Bette Raptopoulos, an analyst at Prudential Securities in New York, said.
"Chinese buying gets the market very excited, because the potential is very large," Ms. Raptopoulos said. 
"They don't buy often, but when they do, they buy a lot."
High-grade copper for March delivery surged 3.15 cents, to $1.148 a pound, on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
Prices also surged after the Bank of England and the Bank of France cut some interest rates. 
Copper is sensitive to interest rates since it is used in the rate-sensitive automotive and construction fields.
Crude-oil and heating-oil contracts advanced strongly for a second day on the New York Mercantile Exchange because of forecasts for cold weather and because the market has become more confident that the United Nations will not allow Iraq to resume selling oil. 
It has been banned from doing so since its invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
February crude rose 66 cents, to $19.18 a barrel; February heating oil rose 1.24 cents, to 54.37 cents a gallon; February unleaded gasoline rose 0.23 cent, to 55.21 cents a gallon.
Grain and soybean futures prices advanced on the Chicago Board of Trade, in part on renewed hopes about exports.
Corn futures advanced because of a belief that recently plunging prices have spurred export interest. 
South Korea was an overnight buyer, and other countries were in the market.
Wheat futures rose in step with corn and soybeans and on the possibility of damage to the hard red winter wheat crop in Kansas after a snow and wind storm.      
