
The chairman of the General Motors Corporation declared today that the best growth opportunities for the American automobile industry lay in Asia, and he called for the United States to extend full trading privileges to China permanently.
The strongly worded remarks by John F. Smith Jr., who is also G.M.'s chief executive and president, were a sign of how strongly many American business executives feel about the need for access to the Chinese market. 
Executives in manufacturing industries, in particular, have led the lobbying for China's most-favored-nation trading status with the United States.
While Mr. Smith welcomed President Clinton's one-year renewal today of that preferred trade status, he contended that the long-term stabilityI of American investments in China depended on ending the annual debate over trade relations and making China's current status permanent.
"Most-favored-nation status is the basis for a stable, credible economic policy toward China," said Mr. Smith, who as G.M.'s top executive heads the United States' largest company.
But the odds of his getting his wish appear slim. 
Human rights advocates and hard-liners worried about Chinese weapons exports have insisted that the annual reviews are necessary to put pressure on China to change its ways. 
Clinton Administration officials refuse even to publicly discuss the possibility of a permanent renewal.
Mr. Smith contended that American companies would have more influence to improve conditions in China if they had stable business relationships there.
"It is no secret that the days of substantial growth in the U.S. automotive market are over -- this is a mature market, so the growth must come from outside North America," notably in Asia, Mr. Smith said.
He acknowledged that American car producers had failed to recognize the growth potential of Southeast Asia in the 1980's, and he argued that China's auto industry was still so much in its infancy that American auto makers could catch up there.
"China, however, is the great equalizer of missed opportunities," he said. 
"China is the ideal cornerstone for growth in Asia."
Mr. Smith had little to say about the Clinton Administration's threatened sanctions to force China to begin respecting American copyrights and patents. 
The two nations need to sit down and resolve their differences, he said.
G.M. has started two joint ventures with China's biggest auto makers, although neither project has yet begun producing vehicles. 
A planned factory in Shanghai will produce midsize Buicks, probably similar to the Buick Century, while another factory in Shenyang, in northeastern China, is to turn out light trucks.
The Chrysler Corporation is building Jeeps in Beijing, while the Ford Motor Company plans to make small commercial-delivery vehicles in China. 
G.M. and Ford are in talks to sell each other many auto parts in Asia so as to reduce the expense of setting up separate parts-production operations, the trade publication Automotive News reported today and both companies confirmed.
Mr. Smith, who is 58, also dismissed talk today that he might take early retirement at 62. 
"I have no plans to retire," he said as he left the Cobo Center here after a speech to the Economics Club of Detroit. 
"It's a phenomenal job."
But Mr. Smith never ruled out the possibility of early retirement. 
The growing visibility of Harry Pearce, the 53-year-old vice chairman and heir-apparent to Mr. Smith, has spurred rumors that Mr. Smith might step down several years from now.
Mr. Pearce played the leading role when a 17-day strike by the United Automobile Workers union at two brake factories in Dayton, Ohio, virtually shut down G.M.'s North American operations. 
Mr. Pearce also made the announcement last Thursday that G.M. would buy a Detroit landmark, the Renaissance Center, and move its headquarters there.
Mr. Smith said that a previously scheduled business meeting prevented him from attending the announcement on Thursday.
He also said that G.M. would like to be the the United Automobile Workers' primary target during negotiations late this summer to renew the Big Three auto makers' three-year labor contract. 
While the primary-target company bears the greatest risk of a strike, the first management to negotiate can also work out a contract that negatively affects its rivals.
And he announced that G.M. was in the final stages of deciding whether to locate a new assembly plant in Thailand or the Philippines. 
Thailand, where the auto market has doubled since 1991, has been the favorite, but the Philippines has tried in recent months to woo G.M. with various incentives.
