
Leading Republican lawmakers accused the Clinton administration today of caving in to pressure from China by refusing to sell high-tech destroyers and other advanced weapons to Taiwan.
The Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, said the administration's decision to bar the sale of Aegis destroyers, submarines and anti-submarine warfare aircraft to Taiwan was based on "threats emanating from Beijing," rather than on Taiwan's legitimate defense needs.
"The administration should worry more about protecting and promoting Taiwan's democracy than offending the Communist dictators in Beijing," Mr. Lott said.
China had vigorously opposed Taiwan's latest shopping list, especially its request for four Arleigh Burke-class destroyers with sophisticated radar and antimissile systems costing more than $1.5 billion each. 
But Taiwan's supporters in Congress have lobbied hard for the transfer.
Administration officials insisted that the proposed arms package, which would provide Taiwan with new defensive capabilities in early warning radar and other areas, was calibrated to address a mounting threat from China without overly antagonizing Beijing.
"We've made it very clear to the P.R.C. that because we, under the law, help Taiwan respond to defensive needs, the greater the threat posed by China, the greater Taiwan's defensive needs will be," said Kenneth H. Bacon, the Pentagon spokesman, referring to the People's Republic.
He called on both sides "to show restraint, particularly on the Chinese."
But Mr. Lott warned that China's leaders might construe the limited weapons package as a "green light for further threats against Taiwan," which Beijing views as a renegade province.
"It would be a tragic miscalculation were Beijing to underestimate the resolve of the American people to defend Taiwan," Mr. Lott said.
But the majority leader did not signal further legislative action to help Taiwan. 
He has not yet scheduled a vote on the proposed Taiwan Security Enhancement Act, a bill that would upgrade military ties between the United States and Taiwan, including the establishment of direct contact between their armed forces and American training of Taiwanese officers.
The House overwhelmingly approved the bill on Feb. 
1.
Senator Jesse Helms, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the administration left Taiwan's supporters in the Senate no choice but to press for swift approval of the Taiwan security enhancement bill. 
Beijing has warned that passage of the bill would bring "very serious damage" to American-Chinese relations, and the White House has threatened to veto it.
It was not clear, however, whether the bill would pass the Senate, which is poised to approve legislation next month to grant China the status of normal trading relations with the United States and help ease its entry into the World Trade Organization.
      
