
A majority of Senate Republicans today urged their leader, Trent Lott, to delay until September a vote on a major bill establishing permanent normal trade relations with China, an approach that Democrats and business leaders said could imperil the measure.
Mr. Lott said he had made no decision, and renewed his promise to try to cut through several procedural and political hurdles and bring up the measure by the end of this month, before Congress adjourns for its five-week summer recess.
But in his strongest signal yet that imminent passage of the China trade bill was in jeopardy, Mr. Lott told reporters that waiting until September "is not as big a problem as some people fear."
Business leaders and President Clinton have pressed the Senate to follow the House's lead, and quickly pass a bill that would end Congress's annual review of China's trade status, before it gets caught up in election-year politics. 
In a telephone conversation today, Mr. Clinton again asked Mr. Lott to schedule a vote by month's end.
Supporters of the bill have at least 70 votes, more than enough to defeat a filibuster. 
Even so, the final vote has been delayed since the House passed the measure in May because Mr. Lott has given a higher priorty to passing several spending bills. 
Also complicating speedy passage is the prospect of several amendments that could force the measure back to the House for a second vote.
But Democrats accused Republicans of postponing action on the trade bill to extract concessions onspending bills and to allow an issue that divides Democrats to fester on through the party's nominating convention in August.
"Delay is danger," said Senator Max S. Baucus, a Montana Democrat. 
"This is putting politics above policy."
But at their private weekly luncheon today, several Senate Republicans recommended that Mr. Lott use the remaining two and a half weeks before the recess to focus on top-priority tax and spending bills, and set a date in September for the China trade bill vote.
"I don't think it makes a difference if we wait until September," said Senator Rod Grams, a Minnesota Republican who three weeks ago had urged Mr. Lott to hold a vote by July 4. 
"We need to vote on it, but I know we have other priorities."
Unlike supporters in the House, who fought for votes until the final minutes, backers of the bill in the Senate have always had the votes to lock up a large victory. 
But supporters want to approve a clean version of the House bill, free from amendments that would force the measure back to the House for a potentially volatile second vote.
Several senators, including Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Phil Gramm of Texas, both Republicans, as well as Paul Wellstone, a Minnesota Democrat, have signaled their intention to offer amendments on China's record on human rights, religious liberties and labor conditions.
But the biggest hurdle has been a measure sponsored by Senators Fred Thompson, a Tennessee Republican, and Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat.
Their measure would require the administration to monitor China's record on the spread of nuclear weapons. 
It would impose automatic sanctions on China if there is "credible evidence" of exports of certain types of prohibited weaponry.
Mr. Clinton would have discretion to waive some penalties, but others would be automatic. 
Nonetheless, the administration and business leaders have opposed the measure as unnecessary, and harmful to United States diplomacy and American companies that trade with China.
"If the Senate is on record with this harsh rhetoric and these extraordinarily harmful sanctions, I think it could seriously poison the well" with China, said Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader.
Mr. Daschle said he might be able to support the antiproliferation measure if significant changes were made, including removing the bill's focus on China.
In response, Mr. Thompson said today he has dropped sanctions affecting food and medicine. 
Republican aides said they were also modifying other provisions, including the steps that triggered sanctions, to appease critics.
Mr. Thompson has insisted that the Senate vote on his measure before taking up the China trade bill. 
He has threatened to offer it as an amendment if that does not happen.
In the Senate, process is important, and Mr. Lott said he was trying to work out all the competing parties and proposals. 
"The Senate is going to pass China P.N.T.R.," Mr. Lott said. 
"It's not a question of 'if.'
It's a question of when and in what condition."
