
A special House committee's findings that China obtained or stole some of the United States' most sensitive military technology are "extremely troubling," a leading Senate Republican said today, adding that the Senate should act quickly to address the problems.
The Senator, Fred Thompson of Tennessee, said the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs might hold additional hearings into the issues raised by the House committee. 
Mr. Thompson, who heads the Governmental Affairs Committee, led its investigation last year into accusations that China had funneled covert contributions in an effort to influence the 1996 elections in the this country.
"These are extremely troubling findings," Mr. Thompson said in telephone interview. 
"But it should come as no surprise to those who have been following our export policies and the activities of the Chinese. 
It's been well known for some time that China has been actively involved in trying to obtain technology information, and I believe that our policies have played into their efforts."
The House committee concluded that over the last two decades, China obtained, sometimes by theft, some of the United States' most sensitive military technology, including nuclear weapons design. 
Representative Christopher Cox, the California Republican who heads the House committee, said on Wednesday that it had unanimously approved a classified report concluding "national security harm did occur."
"These transfers are not limited to missile-satellite technology, but cover militarily significant technologies," Mr. Cox told reporters, citing "serious, sustained" efforts by China during the Reagan, Bush and Clinton Administrations to acquire sensitive American military technology.
Clinton Administration officials said today that they did not expect to receive a copy of the report until next week. 
The report, 700 pages long, includes 38 recommendations for legislative remedies and executive branch actions. 
The recommendations cover a wide range of issues, from security at the nuclear laboratories to the handling of intelligence data to export-control policies.
But until Congress and the Administration can agree on a declassified version of the report, lawmakers and policy makers said it would be difficult to discuss the findings and their significance.
Government officials familiar with the report said, however, that the findings agreed with assessments by the Departments of Defense and State that information shared with Chinese scientists by two American companies had improved China's ability to launch satellites and long-range ballistic missiles. 
The two companies are the Hughes Electronics Corporation, a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, and Loral Space and Communications.
The most explosive part of the report may be evidence of a pattern that China stole nuclear-weapons design technology from American nuclear laboratories, said one person who has read the report.
In Beijing today, a Government spokesman expressed China's "strong resentment" of the report, prepared by the House Select Committee on U.S. 
National Security and Military/Commercial Concerns With the People's Republic of China.
"Normal exchanges on technology and trade between China and the United States serve the common interests of both sides," Zhu Bangzao, spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, said at a news conference.
The report "is totally groundless and irresponsible," Mr. Zhu said, adding that China hoped that the United States would "take practical measures to eliminate barriers in our normal trade and technology relationship, not the opposite."
