
JOHN TREXLER, a plant connoisseur in Boylston, Mass., is obsessed with Gunnera tinctoria, a Chilean plant with enormous crinkled leaves and large furry buds that looks like something H. G. Wells could have dreamed up for "The War of the Worlds."
So what if it has to spend the rugged New England winter under pine needles and a whisky barrel to survive?
Tony Avent, a nurseryman from Raleigh, N.C., had his heart snatched by a foreigner at the bottom of a cliff in China. 
"It was a six-foot-tall clumping perennial loaded with snapdragonlike flowers," Mr. Avent marveled. 
"Each flower had a wine-purple upper lip and a pure white lower lip."
The call of the wild hellebore, a perverse little plant that blooms in the winter, has lured an English mathematician named Will McLewin to risk his life collecting plants in war-torn Bosnia and Croatia. 
"People tell us we're mad, but it's no more dangerous, I suppose, than the Bronx," said Mr. McLewin, who now grows 5,000 hellebores (both species and hybrids) in his experimental nursery near Manchester, England.
Weird and wonderful plants are tumbling into gardens at a velocity not seen since the Victorian era, when intrepid explorers roamed the mountains of China in search of the elusive dove tree.
Explorers from North Carolina are going to southern China for exotic ferns and salvias that can stand up to the Deep South's heat and humidity. 
Chicago horticulturalists are heading for Siberia for oaks hardy enough to survive a Midwestern winter. 
A Denver plantsman climbed the Drakensberg Mountains in South Africa and returned with brilliantly colored ice plants and fuchsias perfectly suited to the dry, temperate climate of Colorado.
The spring crop of cutting-edge catalogues has it all -- from natives, like a five-foot, hot-pink Mississippi phlox that doesn't mildew, to erotic-looking gingers from Japan and six-foot striped cannas from South Africa.
"Weird is in," said Ken Druse, the garden writer and photographer, who gardens rather fanatically in both Brooklyn and New Jersey. 
He has liked weird plants since childhood, when his nature-loving mother used to show him jack-in-the-pulpits in the wilds of New Jersey and tell him, "Never pick one."
But now he can order its far more exotic cousins -- like Japanese cobra lilies, with strange whips extending from their colorful mouths -- from creme de la creme catalogues showcasing these "it" plants of the year.
Variegation -- white or yellow or even pink infiltrating green leaves -- is hot, hot, hot. 
"I'm desperate for a variegated horseradish," said Mr. Druse, referring to Armoracia rusticana Variegata, a mutation of an Asian native. 
Its scrambled genes produce three-foot crinkly white leaves with green blotches. 
This from the man who fanned the native plant movement three years ago, urging gardeners to cordon off all exotics (in botanical lingo, foreign plants), as if in quarantine on Ellis Island.
Mr. Druse's latest book, "The Collector's Garden" (Clarkson Potter, 1996), leaps his own fence and declares: "If it's rare, we want it. 
If it's tiny and impossible to grow, we've got to have it. 
If it's brown, looks dead and has black flowers, we'll kill for it."
While only a few catalogues offer these rarities at the moment, the ones that are easily propagated through cuttings and tissue culture will probably show up in good local nurseries in the next few years. 
Meanwhile, orders are soaring.
"Sales have gone up 700 percent over the past five years," said Mr. Avent, who sells thousands of native and exotic plants through his mail-order company, Plant Delights Nursery, in Raleigh. 
The odd ducks -- you can tell them by their names -- call to their own soulmates.
Five years ago, Mr. Avent sold two voodoo lilies. 
"Now they're selling in the hundreds," he said. 
"Even the $200 one sold out last year."
The $200 voodoo lily, Amorphophallus titanum, from Indonesia, sports a lone red 15-foot flower that smells like rotting meat (it's pollinated by flies).
What's going on?
Maybe it's the confidence of maturity, like having a martini and not apologizing (and offering one to your voodoo lily).
Ten years ago, American gardeners were suffering through adolescence, throwing out all those fluffy delphiniums from Mother England while discovering the sturdy natives growing in oblivion in their own ditches and bogs. 
They declared a holy war against invaders like bamboo and ornamental grasses.
But then even the die-hards began to feel a little silly. 
They missed their Chinese witch hazels and Japanese maples. 
Then they saw their first wild Japanese ginger and lost their hearts, all over again, to foreigners.
And there's always some Marco Polo out there willing to risk life and limb to collect one.
"We were in a small wooden boat in the Yellow Sea heading toward an island off the coast of Korea when a typhoon blew up," said Barry Yinger, a plant hunter with a research nursery in southern Pennsylvania, who has made at least 40 collecting trips to Japan. 
"The motor conked out, and the wind and waves were taking us toward the rocks. 
We were being blown toward a rocky cliff. 
There were six people in the boat, and only about three could swim, so I was trying to decide which one I liked well enough to try to save, when we got the motor started."
Mr. Yinger has brought about 75 species of asarums, or gingers, back from Japan, and they are slowly entering the catalogues. 
These plants, with their mottled green leaves and strange flowers, make beautiful ground covers. 
But they cannot be grown without knowledge and care.
The explosion of interest in exotic plants reminds Mr. Yinger of his grandmother's day. 
"My grandmother grew up in a time when people were more involved with plants -- the ferns and grasses, the old-fashioned perennials, the butterfly bushes, the trumpet flowers and brugmansias -- that are popular again today," he said.
It was also an era of great plant explorations, with lilacs, kiwis, flowering cherries, lilies, mimosas and all kinds of other ornamentals flooding in from Asia. 
All that was interrupted by World War I, the Depression and World War II.
Mr. Yinger made his first trip to Japan as a student from the University of Maryland more than 20 years ago. 
He checked into a rooming house, and on his second day he went to the neighborhood bathhouse.
"I went into the dressing room, and there, on a big table, was a display of bonsai trees of Prunus mume in bloom," he said, referring to tiny apricot trees. 
"And there was a man who looked like a garbage-truck driver, very dirty from his day's work, with his boy, and they were walking around the table while he explained what was going on. 
This was an epiphany for me, how different Japanese society was for men who loved plants. 
Because I grew up at a time when most people thought it was not quite normal for boys to be interested in plants."
This increased worldliness has not slowed interest in native plants; it has just broadened gardeners' ideas of what is possible.
When Mr. Avent, the Raleigh nurseryman, and his wife, Michelle, started their first garden there almost 20 years ago, they didn't have much to choose from. 
"In North Carolina, there were about 20 basic plants," Mr. Avent said. 
Now, Plant Delights carries 5,500 plants, from 200 hostas and 18 lobelias (make-overs of the American red cardinal flower) to a six-foot green-and-white striped leaf called Canna Stuttgart. 
That beauty made its way from South Africa to Germany to the Brooklyn Botanic Garden and on down to Raleigh.
"I still love natives," said Kim Hawks, who started Niche Gardens in Chapel Hill, N.C., 11 years ago to encourage the use of forgotten American plants. 
"It goes hand in hand with ecology issues. 
If you're doing a wetlands planting, you're going to use natives of that region."
But, she added, "bringing other plants from other parts of the world gives us a bigger gene pool to draw from."
Last fall she fell in love with the wild landscape of southern China. 
"The mountains were just awesome, very jagged and ancient and snow-capped," she said. 
"We saw peonies and buddleia, ligularia, rodgersia."
Ms. Hawks returned home with 500 seeds and 100 plants and is testing them out in her garden.
As for that brave bloomer, the hellebore, Mr. McLewin, the Englishman, continues to collect seeds in Bosnia and Croatia, and his plants are showing up in the Heronswood Nursery in Kingston, Wash.
He lost his mathematician's heart to the species about 11 years ago, driven to understand its complexity before the rarest ones disappear. 
"I can look at a thousand hellebores in one wild colony," he said, "and every one is different."
Four years ago, he came upon a red hellebore in Eastern Slavonia, which he says is not available anywhere. 
There were only three red ones, so he didn't dig up even one. 
"The next year, we went back and a new road had been built," he said. 
"The whole colony was gone."
In Colorado, Panayoti Kelaidis, the rock-alpine garden curator and plants-evaluation coordinator at the Denver Botanic Garden, made a beeline for South Africa as soon as apartheid laws were abolished.
About 12,000 feet up, he found a little succulent ice plant with shimmering yellow, daisylike flowers called Delosperma nubigenum, which means "where the clouds are born" in Latin. 
The drought-tolerant wildling not only survives frost, but also turns an attractive red in the cold and back to green again come spring, So, back home in Denver, it's all the rage as a ground cover.
South Africa "has one-tenth of all the plants in the world," Mr. Kelaidis said, adding, "It's Mecca for temperate botanists."
In Massachusetts, Mr. Trexler, the executive director of the Worcester County Horticultural Society, has spent 11 years building the Tower Hill Botanic Garden in Boylston out of a 132-acre farm, which has hundreds of specimens rugged enough for a New England winter.
But this man of the world wants dessert. 
"You want all those wonderful sweet pastries," Mr. Trexler said, "like the epimediums and the hellebores."
(And that Gunnera tinctoria, which he coddles at the first sign of frost like a baby in a blanket.)
It's that growing-up thing again. 
"As you get more mature, you get more uninhibited," he said, "more baroque, whether it's art or music, or gardening, and it's due to being an older society and an older individual."
Is that how you explain the return of the dreaded coleus?
That red leaf from Grandmother's garden and, before that, from Java. 
It has returned to haunt us in ruffles and hot colors: chartreuse, screaming yellow, hot pink, variegated, even black!
"It's like these retro clothing fashions coming back from 1975," said Ken Selody, who grows 100 different kinds of coleuses at his nursery, Atlock Farm, in Somerset, N.J. 
"I guarantee some fashion designer who sees a newly planted park -- where everything's replaced with coleus -- is going to put those colors on people's backs, and you'll see them all seated around a dinner table."
Give them all martinis and pass around the Rolaids.
 
Relax, You Don't Have to Travel
Catalogues from these nurseries have become bibles for those in search of good native and exotic plants.
 
FORESTFARM -- 990 Tetherow Road, Williams, Ore. 
97544; (541)846-7269; $4. 
It has 7,000 trees and shrubs, like clethra, fothergilla, ceanothus and, from China, the fragrant seven-sons plant (Heptacodium miconioides).
 
HERONSWOOD NURSERY -- 7530 Northeast 288th Street, Kingston, Wash. 
98346; (360) 297-4172; $4. 
This nursery has 2,400 plants, like chamaecyparis trees, hydrangeas, hellebores, gunneras, coleuses and cobra lilies.
 
NICHE GARDENS -- 1111 Dawson Road, Chapel Hill, N.C. 
27516; (919) 967-0078; $3. 
There are about 450 unusual native plants, like Baptisia Purple Smoke and Phlox paniculata Robert Poore, a mildew-resistant phlox.
 
PLANT DELIGHTS NURSERY -- 9241 Sauls Road, Raleigh, N.C. 
27603; (919) 772-4794; price printed on catalogue: "10 stamps or a box of chocolates."
There are 5,500 different plants, from cobra lilies to lobelias.
 
SISKIYOU RARE PLANT NURSERY -- 2825 Cummings Road, Medford, Ore. 
97501; (541) 772-6846; $3. 
It has 1,650 dwarf conifers, hardy perennials and alpine plants. 
Its cover girl is Zaluzianskya ovata (above), from South Africa.
