
FEBRUARY is the month when nearly everyone catches cabin fever. 
The cure?
A long walk on a fine day. 
During one of these walks, the birch trees were discovered. 
Oh, they had been growing in the park for many years. 
But they were never really seen until just a few days ago. 
They had no leaves to block the view; they just stood there with their long, high trunks glistening white in the sunshine.
This group of white, or paper, birch trees was mature enough so that their trunks had that clean chalky quality. 
The trees had several stems, which is a birch trait. 
The view was dramatic. 
And the tree count?
Maybe seven or more.
Displays such as this set the mood for the day. 
Surely there must be others to see. 
Not far from the birches was another handsome specimen with rather unusual bark. 
This one was a maple, the paperbark maple (Acer griseum). 
The park planter must have been intrigued with tree bark that suggested paper and so a small collection was started.
The paperbark maple was not the giant that most maples are. 
Later it was learned that this maple can be 20 to 25 feet tall, but most garden specimens are only about half that. 
The cinnamon-colored bark of this tree is its most spectacular asset. 
When the sun shines, it glistens. 
The bark peels off, too, in paper-thin sheets.
The plant explorer Ernest Wilson found this splendid tree growing in central China, and thanks to his efforts, the tree was introduced to this country. 
But until recently, it has almost been a horticultural secret. 
Paperbark maple is not the easiest specimen for nurseries to propagate. 
But more knowledgeable propagators are learning how and the tree is beginning to be found at nurseries.
Another relatively unknown shrub, stewartia, is planted more for its showy bark. 
It can be particularly spectacular now when there are no leaves in competition. 
Stewartia bark resembles that of the sycamore tree, but because the shrub is smaller in stature, the mottling is easier to see. 
The stewartia can be planted for its camellia-like flowers that appear in late summer.
Although several stewartia species are available, most of them are from Asia. 
But the mountain stewartia is a stalwart. 
This one is a native American species and is probably well known to those who may have hiked throughout the Carolina woods.
Although the stewartia is relatively disease-free, it has a bad reputation as being difficult to transplant. 
In these days of container-grown plants, home gardeners will have a better chance of success. 
When the plants are purchased in spring, select carefully. 
Have the nurseryman knock the plant out of the container to be sure that it does not have a serpentine collar of roots inside the pot. 
This would mean that the shrub has been in the container too long. 
A younger, actively growing specimen will be much easier to transfer to the home ground.
Just as showy on the landscape is the lacebark pine (Pinus bungeana). 
This one also resembles the sycamore, but in a more stately fashion. 
This pine needs a place of its own, preferably in an open sunny location where the soil drains well. 
The exfoliation does not occur in the very youngest trees although the bark will be interesting. 
When mature, the lacebark pine assumes the mottled effect of green-white-yellow-brown patches that are ever so handsome.
The lacebark pine was introduced from China, too, where it was first seen growing in a temple garden near Beijing. 
Although the tree was introduced in the 1840's, it has not gained the use it should have.
In the same category, a little-known elm tree deserves much more attention than it has been receiving. 
This one is the lacebark elm (Ulmus parvifolia). 
The first time I saw it, it boggled my mind. 
I never knew that such a handsome elm existed.
The United States Arboretum in Washington is introducing a fine selection of this elm, which it has named Ohio. 
The arboretum can supply a limited supply of budwood or rooted cuttings to qualified nurseries. 
More stock will be made available in the future as more nurseries tackle this one. 
At present only a limited number of cultivated varieties are on the market.
One cautionary note: Though this lacebark elm species is native to China, and sometimes called Chinese elm, it is not to be confused with a somewhat inferior elm species, Ulmus pumila, which is sold as the Chinese elm. 
(The need to know Latin binomials can be critical).
The lacebark elm is a big shade tree, as are all elms. 
But the distinctive character, its handsome bark, makes it particularly appealing. 
Thus far the tree has excellent resistance to the elm-leaf beetle and Dutch elm disease. 
And its future may be forthcoming because this elm also has the desirable vase-shaped crown.
