
As the Clinton Administration weighs whether to renew China's "most favored nation" status after the strained visit by Secretary of State Warren Christopher to Beijing, legions of American business leaders and Washington lobbyists for industry and trade associations are describing the consequences of withdrawing the designation in near-apocalyptic terms.
But some economists and legislators, pointing to the United States' $22.7 billion trade deficit with China -- second only to its $59.32 billion deficit with Japan -- suggest that much of the oratory about damage to American exports and investment in China is overstated and that higher duties could go some distance toward trimming the trade deficit.
In fact, both sides, while summoning considerable data, have shaped their analyses to suit their arguments. 
Any clear-cut assessment remains elusive.
"Our exports were $9 billion last year to China," said Donald M. Anderson, the president of the United States-China Business Council, a group that promotes trade between the countries. 
"No one really knows how much they would be hit, but they would be hit because the Chinese would unquestionably retaliate."
Jagdish Bhagwati, a trade economist at Columbia University, does not agree. 
"All this number-crunching is purely hypothetical," he said. 
"Would the Chinese retaliate by saying, 'The U.S. wants to play hardball so we'll play hardball' ?
That is a vague, general fear, in my view. 
If they start playing that game, we are a superpower and we have lots of leverage. 
We have a whole range of punishments and rewards at our command."
The threat of Chinese retaliation against American companies selling to China and what would be a surge in duties on Chinese products exported to this country have rattled industries with large stakes in China and worried trade experts about the broader relationship between the two countries should China's trade privileges be revoked.
By June, President Clinton must decide whether China has made "significant, overall progress" toward improving its human rights record, a condition of an executive order that the President issued last year on renewing China's trade status. 
Virtually every country with which the United States trades holds most favored status, which results in significantly lower duties on their exports to this country than would otherwise be the case.
The Boeing Company, one of the most influential American manufacturers -- and with orders from China for $3.9 billion in new airplanes -- has led the charge against any change in China's trade status. 
Last Tuesday, at a panel discussion in Washington sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations, Lawrence W. Clarkson, Boeing's corporate vice president for planning and international development, attacked proposals to link renewal of most favored nation status to China's record on human rights.
"Boeing currently has orders for 64 planes for delivery to China with a value of $3.9 billion," Mr. Clarkson said. 
"These orders, plus an additional $2 billion to $3 billion in near-term potential orders, would be at great risk if M.F.N. was not renewed. 
During the next 15 years, China will need 800 airplanes worth $40 billion, making it the world's third-largest aviation market."
 
Offering a Bigger Context
Like many executives who have urged renewal of China's trade privileges, Mr. Clarkson couched his argument in broader social and political terms as well. 
"We believe strongly that this U.S. trade is contributing to the rapid decentralization and transformation of China's economy, helping millions of Chinese to obtain greater freedom to choose their work, their employer and their place of residence," he said. 
"As in Taiwan and South Korea, the development of a vigorous middle class will bring the development of social and political freedom for all Chinese more than any other factor."
American industry leaders often say, as some business executives did to Secretary of State Christopher in Beijing on March 13, that 167,000 American jobs depend on trade with China. 
This figure comes from a Commerce Department estimate that every $1 billion in exports generates 19,000 jobs; thus, the roughly $9 billion in exports to China accounts for 167,000 jobs.
The calculation implies that most if not all of these jobs are in jeopardy if China responds to a cutoff of trade privileges by slashing imports from the United States. 
But, as economists like Mr. Bhagwati note, this inference is not warranted given the uncertainty of the Chinese response and the complexity and size of trade between the two countries.
Still, Lawrence Chimerine, the chief economist at the Economic Strategy Institute, a Washington-based economic and trade policy lobby organization, said cases like Boeing suggest that American manufacturers could lose large chunks of the China market. 
"I think Japan and Europe would get a lot of orders that we wouldn't get," he said.
 
A Wide Range of Trade
In 1993, according to the Commerce Department, the United States exported $8.76 billion worth of goods to China, including airplanes, fertilizer, wheat and automobiles. 
China, during the same period, sold $31.53 billion in goods to this country, products ranging from toys and shoes, to combs and clocks.
Peter T. Mangione, president of the Footwear Distributors and Retailers of America, said that ending China's access to low duties would mean higher shoe prices for Americans because China accounted for one of every two pairs of shoes sold here. 
"Almost 90 percent of all shoes sold in America are imported," Mr. Mangione said. 
"And China is by far the largest supplier of imported shoes; it supplies 60 percent of all imported shoes."
Neal M. Soss, the chief economist at CS First Boston, has calculated the potential inflationary impact of revoking China's most favored status. 
If this trade privilege is denied, he said, the increase on duties on Chinese products imported into this country would fuel inflation by at least 0.15 percent annually. 
"The slippery slope of protectionism is the reason," he said.
But Representative Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat from San Francisco who has led the campaign in Congress against renewing China's trade status, argues that the size of America's trade deficit with China suggests that China needs American markets.
"China's economic growth depends on preferential access to the United States markets," Ms. Pelosi said. 
"The deficit is growing. 
Compound that with cheap labor and you see that they are flooding our markets with products made by people making $24 a month."
Even some supporters of extending China's preferential trade status, however, are concerned about the chilly reception that Mr. Christopher received in Beijing. 
"Right now I'm a bit fed up," Mr. Anderson of the United States-China Business Council said. 
"The Chinese could help, and it would be in their interest to help."
