
Organizers of an international forum on women that was expected to draw more than 40,000 people to Beijing this summer are balking at a Chinese demand to move their conference 32 miles away from the Chinese capital and will ask Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's help.
The meeting, called the NGO Forum on Women, a nongovernmental organization, is scheduled to be held almost simultaneously with the official United Nations-sponsored Fourth World Conference on Women, also in Beijing. 
All large United Nations conferences now have parallel sessions for nongovernmental organizations, and no host government has tried to control them like this, organizers said today.
Diplomats and United Nations officials say that Beijing appears to be wary of demonstrations by nongovernmental groups on political or human rights issues. 
In addition to trying to isolate the nongovernmental forum by relocating it to Huairou, a tourist area near the Great Wall, China is blocking delegations of Tibetan women, women from Taiwan and lesbian groups and is expected to deny visas to others.
"We have set a deadline of May 24 to resolve this," Irene M. Santiago, executive director of the forum, said in an interview today.
Ms. Santiago has just returned from four days in Beijing, where she and Khunying Supatra Masdit, a Thai politician who will preside over the nongovernmental forum, were invited by the Chinese to look at alternative sites after they protested the move to Huairou.
When the General Assembly decided in 1990 to give the conference to China, it was stated explicity in the agreement that nongovernmental groups play an important part in the deliberations by offering expertise and lobbying on various issues.
Two years ago, a site closer to the United Nations conference, the Workers' Sports Service Center, was selected. 
But in March, the Chinese informed the forum organizers that there were structural defects in a gymnasium at the sports center and that the forum would have to be relocated.
"We went to Beijing because we had been given two alternative sites along with Huairou," Ms. Santiago said today. 
"We visited the two sites, but then were told that they were not in fact available. 
Huairou was our only option."
She described Huairou as a scenic town that "doesn't have any of the facilities we need to have a successful forum."
She said that meeting rooms and accommodations were scattered all over the town, which took them 50 minutes to reach in a car with a police escort. 
Although they protested that they would be out of reach of official delegations and journalists covering the conference, they were told the site was better because they would have more space and more meeting rooms in Huairou.
Forum organizers listed several other possible sites, including an Olympic center, the Beijing Sports University and the original site minus the faulty gymnasium.
