
Until the 1980's, the world's best divers usually came from the United States and its college and club systems. 
Then the Chinese discovered and developed the sport, the Russians made a resurgence, the great American champion Greg Louganis retired and American diving struggled.
Now the Americans seem to be making a small comeback, although when the Goodwill Games diving competition ended tonight, China and Russia had won the most medals. 
After 9 of the 10 events, China had 12 medals (4 gold), Russia 7 (4 gold), the United States 3 (1 gold) and the rest of the world 5. 
The best diver here was Dmitri Sautin, a Russian who won the men's 3-meter springboard on Sunday and the 10-meter platform tonight.
But the Americans made a strong impression Sunday night when 20-year-old Laura Wilkinson, a University of Texas junior from Houston, won the women's platform title. 
Wilkinson had won seven United States championships, but never a big international competition. 
And this one was big. 
The field included the world champion (Olena Zhupina of Ukraine) and runner-up (Cai Yuyan of China).
Here, every contender except Wilkinson made at least one major error -- an overrotation here, an underrotation there, a failure to keep the knees straight or the legs together. 
Wilkinson made no big mistakes. 
And when she needed a solid last dive to overtake Cai, she made it, a back 1 1/2 somersault with 2 1/2 twists, that drew scores of 8.0 from all seven judges.
Starting the ninth and last round, Wilkinson trailed Cai. 
Then Cai, only 16 but more experienced than Wilkinson, barely finished a 3 1/2 somersault pike. 
The door was open for Wilkinson, who dived next. 
She said her nervousness disappeared, and she nailed her dive. 
But she said that for her and for the American team, this was only one competition.
"I need to keep working on everything," she said. 
"And since the other teams are so good, we've had to work twice as hard to be able to compete with them. 
I think we're making progress. 
I don't know if it was U.S. diving slipping so much as the Chinese and Russians getting better."
Li Hongping of Mission Viejo, Calif., a former Chinese champion and one of the three coaches of this American team, was cheered by Wilkinson's victory.
"It's very significant," he said, "because it shows our divers are as competent as anyone else. 
This builds confidence in her and in the whole diving program in the U.S.
"It's very difficult to compete with someone who is training more, like the Chinese and the Russians. 
We have to be mentally tougher than anyone and have a more positive attitude. 
I'm seeing that. 
It happened with Laura and that's why she won a gold medal, so this is a very good step."
