
Despite a warning from the National Security Council that a fund-raising luncheon at a Buddhist temple should be approached with "great, great caution," Vice President Al Gore made the appearance anyway after his own national security adviser raised no objections to the trip, Mr. Gore's spokeswoman said today.
The issue arose today after documents released by the White House showed that in an E-mail exchange of messages between John J. Norris, a member of Mr. Gore's national security staff, and Robert L. Suettinger, one of the National Security Council's Asia affairs specialists, Mr. Suettinger raised concerns about how the 1996 event would be perceived by China. 
He also suggested that the donors might have a "hidden agenda."
The computer messages are also the latest document to make clear that members of the Vice President's staff were aware beforehand that the luncheon at the temple was intended to raise campaign money, despite Mr. Gore's initial assertion in the face of news reports last fall that he had thought it a "community event" and not a fund-raiser.
"Hsing Yun would host a fund-raising lunch for about 150 people in the V.P.'s honor," Mr. Norris said in a message to Mr. Suettinger on April 15, referring to Venerable Master Hsing Yun, a Taiwanese Buddhist leader. 
"Any problems with the V.P. participating in this event from the perspective of U.S.-China relations?"
On April 19, Mr. Suettinger replied: "This is terra incognita to me. 
Certainly from the perspective of Taiwan/China balancing, this would be clearly a Taiwan event, and would be seen as such. 
I guess my reaction would be one of great, great caution. 
They may have a hidden agenda."
Mr. Norris's E-mail message said the fund-raising event would be held at the end of June. 
In fact, it was held 10 days after Mr. Suettinger issued his words of caution. 
Mr. Gore appeared on April 29, as the main speaker at the Hsi Lai Temple, which is in the Los Angeles suburb of Hacienda Heights and is described by its founders as the Western Hemisphere's largest Buddhist monastery.
Lorraine Voles, the Vice President's spokeswoman, said today thathis office had taken the words of caution from the National Security Council "very seriously."
But, she said, Mr. Gore nonetheless went ahead with the event because his own national security adviser, Leon S. Fuerth, after consultation with the council and a separate inquiry to the State Department, "posed no objection to the event from a foreign policy standpoint."
Mr. Gore's appearance came at a tense time between the United States and China, just a month after the Administration had sent United States warships near Taiwan in response to Chinese military exercises that were timed to Taiwan's first direct presidential election.
Mr. Gore's stop at the temple has been a continuing source of controversy, because $140,000 in campaign money was raised in a religious institution and also because of questions about the true source of some of the money.
In addition, Mr. Gore has amended his account of what he knew about the event.
The Democratic National Committee has said that in hindsight, it considers the raising of donations in a religious institution, which has tax-exempt status, to have been a mistake. 
The Democrats reimbursed the temple for the $15,000 it spent on food and other expenses for the event, and later returned some of the campaign money.
The documents released today show that Mr. Gore's foreign policy staff was concerned enough about his appearance to inquire about its propriety. 
Ms. Voles said that on the advice of the State Department, Mr. Gore's staff had worked with the organizers of the event "to minimize any risk of negative reaction from the Chinese Government" by making sure that the luncheon was not identified as a Taiwan event, that there was no display of Taiwanese flags or political symbols and that no politicians from Taiwan "were allowed to exploit the event."
Ms. Voles also said Mr. Norris's description of the luncheon as a fund-raising event was not inconsistent with Mr. Gore's own remarks. 
"Some members of our staff may have known the event was a fund raiser, but he did not," she said. 
"The briefing paper provided for him did not say it was a fund raiser."
She added: "I'm not saying there wasn't a disconnect here. 
The senior political staff traveling with the Vice President also did not know it was a fund raiser."
Last autumn Mr. Gore initially said he had believed that he was attending a "community event" for Asian supporters of the Democrats. 
Then, in December, the White House released thousands of pages of documents that included one on the luncheon that had been sent to the Vice President's office by the Democratic National Committee's fund-raising division. 
Mr. Gore then acknowledged that he had known that the Asian Pacific Leadership Council, which he addressed, required membership payments to the Democratic Party. 
But he said he had not known that the luncheon itself was intended to raise money.
