
With her bold public stands undermined by irresolution in the White House and her experience rendered less relevant by new economic crises, Madeleine K. Albright has had a tough 20 months as Secretary of State.
Ms. Albright remains the Clinton Administration's principal foreign-policy voice and the liaison with a recalcitrant Republican Congress, and is greeted like a celebrity very popular in the country beyond Washington. 
But a President averse to military risk, preoccupied by the fallout from his relationship with an intern and unwilling to offend core Democratic constituencies has not supported her on key issues like the Middle East and Kosovo.
Her assiduous courtship of Congress was instrumental in winning Senate ratification of NATO expansion and the Chemical Weapons Convention from a Congress verging on isolationism. 
But Ms. Albright has had little to do with the few other Clinton successes of the second term: a settlement in Northern Ireland and a reinvigoration of relations with China.
And now, as Russia melts, tainting one of the relationships of which Mr. Clinton has been proudest, this is a particularly vulnerable period for the Administration's foreign policy. 
Russia was part of widening international crisis that has now hit Wall Street, threatening the booming economy that has kept his popularity afloat.
But Ms. Albright and the State Department have not been crucial players, White House officials say. 
With Mr. Clinton so distracted, it is not immediately clear who is in charge.
The evidence appears to favor the national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, and the Treasury Secretary, Robert E. Rubin, though, instead of Ms. Albright.
In a recent interview, Ms. Albright bristled at specific criticism, but says it is only natural that the economic experts take the lead on their issues.
"For me, what's important is what people think in years hence," Ms. Albright said. 
"Whether I used this four-year period in a way that ultimately accomplished what I want: to create the underpinnings for the American role in the next century, while taking care of what needs to be done to problem-solve."
Ms. Albright attended only one recent meeting of the National Economic Council, the functional equivalent of the National Security Council, and that was on Japan.
She and her officials did regularly urge a broader view of American interests in Asia than simply the financial, including security and the stabilization of democratizing Asian allies, and coordinated interagency aid packages for Thailand and Indonesia.
But her call for President Suharto of Indonesia to step down occurred only hours before he did so anyway, and in general, Ms. Albright and her department have let Treasury run the show.
Was this an opportunity missed, or simply, as Ms. Albright and her aides contend, the most efficient and collegial way to coordinate a post-Soviet world with new, nontraditional challenges?
In the Middle East, on the other hand, Ms. Albright has been central, trying to coax and cajole Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel into a compromise that would refresh a deterioriating peace and help restore American credibility in the Arab world. 
But her intensive efforts have not yet produced the clear personal triumph that zero-sum Washington seems to require.
In May, she gambled that public pressure and an ultimatum would move Mr. Netanyahu, but the White House failed to support her in the face of a lobbying firestorm stoked by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.
She kept the Administration engaged in Bosnia, where it could not reasonably retreat.
Here in Sarajevo on Sunday and again today, Ms. Albright spoke passionately and effectively about the effort required to make a multinational, democratic Bosnia come to pass, and she was eager to make it vividly clear that American aid would only come to those who worked to carry out the Dayton accords.
But her advocacy of an aggressive approach -- including a credible threat of air strikes -- toward the Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic, over his crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo Province did not find wide support within NATO and was rejected by Mr. Clinton in the spring.
Her vow in March that "we are not going to stand by and watch the Serbian authorities do in Kosovo what they can no longer get away with doing in Bosnia" has proven hollow.
Other American threats have seemed equally empty -- against Iraq to defend United Nations weapons inspections, for example.
That has called into question the American commitment to a sustained war on terrorism, a commitment Ms. Albright and others pledged would begin with the missile strikes against Afghanistan and Sudan.
 
Some Early Victories For a New Secretary
Ms. Albright's accession as Secretary of State, becoming the highest-ranking woman in American history, prompted enormous popular and media interest. 
She attracted attention for her newly discovered Jewish background as well as for successful efforts to expand NATO and to her push to articulate a more forceful American position than her dry, quiet predecessor, Warren M. Christopher.
She quickly earned respect from her French, Russian, Chinese and Arab colleagues. 
Early victories in Congress were hailed, and she has won important policy shifts on Iran and Cuba, while helping to prevent a trade war with Europe over sanctions.
But with domestic problems undercutting Mr. Clinton's international credibility, the Administration foreign policy seems ever more reactive. 
And with the bombing of American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, followed by missile strikes in Afghanistan and the Sudan, with civil war in Kosovo, nuclear tests by India and Pakistan, the Russian economic and political problems and the unresolved crisis in Iraq flaring again, the world seems a more dangerous and unstable place than when Ms. Albright came to office.
Ms. Albright's greatest virtues -- clarity and an intelligent, forceful voice connecting with the public and Congress -- have not diminished, said a senior White House official who admires her. 
But as the Administration faces diverse and less manageable problems, many due to the economic problems that began in Asia, "her virtues seem less impressive or timely," the official said, "because neither economics nor strategy are her strengths, and her depth lies in European issues, not Asian ones."
Even Ms. Albright's hard work with Congress -- in particular with Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina -- has not yet produced a deal to repay Washington's debt to the United Nations or funds to replenish the International Monetary Fund reserves, both described as high priorities by her aides. 
Compromises have been stymied by a fight with House Republicans over abortion policy.
"My predecessors had a different world to deal with in which the parameters were fairly set," Ms. Albright said. 
"They had the possibility of focusing all their attention on one or two issues."
By contrast, she said, she is trying to "put into play a lot of issues that I see as challenges we're facing," like nuclear nonproliferation, economics and the effective use of sanctions, issues that were at the center of a January review of priorities.
 
The Land Mines And the War Crimes
Ms. Albright has failed to achieve some of the human-rights goals she described as among the most important to her. 
She was an early champion of a ban on land mines. 
Last year, however, in Ottawa, the United States was nearly alone in opposing a treaty.
As a Central European whose family fled first the Nazis and then the Communists, she has been especially concerned about crimes against humanity. 
She created an Ambassador for War Crimes and lobbied for a permanent international tribunal to prosecute them.
But at a Rome conference to accomplish that goal, the United States was part of a small minority refusing to sign a treaty to create a permanent tribunal. 
In both cases, the Pentagon and Congress successfully argued that the only superpower required special exceptions.
Ms. Albright said she continues to champion her principles, but she cannot forget America's responsibilities. 
"I have to balance enunciating the principles and leading the way with the pragmatism of getting things done and the power of the United States," she said.
But there is now a new expression in diplomatic circles -- "to pull an Ottawa" -- which means to promote a new initiative and then abandon it at the end.
Ms. Albright's fierce rhetorical battles with the Iraqis at the United Nations helped catapult her into the Secretary's elegant office on the seventh floor. 
And in a corridor leading off from it, she keeps a comic shrine, a collection of cartoons, newspaper cuttings and other mementos of her tussles with Iraq.
But the Iraq problem persists. 
The latest crisis is an outgrowth of the inconclusive standoff last March, which did little for the reputation of Mr. Clinton's foreign-policy team.
Iraq continues to serve as a reminder of the limits of American power, of the post-Soviet difficulties in orchestrating allies and of the continuing reluctance of Mr. Clinton to use force in risky circumstances.
 
The Big Fiasco In Columbus
But the televised town hall meeting in Columbus, Ohio, in February, was the most visible fiasco. 
Ms. Albright and Mr. Berger, the security adviser, and Defense Secretary William S. Cohen were unable to silence hecklers or to sound convincing about why a nearly isolated United States might need to bomb Iraq.
The Ohio meeting -- organized by the White House to use Ms. Albright's skills and popularity -- began the erosion of her reputation among the foreign-policy elite of which she has been a member for so long.
"If you look around the world for the big challenges now, where's the Secretary of State?" asked Robert B. Zoellick, former Under Secretary of State for James A. Baker 3d, who enjoyed a level of access to his President, George Bush, and influence over him that seems denied to Ms. Albright. "To an outsider, she's M.I.A. 
People run issues case by case, but there's a sense the show is being managed by Berger."
The Administration manages crises but has no clear strategic framework, Mr. Zoellick said. 
"How do different problems relate to one another?
It starts with the President, but it's not her forte or Berger's. 
If you don't have a sense of where you want to take the country, you won't get there."
Michael Mandelbaum, of Johns Hopkins University, who criticized first-term foreign policy as "social work," thinks the current team is doing decently at managing the smaller crises of the post-cold-war era, which have less to do with national security and diplomacy.
"Certainly in this second presidential term, by far the most important figures in foreign policy" are Treasury Secretary Rubin and his deputy, Lawrence H. Summers, Mr. Mandelbaum said. 
"For that we should be grateful. 
A world with a financial crisis is far safer than a world with a military crisis, and they've been doing pretty well. 
But Albright doesn't seem to be a player in all this."
 
Success With China: Who Gets Credit?
Richard N. Haass of the Brookings Institution, who was on the National Security Council staff under President Bush, said "the one significant accomplishment in the second term" has been to renew relations with China. 
"There you can see a policy initiative and presidential investment," he said. 
"One senses that the engine for that has been the President and the National Security Council."
In the interview, Ms. Albright defended her involvement and that of her strong team in the full range of foreign policy, from Asia and China to Iran and Cuba. 
On financial matters, she said, she has been working to insure that the diplomatic, human and security aspects are fully grasped.
As a former academic, she has been happy to reach down to the regional assistant secretaries and to urge them "to think outside the box," wanting career officers to compete for ideas with outsiders. 
She has encouraged Under Secretaries Thomas R. Pickering and Stuart E. Eizenstat, and Deputy Secretary Strobe Talbott, "to drive policy and make things happen," an official said.
"Economic issues we have brought right into the department," Ms. Albright said, "and we have an Under Secretary who's strong -- Stu Eizenstat -- really working on sanctions issues and on trying to meld the financial with the assistance part of the Asian financial crisis."
She has pushed hard, as she promised him she would, Mr. Eizenstat said, to make State a serious player again on economic issues. 
Treasury gets the headlines over Asia, he said, "but we and she have been intimately involved with the humanitarian and political dimensions."
She is confident about her managing role as Secretary of State, as the prime foreign-policy spokesman for the Administration and as a formulator of key policy. 
And she rejects the notion that Mr. Clinton's choice of Richard C. Holbrooke to be chief American delegate to the United Nations -- someone who was said to have been a candidate for Secretary of State before Ms. Albright was chosen -- is a sign that her own star is waning or wanting.
"Washington is what it is," she said, shrugging. 
"People think you're terrific, and then they think you're too terrific, so then they let you know that you're not. 
You can't be in a position of being the visible voice for the United States and not be out there to be praised and criticized."
Ms. Albright and Mr. Berger have a friendship dating back to the presidential campaign of Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, when Ms. Albright was the chief foreign-policy adviser to a candidate who took almost unremitting heat for not having a strong foreign-policy view. 
Despite moments of annoyance -- usually over personnel -- presidential briefings or second-guessing about the results of specific diplomatic missions, Ms. Albright and Mr. Berger are each other's closest advisers. 
They hash out policy in advance and speak many times a day -- a sharp contrast to the tension between Mr. Christopher and Anthony Lake, or the raging warfare under Jimmy Carter -- the last Democratic President -- between Cyrus R. Vance and Zbigniew Brzezinski.
 
Albright and Berger Are Both Pragmatists
"This is not the foreign-policy President who wakes up thinking what notes he can pen to his foreign colleagues," a senior Administration official said, a reference, apparently, to Mr. Bush, who was famous for his hand-written correspondence to world leaders. 
"So Berger becomes the guy who doesn't make foreign policy so much as broker it."
In meetings, another senior White House official said, "she is pragmatic and a consensus builder, like Berger, despite her reputation outside as an uncompromising, six-gun shooting moralist."
She arrives well-briefed and armed with a collective department view, in contrast to Mr. Cohen, whose well-armed Pentagon often gets its way regardless. 
She is "articulate on issues she knows well, and tends to put aside the talking points and draw from her own experience, and she's best when she does that."
Ms. Albright dealt movingly with the emotional and security crisis surrounding the bombing of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and the deaths of many of her employees, and she has handled Mr. Clinton's personal troubles with dignity.
But her finest policy moment lately has been a shift in the treatment of Iran after the election of the moderate Mohammad Khatami as President. 
While maintaining demands for a halt to terrorism and Iran's nuclear, chemical and missile programs, she pushed Mr. Clinton to a more receptive Iran policy.
"It was hard and had internal criticism, but she got it done with Sandy and the President," avoiding an interagency battle, an official said.
After her recent speech laying out the new policy -- to which Iran has not yet responded -- the President took her aside to congratulate her, she said, "for threading the needle."
Similarly, she used contacts with Pope John Paul II, the Congress and Cuban exiles in Miami to allow direct relief flights from the United States to Cuba to resume and to let relatives send money.
Ms. Albright is also praised for her work with the Russian Foreign Minister, Yevgeny M. Primakov, which helped forge a new relationship between NATO and Russia.
At one point, aides remember, as Mr. Primakov argued for secondary military status for new NATO members, Ms. Albright said: "Neither the President nor I will negotiate over the heads of the peoples of Central Europe. 
That happened once before and it's not going to happen again."
Mr. Primakov was silent, then diverted the conversation, and never pressed the issue so hard again, the aides say.
But Russian policy is generally run by Mr. Talbott and is dominated by the economic and political crisis, making Mr. Primakov -- and Ms. Albright -- less important.
Ms. Albright also pushed the Pentagon to act more decisively in support of political goals in Bosnia and to keep troops there without a deadline.
Her conversations with the Bosnian Serb President, Biljana Plavsic, were crucial in encouraging her to challenge Radovan Karadzic.
On Kosovo, she argues that -- unlike in Bosnia -- Washington and NATO were involved early and got Europe to act. 
A resolution is not yet clear, she says, but the ground is prepared.
Ms. Albright is also proud of using her unprecedented telephone relationship with the Chinese Foreign Minister to organize the Security Council's five permanent members -- the United States, Russia, China, France and Britain -- to condemn nuclear tests by India and Pakistan.
At their June meeting in Geneva, she told the others that they are "always talking about a multipolar and not a unipolar world."
This was their chance to prove it, she said, "so one country doesn't take a principled stand and the others sign up the contracts."
 
She Will Await History's Judgment
With all the "profound ideological confusion" facing a post-cold-war Secretary of State, said Moises Naim, editor of Foreign Policy, this is not a period for "grand strategy."
Ms. Albright's role, he said, is inevitably one of a goalkeeper.
But Secretaries of State are often defined by challenges. 
Mr. Baker, for instance, had a great crisis thrust upon him, the Persian Gulf war, and a great opportunity, the collapse of Communism.
So far, Ms. Albright has not had such a test or made such an opportunity of the growing world economic problems.
"I can't operate on the basis of instant gratification on any part of my daily work," she said.
"The policies that are being put into place are longer term. 
It may be the next Secretary of State will reap the rewards of what I've done. 
Sitting in this chair you get the sense that you are a part of history."
She noted her recent induction into the national Women's Hall of Fame. 
"When they say I'm the highest-ranking woman in the history of the United States, that's pretty amazing. 
I don't mind occasionally having someone criticize me."
Judith Kipper of the Council on Foreign Relations, while a fierce critic of United States Middle East policy, praises Ms. Albright for showing the way.
"She can be soft with her children, motherly and nice, and go shopping and be all the things a decent person can be," Ms. Kipper said.
"But when it comes to the work, she's tough and serious. 
There's no gender in the work."
