
Police raids in New York and Hong Kong over the weekend took aim at a Chinese gang that has become New York City's most powerful Asian crime organization, gaining wealth and influence through the smuggling of Chinese immigrants, investigators say.
The gang, known as the Fuk Ching, has been operating in New York for several years, but came under increased police scrutiny recently because of its role in helping to organize the ill-fated voyage of a tramp steamer that ran aground off Queens in June with nearly 300 Chinese men and women aboard.
The leader of the gang, Guo Liang Chi, 27, a convicted extortionist who is widely known as Ah Kay, was among 14 members or associates of the gang taken into custody. 
Mr. Guo was arrested in Hong Kong.
Mr. Guo, who first entered the United States as an illegal immigrant at the age of 15, had left New York early this year as warfare broke out in the ranks of the Fuk Ching (pronounced fook-ching) over control of the profits from the smuggling of immigrants.
Federal investigators and New York Police detectives say the extent of Mr. Guo's influence over the gang after he went abroad is unclear. 
But they believe he remained an important figure in the financing and coordination of shipments of illegal immigrants, both by sea and air. 
The gang itself may have become somewhat fragmented, the authorities say, but its estimated 25 to 30 members and dozens of associates remain deeply involved in human smuggling and other crimes.
The gang takes its name from Fujian Province in southern China, a coastal area that has been the source of most of the illegal Chinese immigrants landing in the United States in recent years. 
The name, Fuk Ching, translates as Young People of Fujian.
Like other Asian gangs, the Fuk Ching are extremely secretive and operate in small groups or cells, the police say. 
Perhaps their greatest asset is their language, a dialect that is colorful and complex, unintelligible to most other Chinese and, of course, to the police.
No one knows how many Chinese immigrants the Fuk Ching has helped spirit into this country, but the police say the numbers run into the thousands, with each immigrant paying $25,000 to $30,000 for passage. 
Initially, the Fuk Ching, like some of the half dozen or so other Asian gangs in New York, worked as contractors for the businessmen in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan who ran the human smuggling operations, the authorities say. 
Now, they say, it takes shares in the profitable syndicates that put the smuggling ventures together.
The main role of the gangs, the authorities say, remains the same. 
They take charge of the immigrants on arrival and hold them in bare apartments, basements and warehouses until friends or relatives pay the smuggling fees. 
But as financiers of the smuggling operations, their cut is bigger.
 
Mistreatment of Immigrants
Many immigrants have been beaten and threatened with death when the money for their trips has been slow in coming, the police say. 
Others have been roughed up for no apparent reason.
In June, the police found eight Chinese immigrants being held in a house in Sheepshead Bay after a 21-year-old Chinese woman escaped by climbing out a window as her captors slept. 
Several men, she said, had forced her into a car shortly after her arrival without documents at Kennedy International Airport, taken her to the house in Sheepshead Bay and raped her repeatedly. 
Two men in the group said they were beaten every day.
Like other Asian gangs in New York, the police say, the Fuk Ching also make money by shaking down businesses in Chinatown for protection money, providing guards for illegal gambling houses and brothels and by serving as couriers and bodyguards for drug dealers.
"But they prefer smuggling people," said one Federal investigator who spoke on condition of anonymity, "because it's very lucrative and the risk is much lower. 
The worst they can get for an immigration violation is five years in jail. 
If they get caught with a package of heroin, it's much worse. 
They could go away for 20 years."
 
Pressure From the President
Until the tramp steamer, the Golden Venture, ran aground off Queens and 10 people died, the chances of a smuggler getting caught or even receiving a five-year sentence were slim because investigators focused on crimes that carried bigger penalties. 
But President Clinton has now ordered the Justice Department to apply racketeering statutes, which provide for stiffer penalties, to human cargo smugglers.
Law-enforcement officials said the Fuk Ching leader, Mr. Guo, would be charged with ordering the murders of two subordinates, gunned down while they were getting telephone beepers in an electronics shop on Allen Street in Chinatown in early January, in the start of the battle for control of the human cargo business.
In April, two of Mr. Guo's allies were wounded by gunmen as they sat in a parked van on a darkened street in Bridgeport, Conn. 
A little more than a month later, one of the men wounded in Bridgeport and two of Mr. Guo's brothers were shot to death in what the police described as a gang "safe house" in Teaneck, N.J. 
Another of Mr. Guo's supporters died in the Teaneck shooting and one other was wounded.
