
It isn't all crinoline dresses and cute blinky blue eyes in the doll business.
Last Christmas, Georgetown Collection Inc., a hot maker of collectible porcelain dolls, bet the survival of its business on play dolls for girls aged 6 to 11. 
It called the line the Magic Attic Club, 80 percent of which would have to be sold during the holidays.
Then the newest shipment of dolls from the company's factory in China arrived. 
And suddenly, six weeks before Christmas Day, the company's 100 employees found themselves scrambling to correct a disastrous and unforeseen product flaw: the dolls' arms were falling off.
For thousands of parents and little girls who had sent in their orders, Christmas morning was in jeopardy. 
But Georgetown faced nothing less than its demise. 
And so, secretaries, accountants, managers and the company's president toiled long into the night for weeks to reassemble 40,000 dolls and fix 80,000 little arms.
That effort saved the company and gave Magic Attic such a smashing season that it is now poised for success. 
Takeover offers and deals from feature-film producers, television syndicators and CD-ROM entrepreneurs are pouring in.
But there is no happy ending just yet. 
The privately held Georgetown is still struggling. 
Rich with ideas, expertise and enterprise, but capital poor, it is trying to keep up with skyrocketing demand while eyeing its potential competitors warily.
In many ways, Georgetown can be seen as a paradigm for thousands of small American companies that are trying to exploit their specialized knowledge, pulling themselves up by their own entrepreneurial bootstraps.
Initial success inevitably leads to the more daunting problems of rapid expansion: staffing, warehousing, distribution demands and foreign sourcing crises, as well as a host of unforeseen competitive forces beyond their control.
"This is the point where companies grow or fail," acknowledged Gretchen Springer, Georgetown's 37-year-old vice president for marketing, a former new-product manager at Johnson & Johnson. 
"We're at that point -- in response to demand -- where the company now has to manage its success and make the transition to the theoretical opportunity."
In a matter of months last year, Georgetown had to expand drastically the capacity of its telephone order center and the software that served it and enlarge its inventory and order-fulfillment systems.
But even then, Georgetown found itself in a Yuletide competition for part-time phone-order-takers with the Maine mega-cataloguer L. L. Bean, which is only 15 minutes away.
Rapidly expanding entrepreneurial companies like Magic Attic "need capital and resources to take their business to a higher plane, yet it's hard to maintain consistency and credibility with their banks without a long track record," said Jill S. Krutick, an analyst with Smith Barney. 
"Managing the cost side of the business is crucial, because inevitably they will be tested on their pricing by new competitors."
Like many young businesses, Magic Attic Club is a refinement of an existing product. 
The market for high-priced vinyl dolls was created by the Pleasant Company of Middleton, Wis., 10 years ago with its then history-themed American Girls collection. 
Using glossy catalogues and books to fire older girls' imaginations, Pleasant established a growing new market niche as the age of girls who play with Mattel Inc.'s Barbie became younger, analysts say. 
Although giant toy companies have generally ignored older girls, small companies like Magic Attic and Pleasant Company are offering dolls that sell for $40 to $130 and more.
A former teacher and textbook writer and publisher, Pleasant T. Rowland, the Pleasant Company's founder and president, termed Magic Attic "the most extensive effort at imitation" among her competitors -- "a shameless rip-off."
Jeffrey H. McKinnon, the 44-year-old president of Georgetown, credits Pleasant with "pioneering a unique new marketing approach to bringing a new type of play experience to older girls."
But he added, "We felt there was room in the market for another entrant," specifically one that offered finely detailed dolls for $59 instead of Pleasant's $82 and that focused on contemporary dolls.
While retailers are even now busily preparing for the Christmas toy season, the key to Magic Attic's business plan is direct response: only 5 percent of its 18-inch dolls are sold in retail stores, mostly collectors' specialty doll stores. 
Demand for Magic Attic dolls is driven not only by the colorful world of its catalogue but also by 17 books from the Magic Attic Press. 
The company has shipped 1.5 million $5.95 books to date and also profits from orders for accessories ranging from nightgowns to bedroom sets.
The dolls in the Magic Attic Club -- Alison, Megan, Heather and Keisha -- are four best friends who discover a trunk full of costumes in the attic of a neighbor's house. 
In the books, which bear more than a passing similarity to C. S. Lewis's "The Chronicles of Narnia," the dolls are transported by a magic mirror on adventures through time and space.
The explosive growth of the high-end doll-and-book category "is one of the biggest changes in the toy business in years," said Maurene Souza, an independent toy-industry consultant in Greenville, R.I., who for 20 years headed up girls' toy lines at big companies like Hasbro and Tyco. 
"This doll category is very hot."
Sean P. McGowan, an analyst with Gerard Klauer Mattison & Company, estimates the potential market at about $500 million in retail dollars, exclusive of books. 
Mr. McKinnon thinks it could be $600 million.
Analysts see the smaller, less expensive Barbie as a factor in the creation of this new market for girls. 
"Barbie used to go to age 8 or 9, but it has become a very young product," Mr. McGowan said. 
"Mattel calls it KGOY -- Kids Getting Older Younger."
But Mattel contends that girls up to age 12 still buy Barbie.
Mr. McKinnon, Harvard '74, and Ms. Springer, Dartmouth '80, have mapped out a business plan that is the antithesis of the large toy companies' drive for instant success and quick shelf turnover. 
"We don't want boom and bust, and we don't want fad," Ms. Springer said.
In 1994 Georgetown distributed 100,000 Magic Attic catalogues and sold more than 2,000 dolls, a giddy success for an untested, expensive product. 
Last year Georgetown got a $5 million working-capital investment from State Street Bank and Trust in Boston and Key Bank of Maine in Portland. 
"If Magic Attic had failed miserably, we'd have bankrupted the business," Mr. McKinnon said of his higher-priced collectible doll business, "and 1995 was our make-or-break year."
To be sure, the arm disaster nearly put Georgetown over the edge. 
"We discovered that out of a desire to make the doll's arms more pose-able our manufacturer in China changed the way the arm was attached to the body," Mr. McKinnon said. 
"We stopped shipping -- but we couldn't stop the demand."
"In 24 hours we figured out how to fix 80,000 arms on 40,000 dolls," he said. 
It was a complex assembly-line process, requiring 20 minutes per doll, that involved opening the package, undressing the doll, fixing the arms, then redressing and repacking the dolls. 
In the process, all the profits for Magic Attic evaporated for the year.
But on the bright side, Georgetown had $3 million in sales in 1995, and the company hopes to double that in 1996, largely in the coming holiday season.
These sales are minuscule in comparison with the $187 million in 1995 for the Pleasant Company, the Coca-Cola of upscale play-doll purveyors. 
Pleasant has sold more than three million of its 18-inch dolls since their debut in 1986.
After working in the industry, Mr. McKinnon started his collectible-doll business, Georgetown, in 1987. 
His expertise in working with Chinese factories for a direct-mail supplier enabled him to manufacture lifelike sculptured porcelain faces and eyes that were superior in quality yet cheaper than many other collectible dolls, which are sold to a passionate group of adult collectors for as much as $10,000.
From a zero presence in 1987, Mr. McKinnon quickly won 19 percent of the market, which he continues to hold. 
The problem was that the total audience for porcelain dolls in the United States is limited, estimated as five million avid collectors.
So Mr. McKinnon found a factory near Shenzhen, China, that specialized in high-quality vinyl molds, then brought his doll-making expertise to the production of toys for little girls.
The success of Pleasant Company and the challenge of Magic Attic have not gone unnoticed in the commercial dollocracy. 
"It's been a real awakening for the toy industry," Ms. Souza said.
Right now, Mattel "has no plans to enter the category," Lisa McKendall, a spokeswoman, said. 
Mattel's 11.5-inch Barbie has been selling for 37 years and has the largest sales for any toy ever: $1.4 billion.
But there are a number of other competitors in the expensive play-doll category. 
My Twinn of Littleton, Colo., sells $160 dolls.
And the Ertl Company, the nation's eighth-largest toy maker, will roll out its Girlhood Journey line of dolls for between $40 and $50 in retail stores this Christmas.
This new doll category is welcomed by some parents. 
"I think it's great that my daughter is playing with these dolls so creatively," said Cindy Rosenfeld of Woodbury, L.I. 
"There isn't that much in the toy stores for girls, and we have buckets of Barbies that are never played with. 
Now suddenly the girls are into dressing up dolls, and it's so wonderfully old fashioned."
"We play school with them, plan trips for them, set up tents and pretend we go camping with them," said 8-year-old Allison; she and her sister Amy, 6, have four Magic Attic dolls.
Other parents are stunned by doll-price escalation. 
Carol S. Jimenez of Long Beach, Calif., refused to buy an American Girls doll for her daughter Emily because "I think it's outrageous to spend $82 on a toy for an 8-year-old," she said.
So Emily used her own money to buy Felicity, one of the Pleasant Company's American Girls.
"I'm now saving up to buy Heather," a $59 Magic Attic doll, she said.
