
Of all the powerful people in the White House, there is probably no one -- not even the President -- to whom aides less like to say no. 
So Hillary Rodham Clinton's strong wish to lead the American delegation to the United Nations Conference on Women in Beijing next month has prompted much hand-wringing among senior diplomatic officials who are not sure she should go.
The geopolitics are plain enough: should the most prominent woman in the United States lend her presence to a conference on women's rights that happens to be held in a country with an abysmal record on human rights -- especially when China is holding the American human rights advocate Harry Wu on espionage charges and Chinese-American relations are rubbed raw.
The domestic politics are clear, too: Congressional Republicans are chomping to seize the issue as an example of the mishandling of foreign policy by Mr. Clinton, and to accuse him of coddling dictators as he once accused George Bush of being too soft on China. 
House and Senate leaders have called for an American boycott of the conference.
The office politics are murkier: knowing Mrs. Clinton's desire to lead the charge on an issue that has long concerned her, Administration officials, including the President in his news conference last week, have studiously avoided saying no, and some are ambivalent about the risks and benefits involved.
For her part, Mrs. Clinton argues -- as she did in a speech to a women's group in Denver last month that her aides took pains to fax to a reporter today -- that the conference is "an important opportunity to focus attention on women."
She said that the American delegation should "play a very big leadership role in shaping the agenda" and that "the United States should do all that it can to make sure that barriers to women's participation are broken down, and that training and credit and political involvement and health care and education are available to all women."
As the Clintons began the first full day of a 17-day vacation in the Grand Tetons this morning, the official word from the White House was that there was no official word. 
Unofficially, senior Administration aides in Washington gave slightly conflicting status reports.
Some in the West Wing and the State Department said the current plan was to wait a few more days to see if Mr. Wu might be released, before making a decision by next Monday, which they described as the last realistic point at which the logistical arrangements for such a trip could be made.
Aides to the First Lady insisted there was no "drop dead date," but they acknowledged pressure to make a decision soon, since Mrs. Clinton would leave for Beijing from V-J Day commemorations in Hawaii over the Labor Day weekend, and perhaps visit Mongolia, Cambodia and Thailand as well.
On Monday, Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher and the deputy national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, met separately with Mrs. Clinton to go over the pros and cons. 
Aides to both the First Lady and the President said today that Mrs. Clinton would rely on their judgment in making her decision.
Moreover, at least some officials outside the First Lady's staff have argued that Mrs. Clinton's visit could be good for Chinese-American relations in the long run. 
Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs and former Ambassador to Beijing, switched his vacation plans to be available to escort her.
The matter remains complicated, balancing the enormous attention Mrs. Clinton would win among the 50,000 delegates and reporters at the conference with practicalities as particular as the fate of one man.
Over the weekend, Mr. Wu's wife, Ching Lee, wrote to the First Lady, imploring her not to go. 
Mrs. Clinton has not yet replied, but officials said there was general agreement that it would be extremely problematic for Mrs. Clinton to attend if Mr. Wu remained in custody.
At the same time, these aides said the Administration was determined not to link Mrs. Clinton's decision too closely to Mr. Wu's fate, or to the status of Chinese-American relations in general, but to the mission of the conference.
Washington will be well represented at the once-a-decade conference in any event. 
The chief United States delegate to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, is the official head of the American delegation, which includes the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala, and former Gov. Thomas Kean of New Jersey. 
Mrs. Clinton would be the honorary chairwoman.
Officials said today that if she went, Mrs. Clinton would most likely stay in Beijing one day, address the conference, spend the night and then move on, holding no meetings with Chinese Government officials or dissidents to emphasize that she was attending an international conference, not honoring the Chinese.
But among the Administration's concerns is that however brief her stay, Mrs. Clinton could easily become embroiled in disputes or demonstrations by the various delegations at the conference, and that her visit would almost certainly be interpreted by the Chinese as a sign of American nonchalance about its human rights record.      
