
Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived early today to a Chinese capital under tight security for the Fourth World Conference on Women, the largest ever gathering of its kind.
During a stopover in Guam, she expressed hope that her participation would focus world attention on improving the condition of women, children and families.
"I have very high hopes that this will not be just a lot of talk, but will enable us to learn from one another," she said at a reception.
The conference opened here on Monday with a ceremony at the Great Hall of the People, featuring speeches, entertainment and the pomp that characterized the Chinese imperial court of old. 
The 10-day meeting of more than 4,000 government delegates will seek to produce a "platform for action" to influence the policies of world governments on women's rights in health, education, business and politics.
President Jiang Zemin and the Communist Party leadership welcomed the official delegations from 185 countries at the Great Hall of the People, where dancers in gilded costumes entertained an audience of 10,000 and where the secretary general of the conference, Gertrude Mongella of Tanzania, said: "A revolution has begun. 
There is no going back. 
There is no going back."
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan cut to the core of the issues when she addressed the opening session of the conference on Monday, raising her voice against violence directed at women.
Wearing a white veil as she spoke, she condemned the cultural traditions of Asian nations, including China, that have led to the deaths of millions of baby girls.
"How tragic it is that the pre-Islamic practice of female infanticide still haunts a world we regard as modern and civilized," she said. 
"Girl children are often abandoned or aborted. 
Statistics show that men now increasingly outnumber women in more than 15 Asian nations."
Ms. Bhutto said the preference for boys among Asian men had created pressure to abort "innocent, perfectly formed" baby girls.
"As we gather here today, the cries of the girl child reach out to us," she said. 
"This conference needs to chart a course that can create a climate where the girl child is as welcome and valued as the boy child."
Her remarks demonstrated that the most forceful call for action that may emerge from here in 10 days' time is a demand for international protection for women from violence, whether it is the rape and terror of "ethnic cleansing" and armed conflict or domestic battering.
Absent from Monday's opening ceremony because of illness was United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whose address was delivered by Ismat Kittani, the Under Secretary General.
With Beijing under a virtual state of martial law for several weeks, one of the victims of the pervasive security on Monday was Winnie Mandela, the estranged wife of the South African President, Nelson Mandela, and about 20 other South African delegates. 
Arriving late in Chinese-provided buses, they were barred at the door to the hall, and when they began chanting, "Let us in, let us in," they were surrounded by Chinese police officers.
After a vigorous shoving match that lasted several minutes, Mrs. Mandela and the group were forced to retreat..
Inside the Great Hall, the Chinese President, who made no reference to the many complaints about the intrusions of Chinese security forces at a related meeting of 30,000 women outside Beijing, said, "Such a propitious assembly of outstanding women has added luster to the city that radiates with the colors of the golden autumn."
"Women hold up half of the sky in human society," Mr. Jiang said, using a Chinese metaphor. 
But "over a long period of time," prejudice against women "like an invisible chain, fettered the hearts and mind of millions."
This conference, the first of its kind since the end of the cold war, will bring up uncomfortable issues arising from the collapse of Communist governments and the upsurge of ethnic conflicts that have brought enormous suffering to women and broadened their impoverishment in the third world.
In the eyes of millions of women, the "victory" of market-oriented democracies has remained indifferent to their transitional problems in the old Communist nations, especially where women are heads of households and care for children.
The underlying theme of the conference is the effort to get more women trained and ready for the political process in their countries and win for them the economic and educational rights that will raise them from their disproportionate poverty.
Of 1.3 billion people living in absolute poverty in the world, 70 percent are women. 
For many of them, the importance of this conference, the most ambitious of its kind since the first such meeting dedicated to women was held in Mexico City in 1975, is that it will again take up the issue that has sundered the national politics of many nations of the world: the reproductive rights of women and the issue of abortion. 
The forum met last in Nairobi in 1985.
In part, this meeting appears doomed to debate again policy statements and recommendations that were reached last year at the United Nations conference on population in Cairo, which formed what at the time seemed a strong international consensus that the most effective strategy for limiting population was providing women better access to education and reproductive health care, including contraception and safe abortion.
Thus armed, or empowered, many women chose to plan smaller families to balance the number of children against family resources, the conference found.
"For those of us in this field," said Dr. Fred Sai of Ghana, the president of the International Planned Parenthood Association, "we have learned the importance of teaching the balance of human numbers with human resources and human aspirations."
The debate will again pit the delegations of many national governments against the Vatican and an assortment of Islamic and conservative governments.
In the platform for action, much of the language on "reproductive rights" has been placed in brackets, indicating that one or more governments have registered an objection.
The platform carries no force of law, but women's advocates in many nations can invoke its influence in making arguments to legislatures to enact laws protecting women's rights.
A coalition of women's groups is circulating a petition calling on the United Nations to remove the Vatican's special status as the only religious organization with permanent observer rights in the body.
But the Vatican and other anti-abortion forces are expected to make a strong showing here.
In a letter to Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, a former Congresswoman and deputy chairwoman of the 45-member United States delegation, the president of the American Life League, Judie Brown, said, "On behalf of the 300,000 families supporting the work of the American Life League, I want to express my outrage at the insidious, deceptive manner in which the U.S. delegation" to the conference "continues to promote abortion, contraception and population control, all under the guise of human rights."
Mrs. Margolies-Mezvinsky was equally adamant. 
"The majority of nations have made it perfectly clear that they are not going to backslide and lose ground from Cairo," she said.
 
Maps show site of the Great Hall of the People.      
