
Beating out a competing bid by the General Motors Corporation, the Honda Motor Company announced today that it had won the right to manufacture passenger cars at a plant in southern China.
Honda executives said the venture, their first auto assembly operation in China's perplexing car market, would involve a $200 million investment with two local partners to produce a model resembling the Honda Accord. 
Honda will take a 50 percent stake.
Yet Honda is essentially betting it can succeed where the French auto maker PSA Peugeot Citroen failed. 
Honda plans to use the same plant in Guangzhou that Peugeot vacated early this year, frustrated by low output, rising debt and squabbles with its local partner.
Honda executives, like their counterparts at other auto makers, expressed faith that the long-term potential in China's passenger car market was worth the considerable near-term difficulties, like bureaucratic interference, inadequate sourcing and an insular distribution network.
"We believe the Chinese market has the potential for further expansion in the future," Yoshihide Munekuni, Honda's chairman, told a news conference in Tokyo. 
"We will study the possibility of exports from the Chinese plant in the future."
General Motors expressed disappointment, but said it would not affect a larger commitment to G.M.'s $1.5 billion plant now under construction in Shanghai, where it plans to produce Buicks in 18 months.
"We regret that it was not possible for Opel/G.M. to reach agreement with the authorities in Guangzhou," G.M. said. 
"We believe our proposal, which provided a substantial investment in Guangzhou, would have been a viable business opportunity for all parties concerned."
Honda's local partners are the Guangzhou Auto Group Corporation, which Peugeot executives blamed for making their venture more trouble than it was worth, and the Dongfeng Motor Corporation, already a partner with Honda at a plant that produces engine and suspension components for export to other Honda plants in Asia.
The new Honda venture plans to start modestly, calling for just 30,000 vehicles a year. 
The first cars will be assembled in late 1999, Honda said.
The new venture will also give Honda its first automobile sales channel in the Chinese market, Mr. Munekuni said in Tokyo, where the No. 3 Japanese auto maker's plans were announced together with an upbeat earnings report timed to coincide with a visit to Japan by China's Prime Minister, Li Peng. 
Honda said earnings rose 33 percent in the six months ended Sept. 
30, powered by strong exports to the United States and Europe.
Mr. Munekuni promised that the new venture would not assume Guangzhou Auto's existing debt, though its size was not disclosed.
"Debts of Guangzhou Peugeot Automobile will be settled by the Guangzhou government," he said.
The first step in a long series of approvals that Honda must win, the Honda chairman added, is to apply to the central Government for permission to start a feasibility study on the venture. 
Formal approval of the venture will follow at a later date, barring insurmountable obstacles.
Guangzhou Auto hopes to become one of a handful of auto-making conglomerates that emerge in China in the coming decade. 
Officials in Beijing have said they hope to consolidate the nation's 123 auto assembly plants into a dozen companies as part of an overall plan to make the nation's cumbersome state-run industry more efficient.
Though its potential is tantalizingly large, China's auto market is still relatively small. 
Passenger cars account for only about a quarter of the 1.5 million vehicles assembled here, which are mostly trucks and vans.
One perennially touchy issue in China's car manufacturing is the amount of local content in autos made by international car makers. 
Honda said 40 percent of the China-made Accords would be made with local components in the first year, though that number is expected to rise in subsequent years.
Required to work with a local partner, international auto makers have rarely been able to profit in China. 
The outlook for car makers has grown hazier in recent months, as car sales have dropped, and the recent economic downturn in Southeast Asia is not expected to help.
By contrast, Honda's most lucrative markets are in the West, which was reflected in the six-month earnings report the company released today. 
Helped by the diminished value of the yen, Honda's exports almost doubled to meet strong demand in Europe and the United States. 
Honda vehicle sales rose 16 percent in the United States, to about half a million. 
A popular seller was the CR-V sport utility vehicle, which Honda began selling in the United States in February. 
European buyers snapped up CR-V's and Civics.
The export markets compensated for weak sales in Japan. 
Like Japan's other car manufacturers, Honda has been hurt by an increase in the Japanese sales tax, the elimination of tax rebates and an increase in health insurance premiums. 
Also, mini-cars, which produce less profit, are accounting for a bigger portion of Honda's domestic sales.
In the fiscal first half, which ended Sept. 
30, net income rose to 126.49 billion yen, or $1.02 billion, from 94.91 billion yen a year earlier. 
Sales increased 13 percent, to 2.794 trillion yen from 2.479 trillion yen.
Honda also acknowledged that the Southeast Asian economic crisis would hurt its sales in the region. 
It lowered its full-year forecast for production in Asia outside of Japan by 30 percent, to 130,000 units. 
But it raised its full-year export target by 21 percent, to 570,000 autos.
      
