
Long accustomed to their boisterous, muckraking press, Hong Kong's journalists and news organizations are reeling from a series of body punches delivered by a senior Beijing official over the future of press freedom here.
Lu Ping, the Chinese official charged with setting up Hong Kong's new government after China retakes the territory from Britain on July 1, 1997, has issued a procession of comments starkly warning the crown colony's press that there will be limits on what can be published here under Chinese rule.
"It's all right if reporters objectively report," said Mr. Lu, while on a visit to Japan this month in his role as director of China's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office. 
"But if they advocate, it is an act. 
It has nothing to do with freedom of the press."
Mr. Lu's reference to "an act" appeared to invoke Article 23 of the Basic Law, which China has pledged to respect and is often described as Hong Kong's future constitution. 
Article 23 allows the banning of any "act" deemed treasonous, subversive or secessionist. 
Mr. Lu went on to specify that advocacy of Taiwan's independence could be prosecuted under Article 23.
Hong Kong's 59 newspapers and 675 periodicals are filled with columns of advocacy, blistering articles of opinion and untempered appeals for community and political activism. 
With China's reassertion of suzerainty now in sight, anxieties among Hong Kong's journalists are mounting.
"The message is pretty clear," said Ivan Tong, president of the Hong Kong Journalists Association. 
"On the one hand he is talking about Hong Kong people retaining the same degree of press freedom after 1997. 
On the other hand he's talking about a bottom line, a limit on press freedom. 
It's not press freedom at all."
In addition to Hong Kong's huge Chinese-language press, there are many international news magazines published in Hong Kong, including The Asian Wall Street Journal, Time and Newsweek's Asian editions, the Far Eastern Economic Review and Asia Week. 
And while all insist publicly that they intend to remain here under Chinese sovereignty, many publications are quietly looking at alternatives to Hong Kong.
"Our plan is to remain in Hong Kong," Donald M. Morrison, the editor of Time's Asian edition, said. 
"Not only are we staying in Hong Kong, we are expanding."
But he also cautioned, "As for 1997, obviously we will wait and see what the climate is in terms of freedom of information."
Now in its 50th year, the Far Eastern Economic Review, widely regarded as the region's preeminent weekly and now owned by Dow Jones, also insists that it intends to remain in Hong Kong after 1997, and seems more optimistic about the future climate for journalism here.
"We have every intention of remaining in Hong Kong," said L. Gordon Crovitz, the magazine's editor and publisher. 
"It's important to us that we always be able to report fairly and accurately and we have every expectation that we will be able to do that from our base in Hong Kong."
Urban C. Lehner, the editor of another Dow Jones publication, The Asian Wall Street Journal, said that the paper would also continue to be based in Hong Kong after 1997. 
"We're staying," he said. 
"We're committed to being in Hong Kong. 
We think Hong Kong is the place to be. 
It's the central spot in Asia. 
It's the heart of covering the best story in Asia, which is China."
But a senior Journal executive acknowledged that the company had already scouted alternative locations to Hong Kong. 
"Losing Hong Kong is one fifth of our readers," he said. 
"Advertisers want those readers. 
Not delivering a morning paper to those readers would be the biggest loss. 
But basically, we could move in a minute."
For most of Hong Kong's printed press, however, the option of moving after 1997 does not exist, and editors here are taking a grim view of Mr. Lu's recent statements.
"His comments brought out the anxieties journalists have had for a long time," said Daisy Yet Wah Li, a senior editor at Ming Pao, one of the territory's most serious newspapers. 
"Is merely reporting on Tibetan independence or Taiwan independence advocacy?
What about commentary?
What about a survey that Hong Kong people want independence and we put it on the front page?
We always thought that this would be a problem."
John Schidlovsky, director of the Freedom Forum Asian Center, an independent research center on press issues and a training center for journalists here, said Mr. Lu's comments reflected an unfamiliarity with the role a free press plays in a free society.
"Advocacy is part of free speech and should be allowed," said Mr. Schidlovsky. "If he rules that out, then that's suppression of free speech."      
