
Hong Kong's new government, which took office with the former British colony's handover to China a week ago, moved today to establish a new electoral system that is likely to reduce the number of pro-democracy members in future legislatures while insuring dominance of pro-business and pro-Beijing lawmakers.
Pro-democracy politicians denounced the move as a retreat from the political liberties and rights that were enjoyed by Hong Kong residents in the last years of British colonial rule. 
At the same time, the new government, led by Tung Chee-hwa, who was appointed by Beijing, announced substantial reductions in the number of voters who could take part in the elections to be held for a new legislature next year.
"Our key considerations," said Nicholas Ng, a senior civil servant charged with enacting Mr. Tung's electoral plans, "are to have an open and fair election, to achieve a balanced participation of all groups and individuals, and to constitute a credible legislature."
China ordered the abolition of Hong Kong's old legislature, elected in 1995 under political reforms instituted by Chris Patten, Britain's last governor here.
China asserted that a fully elected body violated agreements between London and Beijing.
Just hours after China resumed control of Hong Kong last week, an appointed body known as the Provisional Legislature was sworn in. 
Then, all elected councils in the territory were reconstituted with appointed, pro-Beijing members, many of whom lost in the 1995 elections.
Mr. Tung and his senior advisers have repeatedly expressed their disdain for representative government, insisting that an oligarchy of the business elite is the best system for preserving Hong Kong's prosperity.
Criticism of Mr. Tung's decision today was swift.
"Chinese leaders have said that Hong Kong would be more democratic under Chinese rule," said Martin Lee, the leader of the Democratic Party, which held the largest number of seats in the old legislature. 
"Now we see what democracy with Chinese characteristics looks like."
Under the new electoral arrangements, the voting system that brought the democrats a near majority in the election of 1995 will be scrapped. 
In its place, a proportional representation system will be introduced to elect 20 of the legislature's 60 seats. 
Unlike the 1995 election, in which candidates who garnered the most votes in a district were elected, the top three to five candidates who win the highest number of votes in vastly larger districts will win seats. 
The remaining 40 seats will be selected almost entirely by the leaders of Hong Kong's business sector and the professions. 
The next election is to be held sometime before next July.
This system, which has been supported by pro-Beijing parties, was designed, according to its proponents, to dilute the influence of the Democratic Party and its allies.
Lau Siu-kai, a professor of law at Chinese University, described the goal of the new system in an interview with the South China Morning Post earlier this year: "People always misunderstand that we purposely designed this voting system to exclude the Democratic Party. 
In fact, its objective is to prevent political parties from winning."
Mr. Ng defended the new government's move. 
"We will never be able to find a perfect system," he said. 
"In the final analysis, the system we adopt must be perceived as fair and open."
      
