
Tung Chee-hwa, the man chosen by Beijing to run Hong Kong, left today for his first visit to the United States since Britain returned this territory to Chinese control on July 1. 
He said the visit was intended to correct American "misconceptions" about Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong that Mr. Tung will discuss with President Clinton, members of Congress and interested Americans is flourishing economically. 
But it has no democratic institutions, has undergone a sharp contraction of civil liberties and apparently has three times the number of people it did 25 years ago who are living in poverty, in part because of an aging population and the large number of immigrants from China who do not have the skills that enable them to work in an increasingly non-manufacturing ecnonomy.
"I'm looking forward to going to the U.S.," said Mr. Tung, a shipping tycoon. 
"Really to tell my friends in America what is happening in Hong Kong, not only about the transition, but what is going on."
Mr. Tung was dissuaded from visiting the United States in the months leading up to Chinese rule, in part because of criticism over his decision to roll back certain rights.
Now, however, with two months of calm behind him, Mr. Tung said he is ready to spread news of Hong Kong's success under Chinese rule to skeptics in the United States, particularly to members of Congress who have been critical of Beijing.
Mr. Tung said he expected to meet with President Clinton, who met last spring with Martin Lee of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, which opposed Beijing's move to disband the elected legislature. 
He also hopes to meet with other Administration officials and key members of Congress.
"The Government is functioning as normal," said Mr. Tung. "The financial market is moving. 
Demonstrations are continuing, arguments everywhere. 
The legislative body is just as assertive as before, challenging everything we want to do."
Still, many people here, including Mr. Tung himself, believe he will face a hostile audience in explaining why Hong Kong is considered not ready for democracy.
Mr. Tung has proposed an electoral system that would give Hong Kong's leading companies and banks a major say in the legislature's composition.
Under his proposal, seats would be distributed to parties according to their proportion of total votes. 
A third of the seats would be chosen by companies, banks and professional associations. 
This arrangement is likely to prevent the Democratic Party, which won the largest share of seats in the fully elected legislature of 1995, from winning a large number of seats in elections next May. 
Because even losers in the elections will gain legislative seats, as permitted under a proportional voting system, and because companies are dominated by conservative business people, the Democratic Party's share of seats is almost certain to fall sharply.
Mr. Tung's view of how things are going is not shared by legislators who were removed from office by China on July 1 and replaced with a body of lawmakers of its choosing.
"It is a step backward -- it's highly undemocratic," said Mr. Lee, describing Mr. Tung's proposal.
The rosy picture painted by Mr. Tung was clouded somewhat today by a report by a group of university academics, the Hong Kong Social Security Society, which found that 856,000 people, 14 percent of the territory's population, are living beneath the poverty line of $358 a month.
