
There are more sharks on the land in this want-to-get-rich town, Gordon Y. S. Wu likes to say, than in Victoria Harbor, the less than fragrant waters of Hong Kong's busy port where the 58-year-old engineer-developer will fearlessly take a plunge.
Nominally, Mr. Wu has lost a public bet that he could finish his Hong Kong-to-Guangzhou highway, the first superhighway into China, by September. 
Then he bet on Dec. 
31. He just keeps losing the bet, so jumping into the harbor is his self-imposed penalty.
But in the grander scheme of Mr. Wu's ambition, he seems to be winning. 
He wants to pave southern China with a modern and profitable toll-highway system while simultaneously building a dozen or more huge electric-power plants under license to the Beijing Government.
 
A Region to Contend With
Symbolically, the completion by early- to mid-1994 of the first six-lane, 76-mile superhighway will be a major event in burnishing the image of the Pearl River Delta as an integrated manufacturing corridor.
Though it will take years to repair the giant red scar that southern China's landscape now bears from the army of bulldozers rearranging its topography, Mr. Wu's transportation bridge will add to the economic nimbus that continues to billow in the region.
The $13-a-vehicle toll road will merge Hong Kong, Shenzhen and Guangzhou into a single sprawling metropolis that the three cities will become after 1997 when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control from its status now as a British Crown Colony. 
The area is already something of an urban megalopolis.
 
Respected for His Success
Though he is a number of months behind schedule in the mammoth highway construction project that has taken more than four years and, by the time it is finished, as much as $1.4 billion to build, Mr. Wu has developed an impressive record for overall performance in laying the foundations critical to sustaining southern China's economic boom. 
His longtime Hong Kong property-development firm, Hopewell Holdings Ltd., is listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
By next year Mr. Wu's company, with two coal-fired power plants operating in Guangdong province, will be providing 35 percent of the south China province's electrical needs.
With the opening of the first leg of the highway project for the 30,000 vehicles a day crossing the frontier between Hong Kong and China, Mr. Wu will have established himself as a prototype developer, using foreign capital and management know-how to attack the bottlenecks in China's transportation and energy industries.
"There is no way China can get the money themselves to do the job," he said in an interview. 
"If I start working on nothing else but power generation until the day I die, I still can't fulfill 10 percent of what they want."
Largely because he has defined a market in a development area critical to China's leaders, Mr. Wu, as much as any Hong Kong businessman, has the confidence of top Beijing officials.
"China never wanted to open up this sector, and I was the first one to crack it in 1984," he said, recalling that his final negotiations were with Li Peng, an electrical engineer by training who is now Prime Minister. 
"I would say he reluctantly agreed at that time," Mr. Wu said.
As a result, these days the contracts just keep coming. 
And thanks to Beijing's enthusiasm and the China fever that is rolling through capital markets in the West, he has all the financial backing he can handle.
Mr. Wu started an eight-city American fund-raising tour in San Francisco last month to sell $374 million worth of stock to partially finance the power plants.
"By the time I hit Denver," he said, "the stock was all sold, so I suggested we forget about the Eastern cities because I had work to do, but the underwriters insisted that we go through the motions."
One key to Mr. Wu's China strategy is to make sure that his joint-venture partners in China, usually units of province governments, are making as much money or more than he is. 
Another is to remove himself from the distribution of electric power. 
His plants will sell wholesale to China's distribution network, which will add its own distribution charge.
"They are making more than we are," he said of the Chinese "We get a minimum of 15 percent. 
If we don't get that, then I won't bring my bulldozers in."
In fact, the incentive clauses and special features of the contracts allow higher returns, analysts say.
Mr. Wu's friends say he has labored mightily on the highway project to overcome snags to land acquisition in China, where any of a hundred local village chiefs in the path of the highway could hold him up -- and did.
The six-lane road will rid the region of the grueling two-day, bumper-to-bumper round-trip from Hong Kong's port to Guangzhou's factories. 
Once the highway is open, it will be possible to make the round-trip in a morning's drive.
The highway's potential for revenue does not stop at the off-ramps. 
Mr. Wu has development rights to 10 major interchanges along the way with more than seven million square feet of potential retail and office space.
 
Some Negative Aspects
In an analysis of the roadway's progress, S. G. Warburg Securities said in a report issued in the fall that delays and cost overruns could conceivably push the opening of its final segments to the end of 1994, even into early 1995. 
In such a case, the $1 billion budgeted cost could end up as high as $1.4 billion.
"Frequent press comments by Hopewell in respect of early completion and early revenue collection have not materialized," the report said, adding, "The risks that the company has exposed itself to by the apparent lack of programming and detailed budgeting are significant and it is this combination of unrealistic statements" and "the large sums of equity involved which give rise to concern."
These warnings notwithstanding, the capital markets have not flinched in their support of Mr. Wu.
He persuaded the Hong Kong Stock Exchange to let him spin off the electricity business from Hopewell Holdings. 
When he brought the stock of the new company, Consolidated Electric Power Asia, to investors in Hong Kong, Tokyo, London and American cities, Mr. Wu said the issue was quickly oversubscribed.
Analysts who a few years ago wondered aloud whether Mr. Wu was taking on too much with forays into the power industry in the Philippines and China simultaneously, are now loath to bet against him.
The new subsidiary, Consolidated Electric Power Asia, will continue to aim for the enormous market for power plants in China.
 
A Man to Emulate
Officials in Beijing have established a goal of installing 12,000 megawatts of capacity each year, a daunting challenge yet necessary to prevent Chinese factories' shutting down for lack of power.
To ask officials in the Power Industry Ministry about the challenge is to hear them mention Mr. Wu, whom they would like to clone onto dozens of other deals around the country.
Mr. Wu and his top executives say they have 20 letters of intent from various Chinese provinces to build power stations. 
In a prospectus, the company says it has preliminary agreements to build a 1,320-megawatt station in Guangxi province, letters of intent to build plants capable of putting out 6,600 megawatts in Jiangsu, Henan and Shandong provinces, and preliminary discussions on 3,900 megawatts in two other cities.
Mr. Wu says he would like to develop an assembly-line concept for power plants, each coal-fired and each standardized in design so he can demand better discounts from major equipment suppliers.
Some eyebrows have been raised among Hong Kong stock analysts, who say that Mr. Wu's introduction of a new power subsidiary represents a prospective price-earnings ratio of about 40 times the unit's forecasted 1994 earnings of $27 million.
Yet a number of analysts point out that the offering represents an investment in the deals Mr. Wu is likely to conclude as well as in the demand for his demonstrated ability to deliver power plants ahead of schedule and basically within budgets.
 
Vision to Last a Lifetime
A Princeton University-educated civil engineer, Mr. Wu is known for thinking big, and at times he dwells on the notion that he can now conceptualize projects that will take the rest of his working life.
For example, in one corner of his office, Mr. Wu, a Hong Kong resident, keeps a map that represents his dream contract -- building a highway linking Hong Kong and Guangzhou to the Yangtze River industrial center at Chongqing, a 700-mile stretch through some of China's most challenging terrain.
"I am 58," he said. 
"I would really like to build that highway."
