
Two things changed Jimmy Lai's life forever: half a chocolate bar that he ate in 1957 and the massacre at Tiananmen Square in Beijing 32 years later.
"When I was 9, I was in Canton, just selling things on the street, stealing things," he said, recalling the young Lai Chi Ying.
"I tried to help this guy -- he had two big bags," he said. 
"A packet of something fell out of his pocket, and he broke it in half and said to eat it. 
I tasted this and said, 'What is that?'
He said, 'Chocolate, chocolate from Hong Kong.'
From that day, I said I wanted to go to Hong Kong."
Three years later, curled up in the bottom of a smelly, wave-tossed teacup of a boat, he was smuggled to Hong Kong.
The former street urchin came to run one of Asia's biggest chains of clothing stores, Giordano's, and to publish Hong Kong's largest circulation weekly magazine, which is as fat as a telephone book for a mid-sized town. 
The journal of politics, crime, fashion and life styles has managed with its exposes of corruption to enrage China and to provoke Hong Kong's triads, its violent criminal gangs.
In the last few months, firebombs have been thrown at Mr. Lai's home and paint at his clothing stores, and the police believe the gangs are responsible. 
Then in early July, China sued his magazine for libel.
"I don't care," said Mr. Lai, who is quick to smile, fond of talk and keeps his watch 30 minutes fast. 
"If we don't do it, someone else will."
When he arrived in Hong Kong, he left behind a China in the throes of Mao's Great Leap Forward industrialization program, which led to famines in which millions of Chinese starved to death. 
Like many of his fellow refugees, he brought with him little education or skills, but a ferocious determination to succeed. 
He went to work stitching gloves in a factory.
"I started studying English when I was 13," he said. 
"Whenever people shouted at me, were swearing at me, they shouted in English -- even the Chinese. 
I said I had to learn that damn language."
Seven years later, he had become the manager of a large textile factory. 
"From there I worked until I started my own factory," he said. 
"I found I could not take orders from other people."
His lack of education gave him an "inferiority complex," he said.
"So I studied and studied and studied," he said. 
"Even today, I will wake up at night and read."
In 1975, Mr. Lai opened his garment factory. 
"I sold to retailers like the Limited and the Gap," he said. 
"But I wanted to sell my clothes myself."
He picked the name Giordano's from an Italian resaurant in New York to camouflage the Hong Kong brand. 
The company took off after 1986, when he hired professional managers, he said, and now has 300 stores throughout Asia and $350 million in annual sales.
"But I was bored by retail," he said.
Then, on June 4, 1989, Chinese troops and tanks roared through the streets of Beijing, killing hundreds of people demanding democracy and protesting corruption. 
Mr. Lai watched on television, never moving from the images on his screen.
"There was no way back," he said. 
"I realized those guys had been closed from the world for 40 years. 
They had no information. 
And I realized information is the biggest business. 
So for me, to be in the media business became the greatest challenge."
Describing his publication, Next Magazine, he said, "I am, in effect, selling freedom."
Despite his wealth and the easier life he could have, he has kept the habit of hard work, focusing his energy on his new enterprise.
Since Next Magazine's inception three years ago, its circulation has soared to 180,000, the highest in Hong Kong. 
By paying high salaries, Mr. Lai has lured the colony's most aggressive reporters and its best writers. 
And while there are pages and pages of fashion, news of movie stars and social notes, the magazine's ground-breaking exposes have etched it clearly on the scene.
Mr. Lai's reporters have documented the way in which the Hong Kong gangs have insinuated themselves into the colony's life, controlling minibus concessions, extortion rackets and call girl rings. 
"They threw a Molotov in my house a couple of weeks ago," he said, laughing. 
"It exploded in the yard. 
They came in and destroyed my office, so now we have this security here. 
They destroyed my computers. 
They attacked my stores.
"I think they're very powerful -- no doubt. 
But if they threaten me, they won't kill me. 
If they want to kill me, they won't threaten me."
Then he took on the Chinese Government, reporting how about $9 million collected here in Hong Kong for poor children in China was misappropriated by local Chinese officials. 
"The kids never received any money, so we wrote about it," he said.
With China scheduled to take over the Government of Hong Kong from Britain in 1997, successful business people here are more inclined to curry its favor. 
But Mr. Lai believes that there is little point in capitulating to efforts at intimidation.
"The next three years will be very exciting, exciting in a positive sense and exciting in a frightening sense," he said. 
"In China, there is no trust left. 
That is the greatest disaster Communism has left behind in Chinese culture. 
There's no shame there. 
There's no sense of what is right, only of what is do-able. 
There has been a total corruption of the moral code."
Mr. Lai, who said he plans to stay after China takes over, heaved his work-shirt-clad shoulders. 
"Those Commies are fading very fast," he said. 
"They belong to the past. 
I think we are the future."
