
On a warm spring night last month, the entrepreneurs and billionaires who built modern-day Hong Kong held an opulent dinner here at the Four Seasons Hotel to send the Washington establishment an urgent message: Calm down.
Don't overreact to every Chinese pronouncement about the future of Hong Kong, they warned members of Congress and Administration officials. 
Don't assume the worst about restrictions on civil liberties. 
And most important, let us handle Beijing.
"We are not in trouble," Victor Fung, a prominent property owner, insisted that night to members of Congress and Administration officials who deal daily with Asia. 
"We are not panicked."
In truth, the Hong Kong business elite is panicked -- but about how to manage Washington, not Beijing. 
The executives' fear is that Congress, with no other tools than economic sanctions at hand, might lash out in response to a minor roundup of protesters or a modest political crackdown, and send an already rocky relationship between the United States and China into a costly and bitter deterioration.
Formally, the United States will simply be an observer on July 1 when Prince Charles ends Britain's 155-year-long control over Hong Kong, the booming financial capital of Southeast Asia, and the Chinese reclaim a territory whose success has profoundly changed China's direction. 
But as a matter of economic Realpolitik, Washington is the central player.
All sides in the arguments and political maneuvering leading up to the turnover agree that America is the key to Hong Kong's future, both as a huge investor and trading partner, and as the single loudest international power calling for Beijing to respect Hong Kong's autonomy.
And in recent months everyone from the departing British to the bullish-sounding billionaires of the Better Hong Kong Foundation, and from labor unionists to Martin Lee, the chief democracy advocate, have come here in hopes of manipulating the political and economic levers in Washington's hands, to their own ends.
The executives are calling for Washington to do nothing, arguing that strong reactions can only anger Beijing. 
The unions and democracy advocates see the United States as their only brake on Beijing but decline to specify how Washington should use its leverage.
Meanwhile, the Clinton Administration has begun a lobbying campaign of its own in Hong Kong. 
In a series of strong but precisely worded warnings, it has argued that the markets rather than the White House or Congress will ultimately punish the Chinese if Hong Kong's autonomy and civil liberties are trampled.
"My message is simple," Lawrence H. Summers, the Deputy Treasury Secretary, said in Hong Kong recently. 
"There is no firewall between economic freedom and freedom in its many other dimensions.
"The free flow of information, the ability of people to remain free, to enter into transactions, to speak out: these are all the essential elements of free markets and a strong financial system," he said.
The Administration is betting that Mr. Summers' economic credentials make it easier to deflect Chinese criticism that Washington is interfering in its economic affairs.
To Americans doing business in Hong Kong, Mr. Summers is even more direct, cautioning executives about the risks of becoming apologists for the Chinese or the new Beijing-appointed Hong Kong Government. 
"If the two systems are going to merge," he said, "it is in everyone's interest that China become more like Hong Kong than the other way around."
But it is far from clear that the message is winning converts in Hong Kong. 
And in Washington, what was once a clear policy to treat Hong Kong as a completely autonomous entity, even after Beijing takes control, has been muddied by the debate about relations with China.
In a nonbinding resolution passed overwhelmingly this spring, Congress threatened to place huge sanctions against Hong Kong exports if China were to crack down on civil rights. 
Within days, that strategy was bitterly criticized by all sides in Hong Kong, from pro-Beijing executives to democracy advocates and Governor Chris Patten, who said it would "deprive Hong Kong of its livelihood at the moment it most needs support."
Since then, Congressional leaders have backed away from that strategy. 
But on Tuesday, Senator Jesse Helms, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, opened a new front: He introduced a resolution to deny China "most favored nation" trading status, an annual exercise that this year could turn into a tough fight. 
He linked the matter to China's handling of the succession.
Mr. Helms declared that it was foolish to treat Hong Kong as a separate entity if the Chinese will not, and argued that China has already reneged on many promises to keep Hong Kong's political freedoms. 
"Yet the United States has failed to prevent or reverse a single violation" of the 1984 accords on the handover, he said.
On Thursday, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin is expected to respond, telling American executives who have pressed for permanent trade status for China that revoking the trade status would "harm Hong Kong in the name of helping it."
 
Primary Investor
Roads Lead to U.S., Not Britain or Japan
Hong Kong is known around the world as a Chinese city with a distinctly British flavor, down to the daily high tea at the Peninsula Hotel. 
But amid the giant towers of Exchange Square, home of the booming Hong Kong stock exchange, it is taken for granted that the territory's economic interests are far more enmeshed with the United States, whose consulate sits just below the Governor's Mansion.
"There is a reason that everyone with an interest in Hong Kong's future is running to Washington these days, not to London or even Tokyo," said Robert Broadfoot who runs a political-risk consulting firm in the city.
The linkage has been tightened by the long recession and stock-market fall in Japan. 
Despite China's looming control, many American companies have cut back their Tokyo offices and moved their Asian headquarters to Hong Kong in the last five years, hoping to use Hong Kong as a beachhead into both China and the booming nations of Southeast Asia.
Today there are more than 1,100 American companies with regional bases in Hong Kong, led by investment houses like Morgan Stanley and banks like Citicorp. 
The American Chamber of Commerce estimates, perhaps stretching the numbers a bit, that American-based companies employ 10 percent of Hong Kong's work force of 2.5 million.
During the cold war, the American Consulate in Hong Kong was a major outpost for the Central Intelligence Agency. 
Today it is a base for issues at the forefront of American relations with Asia: the crackdown on drug trafficking, organized crime and counterfeiting of American currency and American-made products. 
"For a long time the U.S. policy in Hong Kong was that the handover is a British problem, and we're sure they'll work it out," said Jeffrey S. Muir, a senior executive for Seagram Asia Pacific who has lived in Hong Kong for more than two decades. 
"People don't think that way any more."
As a matter of both law and official policy, Washington's stance toward Hong Kong after the transition is to treat it as a completely separate entity from China, building on China's commitment to treat Hong Kong under the doctrine of "one country, two systems."
"We can't insist that China respect Hong Kong's autonomy unless we do as well," Jeffrey Bader, the deputy assistant secretary of state for East Asia, said to Congress earlier this year.
But carrying out that policy creates difficult anomalies. 
Hong Kong will continue to have a separate textile quota from China's, even though Chinese manufacturers have cheated on those quotas for years by placing Hong Kong labels in Chinese-made goods. 
The Commerce Department will continue to keep separate trade statistics for the territory, rather than lump Hong Kong trade with China's.
Hong Kong will continue to have its own vote at the World Trade Organization in Geneva, infuriating Chinese officials, who say it is an outrage that the territory belongs to the organization while China is in a tense negotiation to enter. 
Nonetheless, Hong Kong officials insist that they, not Beijing, will decide how to vote within the organization.
There will even be separate export controls. 
Electronics makers, for example, will be able to ship sensitive technologies to Hong Kong that could not be sent without licenses to Beijing.
"The whole system presumes that the Chinese will truly respect their border with Hong Kong," a senior Western official said in Hong Kong recently. 
"The first time some supercomputer whisks through Hong Kong and shows up in a nuclear weapons lab in Shanghai, the assumptions begin to crack apart."
An American official here with a more jaundiced view of the policy -- and of its assumption that Hong Kong courts, customs service and financial regulators will remain completely independent -- put it another way.
"Here's the deal," he said. 
"After July 1 we pretend that Hong Kong isn't part of China, even though it is. 
And we still insist that Taiwan is still part of China, even though it isn't."
 
Civics Lesson
Market Strength Is Tied to Freedom
The Clinton Administration's political strategy before the transition is to constantly repeat Mr. Summers's argument that China cannot reap the financial benefits of a booming Hong Kong unless the city remains a place of open dissent, corruption-free courts and markets that are less rigged than in most of Asia.
"This was the best way we could think of to convey our message to the Chinese," a senior Western diplomat in Hong Kong argued recently.
"Lecturing them about human rights is a proven failure," he said. 
"So we are simply trying to make the point that if you want to have a solid stock market that people trust, you have to have newspapers that are free to write about the Dalai Lama, or the state of the independence movement in Taiwan. 
These are all subjects that deeply affect the atmosphere for investors."
So far, there are reasons to question whether the message has got through. 
In interviews in Hong Kong, many of the city's tycoons and market players dismissed that argument as overblown, saying that only Americans believe that free markets require American-style liberties.
Several Hong Kong leaders say that C. H. Tung, Hong Kong's chief executive-designate, has asked many of them, "If it works in Singapore, why not the new Hong Kong?"
The Japanese send a similar signal, telling Hong Kong's Government that Japanese investors want stabilityI above all else.
Perhaps the biggest test of Hong Kong's ability to separate the economic from the political lies in how it handles the "red chips," huge state-owned Chinese companies that have become the hottest properties on the Hong Kong exchange.
The companies come from a tradition of enormous secrecy, and they bridle at Hong Kong's requirement that companies publish extensive financial data, including subsidies they received from Beijing. 
In fact, their chief asset, the one propelling their share prices into the stratosphere, is their "guanxi," or connections to the Chinese leadership.
That means their future is completely bound up in the most delicate political decisions facing China's leadership -- for example, whether the leaders are willing to risk millions of jobs because the world demands that China open its domestic market and strip away the protections that have allowed some state-owned companies to operate as monopolies for decades.
Already some analysts for Western brokerage houses say they feel subtle pressure from their employers not to write anything too critical about the "red chips," for fear that Beijing will take lucrative business elsewhere. 
They would be hesitant, several said, to declare that a state-run company was cooking its books or bloated with far too many workers.
And Western investors wonder whether, after the transition, Hong Kong regulatory authorities will remain independent and uncowed by their new masters in Beijing, who many expect will press for less strict standards for companies with friends in high places.
"Watch what happens the first time the Hong Kong authorities delist some stock that has plenty of connections," the head of an American brokerage in Hong Kong said recently.
"The risk in Hong Kong," said a British official who is pessimistic about its future, "is that a stifling political correctness sets in."
If that happens, he adds, Beijing will discover that the markets are "self-sanctioning."
 
Anxieties at Home
Executives Object To Democracy Card
Hong Kong boosters say that Beijing understands that the markets must be free to exert such discipline on political meddling. 
The vast lobbying campaign that the city's rich and powerful have waged in Washington was prompted by the fear that Congress will feel compelled to do something anyway, egged on by prominent leaders of the Hong Kong opposition like Martin Lee, who reminded Congress during a visit here in April that the 1992 Hong Kong Relations Act "commits your Government to support a free, elected legislature in Hong Kong."
Mr. Lee's sympathetic reception on Capitol Hill infuriated many of Hong Kong's rich and powerful. 
"You want to know what would be a good American policy toward Hong Kong?"
Ronnie C. Chan, one of the most outspoken of the American-educated members of the Hong Kong elite leading the lobbying campaign in America, asked over dinner recently at Hong Kong's glistening cultural center. 
"This may sound simplistic, but try it: Leave us alone."
Mr. Chan is hardly alone in that view. 
So when major American magazines began predicting Hong Kong's demise under Chinese rule, he and other members of the city's wealthy elite began inviting journalists from around the world to visit Hong Kong, at the expense of the Better Hong Kong Foundation, to persuade them to paint a more flattering picture. 
Other executives have begun denouncing the American media, arguing that it is exaggerating the threat to make a better story when China takes the reins.
"The American view of what will happen is wildly out of whack," said Mr. Fung, who heads the Hong Kong Trade and Development Council. 
"Look, we have a barometer of Hong Kong's future -- the stock market. 
And investor confidence is very, very high. 
Who would have guessed that just a few years ago?"
In fact, polling data suggest a huge perception gap between Americans and Hong Kong residents.
A study just released by Wirthlin Worldwide, a political polling group, found that 60 percent of Americans polled believe that the people of Hong Kong would choose to become independent, but only 14 percent of the Hong Kong respondents agreed. 
A scant 4 percent of Americans thought Hong Kong would choose to become part of China, while 62 percent of Hong Kong residents thought their fellow citizens would elect Chinese rule. 
The margin of sampling error in the poll was 4.9 percent.
The poll numbers understate the concerns in places like the soda-can-strewn offices of the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions, on the third floor of a neighborhood of bars and brothels where tourists rarely tread.
There, elderly men who mix cement on the edge of Hong Kong harbor and drivers who deliver Coca-Cola say their links to the United States are their best protection after July 1. 
In April, just a day after Hong Kong's government-in-waiting announced new restrictions on political demonstrations to go into effect within hours of the turnover, a dozen or so of these workers met with John Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
"Political activity is how we fight for workers' rights," Lee Cheuk Yan, the general secretary of the federation told the visiting American labor chief. 
"Is a strike over wages a 'political activity?'
"
When the American union leader conveyed those concerns the next day to Mr. Tung, Hong Kong's future leader offered assurances that unions would not be affected by bans on political actions. 
But after Mr. Sweeney launched into a brief monologue on why Hong Kong must observe basic rights, Mr. Tung paused for a moment, then remarked, "You're too caring."
