
Britain and China announced today that they would resume talks next week on Hong Kong's future, a decision that suggests a long and bitter impasse may have finally been broken.
The prospect of Beijing and London talking to each other instead of yelling at each other reflects the desire in each capital to defuse the uncertainty over Hong Kong's future. 
The talks mean that it again seems possible for Hong Kong to have a moderately smooth transition to Chinese rule in 1997.
The announcement comes as China and Britain appear to be assuming a more pragmatic and accommodating stance since the dispute began when Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, proposed new measures in October to broaden democracy in the territory.
Relations had been so brittle that China threatened to set up a shadow government in the territory, and to dishonor contracts that straddle 1997.
 
'A Victory for Common Sense'
"I think that this is a victory for common sense," Mr. Patten told reporters in London.
At the senior-level talks, to begin on April 22, Britain will be represented by its Ambassador, Sir Robin Mclaren, and China's representative will be Deputy Foreign Minister Jiang Enzhu. 
A terse statement, issued in London and Beijing, suggested that the British conceded to the Chinese on certain issues.
Britain appeared to drop its demand that Hong Kong representatives attend as official members of the delegation. 
Instead, several Hong Kong officials will join the talks as consultants.
Mr. Patten's proposals essentially try to increase the number of Hong Kong residents who can directly or indirectly elect the territory's legislators. 
While the proposals fall far short of democracy as it is practiced in the West, they have outraged China, which at one point threatened to unravel the political structure if Hong Kong's legislature approved and enacted them.
The announcement today is likely to arouse concern among democracy campaigners in Hong Kong that the British Government, having raised their hopes, is now caving in to Beijing. 
Pro-democracy organizations have warned that British officials are under strong pressure to reach some pact with China, even it it means agreeing to Chinese proposals that would narrowly constrict the role of elections in the territory.
Last month China said it would "set up a new kitchen," a vague Chinese idiom that was interpreted by many as meaning China would set up a shadow government or at least a second power structure to rival the British.
But Lu Ping, the Chinese official responsible for Hong Kong affairs, has recently tried to construe the term more narrowly, so that it refers merely to Chinese preparations for the takeover of the territory. 
Mr. Lu went out of his way to criticize Mr. Patten last month -- calling him a "man to be condemned by history" -- but he also appeared to try to reassure investors, saying China wants to insure stabilityI and prosperity in Hong Kong.
Mr. Lu also made a gesture of peace by reiterating China's support for a new $16 billion airport project, which has been delayed ever since it was announced more than three years ago.
