
Over the last two centuries or so, Britain has ruled great chunks of the globe -- an empire, it was said, on which the sun never set.
Now, in a matter of hours, this easternmost shard of that empire will be relinquished, returned to China after 156 years of colonial suzerainty, leaving Britain with little more than a handful of islands, mostly in the Caribbean. 
Yet, the Hong Kong that returns to China is in many ways recognizable less as a place Chinese than a place indelibly touched by the ways of the West.
There are, to be sure, the obvious remainders of colonial rule -- coins with Queen Elizabeth's portrait still jingling in pockets, motorists hewing to the left side of the road, the local yacht club clinging stubbornly to its appellation "Royal," the tea and scones served on fine china at the Mandarin Hotel, and above all the use of English.
Yet, Britain has bequeathed Hong Kong more than visible trinkets of its reign.
Derek Davies, for decades the helmsman of Asia's pre-eminent news magazine, the Far Eastern Economic Review, assayed colonialism's central accomplishment in a speech he delivered not long ago titled, "Two Cheers for Colonialism."
"The British," he asserted, "were the Romans, the builders and administrators, no intellectual nonsense, although certainly they thought they were bringing civilization -- industry, modernity, the Christian religion."
"Harbors, roads, railways and imperial cities," were built, he continued, "in addition to less palpable but more important benefits such as the rule of law, the legal system, parliamentary democracy and a free press."
There are some here who are unimpressed by this heritage, preferring instead to see Hong Kong's entire colonial experience as an affront to Chinese history and civilization. 
Propounding this view most forcefully in the last year has been Zhou Nan, the senior Chinese official here, who invariably describes the return to Chinese sovereignty as the moment "when the yoke of colonialism" is shrugged off.
Indeed, Britain's resort to war from 1839 to 1842 to force the Chinese to buy opium from the firm of Jardine, Matheson and its wresting of the island of Hong Kong as booty from Beijing hardly presaged much in the way of morality or benevolence.
Official Chinese lamentations over British perfidy neatly overlook the venality and collaboration of a huge measure of Qing dynasty officialdom with the opium trade. 
Yet the fact remains that force of arms won Hong Kong for the British empire and cemented it, in 1898, with a 99-year lease on adjoining mainland territory.
In many ways, however, Hong Kong was different from other British colonial possessions, whether in the New World, Africa or the Indian subcontinent, virtually all of which are now long independent.
"I think Hong Kong is not a typical colonial situation," said Charles Aylmer, head of the University Library's Chinese Department at Pembroke College, Cambridge. 
"Rather paradoxically, I think the reason Hong Kong outlasted all the other colonies is because of the really strange situation with the lease."
"It is because everyone knew it was coming to an end that it lasted as long as it has," he said. 
"If it had been a simple occupied territory, there is no reason it would not have ended in 1949," the year Mao Zedong established the People's Republic of China.
The crude barbarity with which Hong Kong passed into British control was quickly supplanted by the rudiments of an administrative and legal system modeled on Britain's own. 
Democracy was not in the cards, though, for more than a century.
Still, Britain's last Governor, Christopher Patten, has been buoyantly defending the record of British stewardship. 
In his final appearance before Hong Kong's legislature, a fully elected body that China will dismiss on Tuesday, Mr. Patten summarized what he believes to be British colonialism's bequest to its last Asian territory.
"I think that Hong Kong is an astonishing Chinese success story," he told the 60-member legislature. 
"But I think it's a success story with British characteristics. 
I think that what Britain has helped provide as a result of the accidents of history is a framework within which people, particularly in the last 50 difficult years in this region, a framework within which Chinese men and women -- ordinary Chinese men and women -- have been able to do extraordinary things. 
I don't think any fair-minded observer would deny any role for British administrators or the rule of law in what has happened. 
But equally, any British observer, any of my predecessors as Governor, like this Governor, would stand back in awe at what Chinese men and women have managed to do here in Hong Kong given the chance, given the chance to be free in an economic and political sense."
More than any of his 27 predecessors, Mr. Patten in his five-year tenure moved Hong Kong toward a genuine measure of democratic governance and accountability. 
In 1995, for the first time, Hong Kong's Legislative Council was fully elected, directly and indirectly. 
Other local councils are all filled by elected members. 
It is one British legacy that will be nullified.
China will dismantle those institutions of governance on Tuesday. 
Indeed, the senior member of the new government's incoming Cabinet, Sir Sze-Yuen Chung, said this week that assemblies with appointed members marked "a step forward for democracy."
When the royal yacht Britannia, bearing Prince Charles and Mr. Patten, slips its mooring here on Tuesday, the Chinese flag will already be flying above them. 
But not all those who came here in the service of colonialism will follow.
Among those bits of empire that will remain are the likes of the stout and ruddy-faded Police Superintendent, Stephen Grinley Evans, who oversees a police team that watches the border for illegal immigrants passing into Hong Kong from China.
"I'm not ashamed to say I'm a bloody dinosaur," he said, laughing. 
"I came here from Scotland and I've been here since 1977. 
As long as they'll pay me, I'll stay."
And there is David T. Browning, a senior civil servant in the Customs and Excise Department who has seen the Union Jack lowered twice before on bits of empire.
"I joined the colonial service, partly for adventure and partly because I didn't really fancy staying in England," he said, hoisting a silver tankard of ale to his lips.
"I stayed on in Zambia after independence," he continued. 
"But I left the New Hebrides after it went independent."
The New Hebrides are now Vanuatu. 
"A friend in London said 'Why don't you go to Hong Kong?'
" he said. 
"Of course, I had in the back of my mind the impermanence of colonial regimes."
Now the last remaining British civil servant of 5,000 in his department, Mr. Browning said that Chinese rule would mean a rapid winnowing of the slightly more than 1,000 British citizens working in the Hong Kong Government.
"There are enough well-qualified, diligent, intelligent people here," Mr. Browning said. 
"The main thing is they have to maintain stabilityI under the S.A.R."
-- the Special Administrative Region, as Hong Kong will be known under Chinese rule. 
"I don't think it will be very many years before the expats leave," he continued. 
"Nobody's indispensable."
But for Governor Patten, his major regret, he insists, is not the disappearance of British civil servants -- for the civil service remains -- but the scuttling of democratic governance.
"I think there is a sadness," Mr. Patten said, "that this is the first time in recorded history that decolonization is followed by less democratization, not more."
