
China, reacting to recent proposals in Hong Kong for democratic reforms, threatened today to set up a shadow government in Hong Kong before it takes control of the British Crown Colony in 1997. 
But business executives in Hong Kong largely shrugged off the threats, convinced that the fundamental outlook for the economy there was unchanged.
Many executives say they are optimistic that Britain and China will reach a compromise in the long run, partly because both sides have too much to lose if they do not. 
China has invested billions of dollars there.
 
A Window on Prosperity
"They hope by rhetoric and bullying and shouting at the present time to bring about a result more acceptable to China," said James D. McGregor, a Hong Kong legislator and chairman of Asia Securities International Ltd. 
"At the same time, I don't think they have any intention of seriously damaging the great capability of this place to deliver the golden eggs for China."
The current dispute intensified on Friday, when Chris Patten, the British governor of Hong Kong, formally introduced legislation to broaden democracy in the crown colony. 
China has reacted with outrage.
And today, Lu Ping, a senior Chinese official with responsibility for Hong Kong affairs, denounced Mr. Patten as it has denounced no other major foreign official in several years. 
Mr. Lu called Mr. Patten "a man to be condemned through the history of Hong Kong," and he blamed Britain for "closing the door" on negotiations.
Yet the Chinese all along have emphasized that their aim is to preserve Hong Kong's prosperity and stabilityI.
This morning, the Hong Kong stock market, which has seemed like a roller coaster in the last few days amid the feud between the Chinese and Mr. Patten, plummeted again, but substantially recovered when it became clear that, for now at least, Beijing is barking more than biting.
The Hang Seng index dropped 3.67 percent to an intra-day low of 5,760.79, before rising to close at 5,958.33. 
That was 21.71 points -- less than 1 percent -- below Tuesday's close.
In the long run, many economists and analysts say the outlook for Hong Kong is rather good. 
"Stock market volatility doesn't mean that the real economy is being affected accordingly," said K. K. Chan, senior economist at the Hong Kong Bank. 
"In December last year, we saw the same volatility," he added, "but the real economy wasn't affected, according to the available data. 
We continue to see strong exports, strong retail sales, strong orders coming in."
 
Economy Is Thriving
While the dispute has heated up since Mr. Patten first made his proposals public in October, the Hong Kong economy managed 5 percent real growth last year. 
This year, the colony's Government estimates growth of 5.5 percent.
Many executives there insist that the economy and mid- to long-term prospects are scarcely affected by the bitterness of the dispute between Britain and China. 
The property and stock markets may gyrate, they say, but Hong Kong will remain an attractive place to do business.
Paradoxically, for all the name calling from Beijing, optimists point out that the colony's strongest selling point remains: It is the best launching pad for doing business with China.
"Businessmen are continuing to do very well, based on the industrial base in China," said Ian A. Christie, the Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce director.
It was not clear what effect the threat today might have on the Hong Kong economy, even short-term. 
Mr. Lu, the senior official, said that China would be forced to set up a new government on assuming power in 1997, and that in the meantime it would consider establishing an alternate administration in preparation.
He did not give details in his comments, but some believe that the Communist authorities want to set up a parallel administration over the next year and then dismantle much of the Hong Kong Government in 1997, a combination that would presumably deal a blow to confidence in the city.
But despite the denunciation today, investors had been expecting bad news and even harsher words. 
Instead, Mr. Lu said China would not take back Hong Kong before 1997, and he did not repeat a previous threat not to honor commercial contracts that straddle the transition period.
He said that if Mr. Patten continued to press his proposals to democratize Hong Kong, China would begin making preparations for "setting up a new kitchen."
This is a Chinese idiom meaning to make a fresh start, and Mr. Lu apparently meant that Beijing was prepared to form a new government and replace the Hong Kong executive and legislative bodies in 1997.
