
Seeking to quell a bitter dispute with mainland China, Hong Kong's government asked its high court today to clarify a landmark ruling that provoked objections from Beijing.
"We have looked at the concerns expressed by a lot of parties," said a government spokesman, Stephen Lam. 
"Because there has been such great concern in the community, we have decided to seek clarification."
Late last month, the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal ruled that children born on the mainland who have at least one parent living in Hong Kong have the right to residency here. 
Officials in Beijing criticized the decision as a violation of the Chinese Constitution and warned that they wanted it "rectified."
Far from calming the waters, today's move rattled legal experts, who said the Hong Kong government appeared to be pressing the court to retreat from the ruling before the Chinese Government forced its hand.
"This is close to a government subversion of the court," said Yash Ghai, an expert on constitutional law at Hong Kong University. 
"I would almost prefer if China took the action itself and bore the responsibility."
Lawyers here have said that if China overturned the decision, it would ignite a constitutional crisis. 
Under the agreement between Britain and China -- known as "one country, two systems" -- Hong Kong is supposed to be a semi-autonomous region within China, with its own legal system.
China has not formally demanded that Hong Kong overturn the ruling. 
But many people here believe that if the local government does not mollify Beijing, the Chinese Government will probably repudiate parts of the decision during the annual meeting of the Chinese National People's Congress next month.
Such a move could stain Hong Kong's reputation as an international financial center, which depends in part on having courts that operate without meddling from Beijing. 
The dispute has already set off a crisis of confidence among Western diplomats and business executives, some of whom fear that the rule of law could become a relic of Hong Kong's colonial past.
"This ruling is central to Hong Kong's autonomy," Professor Ghai said. 
"If we lose out on this, Hong Kong will have no more autonomy."
By asking the court to explain its decision, the Hong Kong government is raising nettlesome legal issues. 
Lawyers here said they were not aware of a precedent for the government to ask its highest court to reconsider a decision.
Mr. Lam said the government was not acting on orders from Beijing, though he acknowledged it had taken China's objections into account. 
He also said Hong Kong was not trying to overturn the ruling.
"This is a very special case," Mr. Lam said. 
"It's not like from now on, whenever the court makes a ruling we don't like, we're going to file a motion."
In its effort to resolve the dispute, Hong Kong is focusing on the nature of Beijing's objection, which is not to the substance of the ruling -- that some mainland Chinese children have the right to live here. 
What troubles Beijing is that the court said it has the right to strike down Chinese laws if they violate Hong Kong's Constitution.
Some legal experts here said China was misreading the ruling as an attempt to place Hong Kong's courts above the National People's Congress.
Clearly, Hong Kong hopes that if its highest court affirms it is not challenging China's sovereignty, Beijing will let the matter drop.
      
