
It began with a dare.
"Two years ago I was doing this live radio talk show, and I was saying I had great confidence in the future of Hong Kong," David Chu said. 
"Then one listener called in and started giving me hell, saying, 'You have a U.S. passport, you're safe.'
He challenged me to give up my U.S. passport. 
I accepted that challenge. 
And for me, that was the turning point."
With less than two years to go before Britain returns this territory to China, the pursuit of a foreign passport has been elevated to a fine art by those here who fear for their future under Beijing's rule. 
Giving up foreign citizenship just isn't done.
Yet for David Chu, former banker and current real estate mogul, the future is not to be feared but welcomed. 
Not only has he ripped up his passport, Mr. Chu has also eagerly, and very publicly, been pounding the drum for Beijing.
Under American law he may obtain a new passport merely by applying for one. 
Still, as a reward for his demonstration of allegiance, he was one of 35 Hong Kongers chosen by Beijing to sit on the body that advises China what to do about Hong Kong.
"Some Chinese go overseas and become very Westernized, but some Chinese go overseas and discover their Chinese identity," Mr. Chu said. 
"I belong to the latter category."
His empathy for China's approach to Hong Kong -- an approach that is generally dismissive of British concerns while forcefully asserting Beijing's right to determine the territory's future -- mirrors that of many in the colony's business elite. 
While most Hong Kongers, according to opinion polls, still do not want to return to Chinese sovereignty, most Hong Kong business leaders, many of whom play a role in Hong Kong's current governance, have accommodated themselves to China's desires.
"I freely admit I'm pro-China," Mr. Chu said. 
"It's no different than Americans who feel pride about being American and are willing to go to war for their country."
So, in a way, Mr. Chu went to war for China. 
Three years ago, when Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, enraged China by pushing through a series of changes intended to expand democracy, Mr. Chu took up the cudgels for Beijing.
"That's when Britain and China started fighting," Mr. Chu said.
"We, the pro-China camp, had to do something," he said. 
"I think it is wrong to destroy what we have had with a headlong rush toward democracy. 
What has made Hong Kong very successful is a dictatorial or colonial government that is responsive to public opinion.
"Some people say, let's fight with China, let's be more free. 
I don't think that's a very responsible attitude. 
There is a price to pay for that."
Mr. Chu fled Shanghai with his parents in 1954, when he was 14, landing in Boston, where his father found work as an accountant.
He poured himself into American life, and finished his education with an M.B.A. from Harvard. 
He went to work for the Bank of America, but after two years was plucked away by Jardine Matheson, one of the original British trading houses in Hong Kong, to work in its property group here.
Mr. Chu soon started his own real-estate company. 
He built the value of the company's holdings to more than $260 million, but politics and his views about Hong Kong have been the real focus of his life.
"When the Sino-British confrontation was getting very hot, when relations were really very poor, I perceived the necessity to pitch in and help," he said. 
"It seemed so depressing, so hopeless. 
Instead of avoiding China, though, I chose to be involved. 
I feel partially responsible, being Chinese."
Coziness with China has not, however, imbued him with an unalloyed love for Communism. 
He described people who failed to march in demonstrations here after the Tiananmen massacre in June 1989 as "people with problems," and said he had doubts about the degree of Chinese understanding of what makes Hong Kong work.
"Unfortunately, many Chinese leaders have a revolutionary war mentality," he said. 
"They've been fighting foreign domination for a long time. 
That's why people like me can help. 
But if the Communist Party doesn't change, they won't survive."
His optimism is also reflected in his increasingly lavish way of life. 
His penthouse apartment overlooks the lush hills above Deep Water Bay, and in his garage are three custom Harley Davidson motorcycles -- one of which he has driven across China -- and his new Ferrari, a recent $260,000 splurge that has cost him one speeding ticket already. 
In Beijing, he is putting the finishing touches on a mansion just north of the Forbidden City.
Still, he admits that not everyone here shares his confidence.
"As we get close to 1997 there will be a lot of last-minute jitters; I would expect the confidence level to go down at the last minute," he said, stomping his lime-yellow Harley, matching the Ferrari, into first gear."Bumpy or not, we'll get to 1997."
When reminded through the rumble of the Harley that if things turn bad in Hong Kong after 1997, it will not be all that difficult for him to regain his American citizenship, Mr. Chu paused and said quietly, "I know."
And then he gunned the motorcycle away.
      
