
On clear days at this time of the year, Barrie Cook used to take out-of-town visitors to the top of Victoria Peak, where they could see the gleaming skyscrapers of Macao, a Portuguese colony 38 miles away. 
Now, he said, "you can barely see to the bottom of the hill."
For much of this winter, Hong Kong has been shrouded in a yellowish haze that has blotted out its legendary vistas. 
This is not brooding, rainy mist of the sort that supplies atmosphere in James Clavell novels. 
It is a dry, gritty smog that catches in the throat and gives the city an odd sepia-tinted glow.
As the haze has become an every-other-day phenomenon in this city of 6.7 million, it is setting off alarm bells in some unlikely quarters.
"If this is allowed to deteriorate further, it's going to be a major problem for the economy," said Mr. Cook, who runs a cement and concrete company for Hong Kong's most famous tycoon, Li Ka-shing. 
"Companies are very concerned about employees working in a deteriorating environment. 
They won't want to invest here. 
They won't want to put people or facilities here."
In Hong Kong, tackling pollution raises ticklish political issues. 
Much of the smog is generated across the border in mainland China, where a forest of smoke-belching factories has risen in Guangdong Province over the last two decades. 
In the winter, northerly winds blow the fumes into Hong Kong, where they mix with exhaust from buses and taxis to create what Kim Salkeld, the government's spokesman on the environment, calls a "horrendous cocktail."
Mr. Salkeld said the percentage of days when pollution reduced visibility to less than five miles doubled from 1991 to 1997, to more than 8 percent. 
Hong Kong hit a new low on Jan. 
19, when a particularly murky brew cut visibility to less than 3,000 feet, despite sunny skies. 
Ships in the harbor were forced to sound their foghorns as they crept forward in the midday gloom.
Hong Kong is still less polluted than Beijing or Shanghai -- not to mention famously blighted Asian cities like Bangkok and Manila. 
But experts here worry that Hong Kong could soon slip into their ranks.
With China's economy still humming, more factories are likely to spring up in Guangdong.
And Hong Kong, which is clawing its way out of an economic quagmire, may be reluctant to turn away industrial development, even if it degrades the environment and alienates foreign businesses.
"It really depends on what we're willing to put up with," said William Barron, a professor at the Center for Urban Planning and Environmental Management at the University of Hong Kong. 
"What we see in a place like Bangkok is how bad things can get, but the government still doesn't address the problem."
Mr. Barron said that while the Hong Kong government regards pollution as a major threat, it has been loath to confront China about its role in fouling its newest possession. 
"They don't even want to talk about the pollution coming across the border," he said. 
"It is way too sensitive."
Partly this is because of Hong Kong's general reluctance to ruffle the feathers of its new sovereign, whether it be over issues of judicial independence or environmental policy. 
But partly it is because the government knows that many of the factories in Guangdong are owned by Hong Kong companies.
Hong Kong also has no shortage of home-grown pollution. 
The number of cars, taxis and buses has soared in recent years as more people have moved into the New Territories, a once-bucolic hinterland that separates Kowloon from the mainland.
In Hong Kong's popular shopping district, Causeway Bay, the pollution readings are often so high that the government urges people with respiratory conditions to stay indoors. 
On a recent afternoon there, the fumes from taxis and double-decker buses all but choked two women who were standing on the sidewalk, handing out invitations to join a health club.
"In 15 years, Hong Kong will not be livable," Cindy Ho said as she packed her things and headed for a restaurant. 
"Everybody will be dead."
Mr. Salkeld said the government was determined to clear the air by banning leaded gasoline, converting taxis from diesel to liquefied petroleum gas, and expanding the rail system by 40 percent. 
But Hong Kong's close ties to southern China are not helping. 
Many trucks burn low-grade diesel fuel that is smuggled into Hong Kong from the mainland. 
The police recently uncovered an illegal pipeline that carried the cheap and far more polluting fuel across the border.
Politicians here said the government could no longer afford to tiptoe around China. 
Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, declared in a speech last month that the environment would be "at the forefront of our agenda next year, year after next, and every year thereafter."
But Mr. Tung, a shipping magnate appointed by Beijing, has said little about cross-border pollution.
"What I don't want to see is the government saying, 'Just because the problem is from over there, we can't do anything about it,' " said Christine Loh, a pro-democracy leader who is active in environmental issues.
As a practical matter, it is not clear that Hong Kong can do much to influence Beijing's environmental policies. 
Mr. Salkeld said the two governments were cooperating to harmonize fuel standards. 
And they pledged $3 million each to install a pollution-monitoring system in Guangdong. 
But Mr. Salkeld noted that China's population and economic demands were so vast that they could make any environmental initiative seem hopelessly inadequate.
And anyway, he added, the seasonal wind currents work against China, too. 
"During the summer," he said, "when Hong Kong's air quality is pretty good, the wind is blowing our pollution into the mainland."
