
In the shadow of an old Buddhist temple, a curving alleyway known as Soothsayer's Arcade is full of tiny stalls where fortunetellers routinely predict the future and, for a few dollars extra, unlock some of life's deepest mysteries.
Yet even here, in icon-laden booths that reek of incense and the mystical power of Chinese fortunetelling, no one seems willing to venture a prediction about what will happen in Hong Kong after July 1, when China takes over from Britain.
"How can you know?" asked Leung Tin-che, a 50-year-old fortune-teller whose inviting smile turned to a puzzled frown when he was asked about Hong Kong's future. 
"None of my customers ask about that anyway. 
They want to know about their career, or love."
As Hong Kong nears its fateful date, people all over the world are wondering what will happen in a political situation that history has no script for. 
In Hong Kong itself, however, many people seem to accept that their future remains firmly in the realm of the unknowable.
But in a telling indication of the way things are going, in Soothsayer's Arcade and in so much of Hong Kong, new customers now come mostly from mainland China.
Fortunetellers say that many of the mainland visitors are actually mid-level Communist Party officials, who ignore the Party's rejection of superstitious practices when they come for a session.
"It makes sense if you think about it," said Chung Tak-ching, another fortuneteller. 
"If you're from the Communist Party, and no one believes in Communism anymore, wouldn't you have questions about your future?"
Probably no place is as obsessed with lucky numbers and talismans and fortunetelling as Hong Kong, perhaps because its very existence -- as a precarious dot on the long coast of China -- seems to have tempted fate over the years. 
Bankers and lawyers regularly consult fortunetellers, as do housewives and delivery boys, and the 200 fortunetellers in Soothsayer's Arcade may be the largest such grouping in the world.
A decade ago, despite China's promises to leave Hong Kong untouched, many people here feared that 1997 would mean the closing of places like fortunetelling stalls and nightclubs and race tracks, long banned in China as remnants of a misguided, and capitalist, past.
But few fear such a crackdown now, since change in recent years has brought capitalist pastimes like stock markets and nightlife to the mainland. 
Even if Chinese control does mean a loss of civil liberties, several fortunetellers said they found it hard to imagine their trade being affected.
"They come here as customers themselves, so why would they want to shut us down?" asked Priscilla Lam, a matronly fortuneteller who has brushed up on her Mandarin to accommodate mainland clients. 
"Maybe they'll figure out a way to make money off us."
In a simple example, Ms. Lam seemed to put her finger on some critical forces verging on Hong Kong's future: China's enthusiasm for capitalism, the eagerness of Chinese officials to enjoy the forbidden fruit within, as well as these officials' tendency to try to make money off anyone who is making money.
Yet all the reasons why China should leave Hong Kong alone may have to be balanced against Beijing's deepest concern: to control anything it perceives as a threat.
"We are not a danger to anyone," Ms. Lam said firmly. 
"No one here would ever make a prediction that is politically sensitive."
Described on her business card as a "physignomist," Ms. Lam prefers to divine an individual's future by examining palms and nose and eye shape, and by crossing her findings against one of many ancient charts listing personality characteristics based on year, date and hour of birth.
One customer, Evelyn Lau, a 24-year-old bank clerk wearing purple lipstick, came to ask about her prospects with a man she recently met. 
She demurred when asked what her palm-reading disclosed.
"I want to know about big issues that will affect me for my whole life," she said, trying to surpress a nervous giggle. 
Egged on by a friend, she admitted, "I really like this guy."
Mr. Leung said that, although most of his prognostications also deal with romantic concerns, there was a surge in the fortunetelling business about five years ago when many Hong Kong people were trying to decide whether to emigrate and to where.
"Everyone was afraid of the future back then," he said. 
"But everything depends on what happens in China, and China is changing fast."
Despite his own reluctance to predict Hong Kong's future, Mr. Leung said he had noticed a few things about people who do make predictions.
Hong Kong's most vocally optimistic people, he observed, are wealthy businessmen and women who, although they have the most to lose, also have the easiest ways out. 
Most of them arranged foreign passports or other escape routes years ago.
In contrast, he said, many working-class people are pessimistic about the future, though they have little to lose but their freedom.
"They're the ones with nowhere to go," he said. 
"Like me."
Ms. Lam has also advised many customers on choices about emigration, but she said it was always a question about where, not if.
"Everyone with enough money emigrates," she said simply.
With the fortunetelling business slow, Mr. Leung allowed that he makes his real money as a master of feng shui, the ancient art of geomancy, advising a tenant or home-owner on the proper placement and design of an office or dwelling. 
Even though the practice was banned in the mainland long ago, Mr. Leung thinks it inconceivable that Chinese officials would try to restrict it here.
Ms. Lam also complained that since much of her business now comes from mainland visitors, business has been slow this month, because Chinese authorities feared an onslaught of mainland visitors in the weeks just before and after the handover and put restrictions on how many could come.
"We'll have to wait until late July 1 before things pick up again," she said.
