
A constitutional challenge to China's rule in Hong Kong was rebuffed today when a three-judge panel ruled unanimously that the territory was powerless to question Beijing's decisions, particularly the scuttling of Hong Kong's elected legislature and its replacement by a handpicked assembly.
The challenge, which grew out of a criminal case involving the theft of a Rolex watch at a ferry terminal, claimed that the existence of Beijing's legislature violated the Basic Law, the mini-constitution that Beijing drafted for Hong Kong before China took over here from Britain. 
The Basic Law provides for a legislature that is in part elected, but it does not provide for an appointed assembly.
In the narrow sense, the case revolved merely around the survival of a criminal indictment through the transition from British to Chinese sovereignty, but more broadly, the ruling by the Court of Appeal, the second-highest court in Hong Kong, found that China has the power to impose its will on Hong Kong.
The case itself marked a significant moment in the era of Communist rule in China. 
For the first time in the history of the People's Republic of China, judges deliberated on constitutional matters affecting Beijing's governance.
Indeed, remarkably, only one of the three judges was Chinese, making this the first time that judges of foreign nationality have deliberated on Chinese laws; all Hong Kong's judges retained their appointments after China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1.
It was not immediately clear what the complete implications of today's decisions are for Hong Kong's autonomy, or whether the jurisdiction of Hong Kong's courts has been circumscribed. 
The Government insisted afterward that the rule of law and the integrity of the courts had been maintained. 
But lawyers who brought the case, and other critics, warned of the consequences of the ruling and hinted at an appeal.
At stake was the fate not only of Beijing's appointed legislature, known as the Provisional Legislative Council, but also of the laws it has passed, including an omnibus law to insure the continuation of common law in Hong Kong as well as the appointment of the appeals court judges themselves.
In reading his opinion today, Chief Justice Patrick Chan said, "I am inclined to hold that the Provisional Legislative Council has been validly established under Chinese law and was ratified by the National People's Congress," China's rubber-stamp Parliament.
Addressing a courtroom packed with observers lining the walls and spilling out the double wooden doors, Mr. Chan said of the appointed legislature: "Its formation is an interim measure out of necessity."
He said, "It was not done as an intentional breach of the Basic Law. 
It is, strictly speaking, not a Legislative Council under Article 60 of the Basic Law," the provision that requires a partially elected legislature.
In a precisely reasoned ruling, Justice Chan took pains to support his ruling on principles of common law and under Chinese laws passed by China's parliament, as well as the decisions of various Chinese-appointed bodies and the text of the Basic Law itself. 
At no point did anyone, including harsh critics of the decision, suggest that Mr. Chan and his colleagues were pressured by Beijing to rule a certain way.
Ever since China declared it would abolish Hong Kong's elected legislature, because the elections in 1995 were held without its approval, there has been a debate here, especially among legal experts, over whether an appointed assembly would satisfy the constitution.
Both the Bar Council, which represents barristers, the lawyers who appear in court, and the Law Society, representing solicitors, lawyers who deal with clients, have maintained that the Provisional Legislature is not in accord with the Basic Law.
That argument was powerfully presented in this case last week by Gladys Li, a former chairman of the Bar Council and one of the most respected barristers in Hong Kong.
Opposite her was the Government's chief legal officer, the Solicitor General, Daniel Fung, who insisted that China had the authority to erect the governmental structure it deemed appropriate for Hong Kong and that in any event, the courts had no power to rule on those decisions.
Clearly relieved at the court's posture, Mr. Fung said afterward, "We welcome the Court of Appeal's decision, which was unanimous that the Provisional Legislative Council is a valid, competent body established by the National People's Congress."
"This has settled a constitutional controversy and we welcome the clearing of the air," said Mr. Fung, who, like the other barristers and judges, appeared in court in elaborate regalia of robes, starched collars and horsehair wigs.
Tung Chee-hwa, the shipping magnate appointed by Beijing to administer Hong Kong, also praised the ruling. 
"The rule of law is one of the important factors contributing to Hong Kong's success," said a statement issued by Mr. Tung's office. 
"The litigation demonstrates the respect the society have towards the rule of law."
Across Hong Kong, however, many pro-democracy activists, including lawmakers who had been dismissed from the legislature by China, were critical of the court's ruling and suggested that the issue would be raised again in Hong Kong's highest court, the Court of Final Appeal.
Martin Lee, the leader of Hong Kong's largest political party, the Democratic Party, which lost all 19 of its legislative seats, was equally critical. 
"This case raises very serious implications for the future of Hong Kong's rule of law and autonomy," said Mr. Lee.
"There must be something seriously wrong if the Chinese central Government can introduce an appointed body, ignore the Basic Law at will, and Hong Kong courts cannot do anything about it," he said.
Nihal Jayawickrama, a professor of law at Hong Kong University, called the implications of the ruling "quite serious."
He explained, "What they are saying is that the National People's Congress is supreme and whatever it does, the court will apply. 
That's not what the Basic Law says. 
The National People's Congress has no relevance in Hong Kong. 
If they can do this, where does the Basic Law stand?"
While it was unclear tonight whether there would be an appeal to the territory's highest court, Mr. Fung expressed confidence that today's ruling would be upheld. 
"There is no question the common law is part of the law of Hong Kong," said an ebullient Mr. Fung after the ruling. 
"We all accept the difference in nature and development between the Hong Kong system and the Chinese system. 
But we have to respect the basic law and the structure under which we were created."
      
