
Tucked among the coffin makers just off Wing Lok Street, on the edge of a hankie-sized park where old men play Chinese chess, a fading photograph shows a waterfront site, Possession Point -- the spot where the British flag was first planted, by Capt. Edward Belcher at 8:15 A.M. on Jan. 
26, 1841.
Today Possession Point -- now Hollywood Road Park -- is well inland from Hong Kong's shrinking harbor. 
The coffin makers lounge on low stools, smoke from their loosely fingered cigarettes drifting in the pudding-thick humidity, as they wait for their next customers and watch the last faint moments of British rule unwind.
One year from today, at midnight's stroke on June 30, 1997, the territory's last colonial governor will sail from Hong Kong, relinquishing Britain's final Asian outpost and its 6.2 million people to one of the world's last remaining Communist governments. 
It is a moment that is riveted in people's minds and emotions, a date with a destiny many fear and others exult in.
In Beijing, where an immense digital clock flicks glowing red seconds inexorably toward zero hour, Hong Kong's return to China will be a decisive righting of historical wrongs -- the return of a piece of the motherland sundered after Britain forced China to buy its opium. 
The "yoke of colonialism," as Zhou Nan, China's senior official here, repeatedly puts it, is being shucked off.
Under that yoke, however, Hong Kong has become Asia's pre-eminent financial center, a city feverishly at work on the globe's largest civil engineering project -- involving a new airport, town, railroads, two immense bridges and two tunnels under Hong Kong's harbor. 
Hong Kong is the place where money is made with relish and spent with abandon, where a two-bedroom apartment can run $10,000 a month and tycoons tool around in limousines originally designed for the Japanese emperor.
Yet even in this city of soaring financial prowess -- a place of robust debate and newly spread political wings -- pride at the ending of colonialism is stirred by a widening sense of apprehension about the future under a Communist sovereign.
"I'm very pessimistic about the near future," said Martin C. M. Lee, the leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, which won the largest number of seats in last year's legislative elections. 
"They don't trust us, so they want to control us from Beijing."
Indeed, after 14 years of preparing for China to retake Hong Kong, virtually none of the major issues confronting the territory have been resolved, including most prominently who will lead the territory. 
A committee chosen by Beijing is nominally charged with settling these issues, but it meets only in secret, consults with carefully selected segments of Hong Kong's people behind closed doors and has banished dissenting voices from its proceedings.
China has promised that it will leave Hong Kong unchanged and "with a high degree of autonomy" for 50 years. 
Yet in the past year, China has proceeded clumsily and mostly in secret as it lays its plans to resume sovereignty.
What is clear is that Beijing has said it will abolish Hong Kong's elected legislature and replace it with handpicked lawmakers, scuttle its Bill of Rights ordinance and revive a slew of repressive laws. 
What is also clear is that the transition is well under way; China is already the largest investor here, with more than 1,100 mainland companies, from banks to trading houses, garment manufacturers to tour operators, doing business here.
 
The Growing Signs Of China's Presence
Already the pace of Hong Kong's absorption into China is quickening. 
At the Department of Government Supplies, Nigel Shipmen has taken surveys of Government buildings to determine how many of China's five-starred red flags will be needed on July 1, 1997, and how many of Hong Kong's new flag, featuring a five-petaled bauhinia flower.
Insignias for the police, fire department, immigration and prison officers are all being redesigned.
Beyond the external flourishes however, China's presence and influence are already considerable here. 
Swire Pacific, one of the great British hongs, or trading houses, has been pressed to reduce its holdings in the airline run by Hong Kong to a minority share. 
The British telecommunications giant Cable and Wireless is expected to cave in to Chinese pressure and become a minority shareholder in the territory's local phone company.
"It is natural for China to want some control of the commanding heights of the economy -- aviation, electronics, telecommunications and maybe banking -- but I am not comfortable," said Miron Mushkat, the managing director of Lehman Brothers here, at an American Chamber of Commerce conference. 
"It is not the Hong Kong way, and it is a form of nationalization."
For years, companies that traditionally have done most of their business with the London-based Hongkong & Shanghai Bank have been shifting business to the Bank of China. 
"It just makes sense," said the director of one company. 
"These are the guys we have to deal with."
But Hong Kongers themselves are not easily abandoning their sense of themselves as distinct from China's people, not merely because of social and political differences, but culturally and linguistically.
 
A Sense of Identity Apart From China
Last spring Eric K. W. Ma, a journalism professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, sent his students to an exhibit on Hong Kong's history, telling them to return and write about who they felt they were.
"My purpose was to trigger them to see whether they are local Hong Kong people or are they Chinese," he said. 
"Most of them were born in Hong Kong and most have very remote ideas about the Chinese."
More often than not, Hong Kong's people see themselves not as Chinese, but as Hong Kongers -- with a way of life far removed from China's mix of avariciousness born of rapid economic growth and insularity born of political repression, and with an ease with the world around them that China's people do not share.
In an effort to lend some statistical shape to Hong Kong's amorphous sense of identity, Timothy K. Y. Wong, of the Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies, conducted a poll. 
"We found that Hong Kong people still maintain a strong indigenous identity, although this identity is declining somewhat over the years," he said. 
Indeed, 49 percent of those surveyed regard themselves as Hong Kongers, with only 36 percent seeing themselves as Chinese.
One answer to the search for identity, among many, springs from the pages of the essays Mr. Ma collected. 
A student who left China in 1981 described her transformation after the Tiananmen massacre of June 4, 1989, from a "Hong Kong Chinese" to a "Chinese Hong Konger."
"The more I was influenced by Hong Kong's culture and ideas, the more I became a Hong Konger through and through," she wrote.
 
Confidence, Yes, But Keep Passports
One of the starker signs of the chasm between Beijing and Hong Kong is the refusal of Chinese officials here to speak Cantonese in public. 
Instead they insist on speaking Beijing-accented Mandarin, a language scarcely understood here. 
Yet there remains a vast range of intentions toward China's looming sovereignty.
Six years ago, Chui Kei Kong returned to Hong Kong from Vancouver, British Columbia. 
"You can't earn as much in Canada as here," said Mr. Chui, an electrical engineer. 
He had moved to Canada 10 years ago, but the allure of business opportunity pulled him back. 
His wife and daughter remain in Canada.
"I don't worry too much about 1997 because I'm a Canadian citizen," said Mr. Chui, who now owns a factory over the border in Shenzhen. 
"If the situation is very bad next year, I'll go back to Canada. 
Even though I can earn more in Hong Kong, I'd rather stay in a peaceful and civilized place."
Invariably, conversations these days swing toward contingency plans, and above all that means possession of a foreign passport. 
There are no precise data, but the Government estimates that 600,000 Hong Kongers hold such passports. 
In fact, more than half the members of Beijing's hand-picked Preparatory Committee, the body that China created to chart the transition from British to Chinese rule, carry foreign passports.
Yet many Hong Kongers are eager to live in a Hong Kong that is a rightful part of China. 
Chung Lee Wai, a 22-year-old university student who said he plans to work in community development, is harshly critical of China's political system yet equally fierce in his patriotism.
"The first step is for China to control Hong Kong," he said. 
"We need to go back to China. 
Hong Kong went to Britain because of the Opium War. 
I don't believe in independence for Hong Kong. 
I'm staying."
Chan Siu Hong is equally adamant. 
"Of course things may become very harsh in 1997, but I would like to stay here to try my best to take advantage of the opportunities here," said the 26-year-old owner of a video production company. 
"Why should I go abroad where I'll be looked down on by foreigners?"
Yet even some of the most ardent boosters for Chinese rule have hedged their bets. 
Henry Cheng, one of the world's richest men and the managing director of the New World property conglomerate, is chairman of the Better Hong Kong Foundation, a pro-China business group that actively promotes the territory's prospects and regularly meets with China's senior leaders.
Still, when asked recently what passport he held, he replied, "a French passport as a matter of confidence."
Quickly, though, he corrected himself. 
"I mean as a matter of convenience."
 
Little Understanding Of a Free Society
Much of Hong Kong's anxiety stems not only from the opacity of the process leading to Chinese rule, but from the stream of comments from Chinese officials that appear to threaten elements of Hong Kong's way of life, and the silence emanating from the territory's own leading citizens. 
Beijing's insistence on secrecy and conformity among the Hong Kongers it chooses to steer the territory toward Chinese rule is regarded as particularly ominous.
When Frederick Kin Kee Fung, a member of the Preparatory Committee, announced that he intended to vote against plans to abolish Hong Kong's legislature, he was aggressively lobbied by senior Chinese officials. 
On the day the committee voted to install a legislature picked by China, Mr. Fung cast the solitary negative vote.
"I wanted to let them understand, through words and actions, what is Hong Kong political culture," Mr. Fung said. 
"At the Preparatory Committee they just read out documents and said whoever supports it raise their hands. 
It's the Chinese way. 
I was told that if I voted no, I would be off the provisional legislature" -- the council that China will impose on July 1, 1997.
Mr. Fung did vote no, and he has been barred from participating in any discussions over the new legislature or the chief executive.
Many Hong Kongers, including Mr. Fung, believe that Chinese officials fundamentally do not comprehend Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, argues that much of the blame for Beijing's ignorance of and insensitivity toward Hong Kong is a consequence of the type of advice it has sought. 
"I think that one of the tragedies of the last few years is this," Mr. Patten said in an interview. 
"It's understandable that senior Chinese officials, given their backgrounds, find it difficult understanding the nature of a free society, what makes Hong Kong tick.
"They require a bit of assistance in learning about Hong Kong.
"They haven't always gotten the assistance they deserve from their appointed advisers in Hong Kong, who have believed that they should go and tell Chinese officials what they think Chinese officials want to hear. 
Senior Chinese officials deserve honesty, and too often they've gotten shoe shining."
In the meantime, Hong Kong waits and watches.
