
After a year of economic despair, relentless criticism and growing doubts about his leadership, Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, finally got a break last week.
Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, making his first visit here since this former British colony reverted to China, praised Mr. Tung for how steadily he was leading Hong Kong through the Asian financial crisis.
That the chief executive's most prominent defender these days is the former colonial ruler of this territory must be cold comfort to Mr. Tung, 61, a former shipping tycoon who took over Hong Kong when it was the pulsing heart of the Asian economy and has watched as it has gone into cardiac arrest.
"Am I frustrated?" asked Mr. Tung in a rare interview on Friday. 
"At times, I would say. 
But the important thing is to zero in on the things you can do and also zero in on the long-term perspective, because the turmoil will be over."
As if to underscore his point, Mr. Tung showed off a scroll that China's President, Jiang Zemin, painted and gave to Hong Kong as a gift during the handover. 
"Hong Kong will be better tomorrow," it says in Chinese calligraphy.
But to many people here, the economic crisis has settled into a debilitating illness, with little hope of a cure. 
Hong Kong's stock market has fallen by roughly half since its peak in August 1997, property prices have plummeted by as much as 60 percent and unemployment is soaring.
"People respect Tung as a sincere, elderly person," said Joseph Cheng, a professor of political science at the City University of Hong Kong. 
"His heart is in the right place, but people are looking for results."
As the man China chose to run Hong Kong, Mr. Tung faces a quandary unique among Asian leaders. 
He does not have a popular mandate, yet he must serve two very different constituencies: the 6.6 million people of Hong Kong and the Communist bosses in Beijing. 
Unless he comes to grips with the economic crisis, his critics say, Mr. Tung risks losing the faith of both groups.
With its economy in a free fall, some observers said they also feared that Hong Kong was turning away from the global market. 
In August the government intervened in the stock market to foil overseas hedge funds, which it accused of manipulating Hong Kong's markets.
In defending the intervention, senior officials played heavily on fears of unnamed "foreign traders," while a prominent member of the legislature referred to foreigners by a derogatory Cantonese word.
Mr. Tung said such remarks reflected public frustration with the hedge funds, which he said had destabilized Hong Kong's economy. 
But as someone who lived in Boston and New York for nine years and watches the football games of his favorite team, the San Francisco 49ers, on videocassette, Mr. Tung seemed disturbed by suggestions that Hong Kong had become xenophobic.
"The whole of Hong Kong overwhelmingly understands that Hong Kong is an international city, and the future of Hong Kong, the success of Hong Kong, is closely tied to being an international city," he said.
When it comes to domestic issues, critics said Mr. Tung seemed to miss the forest for the trees. 
In his annual policy address last week, he proposed to turn Hong Kong into a center for Chinese medicine, but he offered no major remedies for restoring the property market. 
During a radio call-in show with Mr. Tung after the 135-minute speech, one caller bluntly told him to resign.
"Obviously, you can understand it when the public is unhappy," Mr. Tung said. 
But he added, "Hong Kong is a very free-market economy, and what the government can do is really not a lot."
Some politicians here say Mr. Tung may be miscast in his role. 
Before the transfer to China, when Hong Kong was booming, a conservative businessman might have seemed an obvious choice to keep the cash registers ringing. 
Now, with the economy in a shambles and Hong Kong's confidence shaken, people here are yearning for more than Mr. Tung's gray-flannel style.
"He would make an excellent chief executive in Singapore, where the people are Chinese but are more old-fashioned," said Martin Lee, Hong Kong's most prominent pro-democracy politician.
Unlike his British predecessor, Christopher Patten, who was a Tory party leader before coming to Hong Kong, Mr. Tung does not relish kissing babies, glad-handing on the street or racing to accident scenes.
"This is one area in which I really have to learn a whole lot more -- transforming myself from a businessman," Mr. Tung said. 
"Could I communicate better?
Yes, I can and I will communicate better."
But while Mr. Tung wants to hone his political skills, he is not about to embrace the rough-and-tumble of democracy. 
Hong Kong held direct elections for one-third of the seats in its legislature in May, and pro-democracy candidates, who did well, are pressing for a speedier transition to full democracy.
Mr. Tung said the economic crisis made him more determined to stick to the timetable, which would not put his job or the full legislature up for election until after 2007.
"Right now we just have too many things going on," he said. 
"If you look at the changes that are around us, we need a stable environment."
In the final analysis, Mr. Tung's future depends on his relationship with the leaders in Beijing. 
And despite Hong Kong's travails, there is no evidence that he has lost their faith. 
Likewise, Mr. Tung's support among Hong Kong's powerful property tycoons remains generally solid.
Mr. Tung has worked hard to establish his credentials as the leader of a Chinese city. 
In his speech last week, he said Hong Kong people should be inspired by their brethren in China, who built earthen walls to hold back the waters during the recent floods on the Yangtze River.
But critics say the flood would not have been so calamitous if China had protected its environment. 
Hong Kong, they say, needs policies that avoid disaster, rather than appeals to heroism after disaster has struck.
      
