
A House committee dealt a sharp if largely symbolic rebuke to the Administration's China policy today, just four weeks before President Jiang Zemin is to come to Washington, when it voted to deny visas to Chinese officials who violate human rights.
The bill, approved 22 to 18 by the Committee on International Relations, was one of several meant to challenge the Administration's stance on China as Mr. Clinton prepares for President Jiang's state visit, the first by a Chinese leader in a dozen years.
The bill would deny visas to military or civilian officials guilty of religious or political oppression, as well as to members of eight religious organizations that cooperate with the Chinese Government.
But it would not affect President Jiang or other Cabinet-level Chinese officials, and it would allow President Clinton to clear the way for any official to visit the United States by declaring that the visit was in the national interest.
Congressional staff members familiar with the bill's history said the measure will probably be voted on next week by the full House, where its prospects are uncertain. 
If it does clear the House, it would go to the Senate, where its chances are even slimmer, said the staff members, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Finally, President Clinton could veto the bill, should it ever reach his desk, and be fairly confident that the veto could not be overridden, Congressional staff members suggested. 
The Administration has strongly opposed the measure, asserting that China could retaliate by denying visas to many Americans.
An Administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the committee's action "is not helpful" and could thwart efforts to raise human-rights issues with Chinese leaders face to face.
One of the measure's sponsors, Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, said denying visas would tell the Chinese that "we don't want the ghouls of the world to come here."
But Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana, the panel's ranking Democrat, said that the bill "points us in the direction of cutting off dialogue with China, in the direction of disengagement from China, in the direction of making China the enemy."
The committee also recommended increasing Radio Free Asia's funds to $40 million a year, from $30 million. 
It also urged the Administration to provide Taiwan with better missile defenses if Taiwan requests them.
The deputy assistant Secretary of State for East Asia, Susan Shirk, said the missile-defense recommendation would be viewed by the Chinese as "a hostile measure" and cause some disruption in American planning for the summit.
Representative Amo Houghton of New York, one of four Republicans to oppose the visa-denial measure, equated it to "poking a finger in the eye" of the Chinese while the United States is supposedly trying to learn how to deal with them.
"I think it's a dumb idea," Mr. Houghton said. 
The Congressman is a former chief executive of Corning Inc., founded by his family, and said his experience in international trade helped to determine his vote.
Representative Robert Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, said the United States ought to be encouraging human-rights advocates in China and should send the message that "we are not going to give a free vacation to the United States to someone who helps promote a policy of religious persecution."
      
