
AS a fashion designer, Han Feng designs three collections a year for the New York runways. 
But it has taken decades for her to design her first home.
In it, she has created an environment that is reminiscent of her clothes, with a subtle and personal understanding of texture, light and balance. 
Her luminous Thai silk jackets, wide-cut pants and simple columnar dresses express graceful motion and diaphanous coolness set off with Asian touches, deftly enriched by a silk cord, tassel or frog closure. 
And like her designs, her home is airy and beguiling.
When Han Feng and her husband were divorced earlier this year, the designer moved from a five-room, 1,600 square-foot apartment on the 13th floor of the Ansonia on the Upper West Side to an anonymous 2,400-square-foot loft on the sixth floor of a garment district building on a side street.
"For me, the Ansonia had such a strong personality -- the moldings on the ceiling, the round living room, the beautiful view, the terraces all around -- I didn't want to touch the detail," said the 34-year-old designer, who was born in Nanjing, China, and came to the United States in 1985. 
Han (pronounced HAHN) is her surname, and Feng (pronounced FUNG) is her given name, but she always uses the two names together.
The rented loft offered her a blank slate for her interior design ideas. 
First, she and David Hu, a New York architect, gutted the space. 
Out came the walls that divided the loft into four dark and dreary rooms. 
Out came the closet and bookshelves that obscured five of the 16 windows.
Sunlight is now filtered through white muslin, which on warm summer days billows at the open windows. 
Some of the muslin is hung straight in extra-long panels, and some is swagged and draped like theater curtains.
By day, the sheer fabric diffuses the light so there is never any glare, and the curtains become a scrim through which one can glimpse Manhattan rooftops. 
When shafts of sunlight cut through the openings between the panels of muslin, they form evanescent stripes on the cool, dark concrete floor. 
At night, the space glows with dozens of candles, some in bowls aligned along the floor, others in delicate metal fixtures suspended from the ceiling.
"I want to make my home very peaceful, very quiet," Han Feng said. 
"I want you to feel the flow of the air."
Along one wall there is a procession of oddly shaped rocks, some with groupings of pebbles on top of them. 
These are her touchstones. 
"For me, rocks bring me memories, and wherever I go, I remember where I picked them," Han Feng said, adding that on one trip to Maine she had to rent a van to bring them all home. 
The assemblage is a variation on the rock gardens found in traditional Chinese landscaping. 
"When I see a rock, I see a mountain," she said.
The loft is divided into three parts: living room, dining room and bedroom. 
But unlike the awkward partitions that originally broke up the space, the areas are now delineated only by the placement of furniture, including Chinese pieces and those by Josef Hoffmann and Kolo Moser, the Viennese pioneers in modernism who founded the Wiener Werkstatte in 1903.
A hundred-year-old six-paneled Chinese screen separates the bedroom from the rest of the loft. 
Though attached to one wall and to the floor, it appears to be freestanding. 
With its open carvings and geometric latticework -- some panels have a squared-off pattern; others are arranged on the diagonal into diamonds -- the 9-by-12-foot screen is both massive and airy, at once romantic, lacy and slightly austere.
"It was originally used to divide rooms in a traditional Chinese house in Hangzhou," Han Feng said, referring to the eastern Chinese city where she spent her student years. 
Originally, rice paper was glued behind the latticework to give complete visual, if not auditory, privacy.
The bedroom has the feeling of an aerie, and the platform bed seems to float in space. 
It has a canopy made of pale blue mosquito netting, the fabric held by steel filigreed tiebacks, which the designer bought in Beijing in 1982. 
On the bed a white cloud of a comforter floats on top of the mattress, which rests on a bleached wood platform. 
Even the pillow shams, which are linen edged with a deep band of silk organza, appear almost weightless.
The single chair is a light, graceful 1905 Hoffmann rocker with circular arms and a rattan seat and back. 
An armoire and a baby grand piano are the bulkiest objects in the room. 
At night, Han Feng lights the candles and turns on an electrified lantern covered in canary yellow silk piped in crimson.
The dining room is really nothing more than a grouping of a table and chairs. 
They also seem to float in the middle of the loft, and the objects themselves have such a self-possessed integrity that they define their territory.
For the living area, the designer swagged and draped muslin into a three-sided tent, under which nestles a round table, chairs with curved spindle backs, and a love seat, all designed by Hoffmann. 
The intimate space is a place for a tete-a-tete or a solitary cup of jasmine tea. 
The stiff formality of the Hoffmann furniture is offset by a comfortably cushioned sofa placed just opposite.
In 1985, when Han Feng first arrived in New York, she embraced all things Western, both in fashion design and furniture. 
She even traded her long hair for a spiky punk cut and dyed it red.
She came to the United States to become a fashion designer, a program of study not available in China. 
"I wanted out of China," she said. 
"All I saw was T-shirts and jeans."
She studied English at Hunter College and sold dresses at Bloomingdale's. 
In 1989, she started making scarves of pleated silk and by 1991, had sold her scarves to stores like Barneys New York, Henri Bendel and Brooks Brothers. 
By 1992, Han Feng had branched out into blouses, and by 1995, she was making coats, suits and evening dresses.
Han Feng had an interior design epiphany 11 years ago when she met Tim Chu, an engineer at CBS, who invited her to his apartment, which was full of furniture by Hoffmann and other designers of the Wiener Werkstatte. 
Theirs was a functional geometric style, beautifully executed in warm woods with careful detailing, whether carvings, inlays or rich upholstery textures.
"I liked it because it's well made, very simple, with a tiny bit of detail," Han Feng said. 
"And the more I studied that period in the West, I saw that Hoffmann was influenced by Japanese art, so I understood why there are the carved patterns that look so Japanese."
Hoffmann's furniture also bears a similarity to Chinese furniture of the Ming dynasty. 
Both possess a sculptural beauty born of gracefully curved wood. 
And it must be said, both have a certain disregard for physical comfort: sprawling is not in their vocabulary. 
Wiener Werkstatte and Ming chairs are good for the posture. 
"They both make you want to sit straight," Han Feng said.
With Mr. Chu, she went to antiques dealers to study Wiener Werkstatte designs. 
Year by year, she slowly began to accumulate Hoffmann furniture, along with Chinese objects, ranging from the carved wood screen to a collection of bird cages, which are arranged in the living room.
Against the dining room wall is a rectangular Wiener Werkstatte sideboard, trimmed with brass, designed by Moser around 1903. 
Although the sideboard is Viennese, the shape and materials are reminiscent of Chinese, Korean or Japanese chests, which are also decorated with brass locks and drawer pulls. 
"It's Western furniture but with Asian details," Han Feng said.
The Viennese and Chinese pieces come into their own in these spare surroundings, but they have an innate sense of discretion that allows for visual impact without a hint of stridency.
In an alcove off the living room there is an antique claw-footed bathtub raised on wood blocks and completely functional. 
A Chinese bamboo step stool stands alongside.
There is, of course, a separate bathroom with a shower, sink, toilet and its own door, but the tub sits in the open, facing a window with a view of rooftops. 
An antique metal lantern hangs high up near the ceiling, and a second Chinese lantern in yellow silk adds more soft light just above the tub. 
A 10-foot-high mirror leans against a wall.
Han Feng said her inspiration came from the sensual gold-toned bath scene in "The English Patient."
"Remember the lighting, coming in from the carved wood doors?" she said. 
"Originally, I put the carved wood gate here, and the golden light was coming in, but I decided I didn't have to be exact."
The electrified silk lantern turned out to be gold enough.
For her, the bath symbolizes the luxury of the West. 
"Years ago in China, we never had the opportunity to take a bath," she said. 
"In China, you have a bucket of water, or you go to a public bath."
In the mornings, in a bow to efficiency, Han Feng starts her day with a shower. 
But at night, after she has lighted every candle in her loft and turned on the yellow silk lantern, she climbs into the raised tub for a very long and languorous soak.
And surely one of the great luxuries of living on one's own is coming home after a hard day's work and being able to take a bath in the living room.
