
On one of Beijing's busiest shopping streets, an eye-catching display for a small Chinese beer and soda company hangs in a glass case. 
The highlight of the display is a photograph of President Clinton and the First Lady, smiling at a White House Christmas party as they pose with the Chinese company's chairman and two other men. 
Beneath the photo sit an oversized beer bottle and two mugs.
The California entrepreneur who arranged the photo, and who appears in it, Johnny Chien Chuen Chung, has donated $391,000 to the Democratic Party since mid-1994, and he has visited the White House at least 50 times, often with foreign visitors like the beer executive in tow.
In an interview, Mr. Chung's lawyer, Brian A. Sun, said that some of the money that Mr. Chung used to make the donations had come from more than $3 million that he had received over the last three years in consulting fees and in capital from investors in his companies. 
Mr. Sun acknowledged that a number of foreigners, including the chairman of the Chinese beer company, accounted for nearly $1.5 million of that $3 million.
His lawyer's account of Mr. Chung's finances comes as Federal and Congressional investigators are trying to determine whether foreigners with no resident status in the United States contributed to American political campaigns, which would be illegal. 
The Democratic National Committee has said it is examining the contributions from the 42-year-old Mr. Chung, who had enjoyed little business success before he began to take on foreign partners.
Mr. Sun said that his client had done nothing wrong and that all the money donated to the party by Mr. Chung had been earned by him in legitimate business deals. 
Mr. Chung's foreign partners, Mr. Sun said, were not involved in his decision to make the contributions.
"My client was getting money in like any other businessman," Mr. Sun said, "and he was in complete control of what he did with it."
Interviews and records show that perhaps more than any other figure in the broad fund-raising controversy swirling around the Democratic Party, Mr. Chung, an engineer who was born in Taiwan and is now an American citizen, has sought to exploit his donations for commercial gain. 
Associates say he has used his impressive political access to cement business deals with investors from China, Taiwan and Hong Kong, squiring them to White House events and to fund raisers including a $25,000-a-plate dinner at the California home of the film maker Steven Spielberg and a birthday bash for Mr. Clinton at Radio City Music Hall.
Mr. Sun said much of the $3 million raised by Mr. Chung over the last three years had gone into his struggling fax services business, which he has gradually expanded into a consulting firm that helps foreign investors put together deals in the United States.
California state records show that over the last two years, Mr. Chung has formed at least seven other companies with foreign investors. 
These include two export-import companies that he has created with Chen Shizeng, the Chinese beer executive. 
Mr. Sun estimated that Mr. Chung had earned or raised from investors $500,000 to $1 million in connection with these seven ventures.
Federal election records show that several of his largest donations to the Democratic Party were made within days of the incorporation of these businesses, coinciding with his taking the investors to Democratic fund-raising events.
 
That Beijing 'Billboard' Irritates White House
Mr. Sun said that Mr. Chung, who declined to make any comment, was not consulted when the Chinese beer company, the Haomen Group, mounted the display with the photograph of the Clintons.
"Certainly he understood that people might use these pictures to try to make themselves look good," Mr. Sun said. 
"But the idea that this would be turned into some kind of billboard was not something he would have encouraged or wanted."
White House spokesmen today denounced the use of the photograph in a business promotion. 
They also said Mr. Chung had become "an irritant" over time and was "not welcome at the White House anymore."
But that the White House took so long to cut off Mr. Chung's access appears to be a rich symbol of how the Democrats, in the headlong rush to keep up with the Republicans in fund raising last year, ignored past safeguards that had enabled them to checking on donors' backgrounds.
White House documents released last week show that Mr. Clinton himself was concerned in April 1995 about the "circulating around" of pictures that showed him meeting with Chinese businessmen whom Mr. Chung had brought to the White House to watch the President give a radio address.
In addition, Robert L. Suettinger, a China specialist on the staff of the National Security Council, cautioned a colleague in a memorandum that month that Mr. Chung "should be treated with a pinch of suspicion."
"My impression," the memo went on, "is that he is a hustler, and appears to be involved in setting up some kind of consulting operation that will thrive by bringing Chinese entrepreneurs into town for exposure to high-level U.S. officials."
The concerns grew even more intense in the summer of 1995, when Mr. Chung sought a letter of support from the President as he left for China to intervene in a high-stakes diplomatic effort to free Harry Wu, an American labor activist imprisoned by the Chinese Government.
Mr. Clinton, who had written an earlier letter thanking Mr. Chung for opening "lines of communication between our Administration and the Taiwanese-American community," did not give Mr. Chung the letter he wanted concerning Mr. Wu, who was eventually freed.
But Donald L. Fowler, then the national chairman of the Democratic Party, did give Mr. Chung a more general letter, which did not mention Mr. Wu but noted that Mr. Chung was "a friend and a great supporter of the D.N.C."
At Mr. Chung's request, Mr. Fowler's office also later encouraged Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary to meet a Chinese petrochemical executive, at a time when Democratic fund-raisers kept soliciting donations from Mr. Chung.
Records of the Federal Election Commission show that Mr. Chung or his fax business, Automated Intelligent Systems Inc., gave the Democratic National Committee or other party organizations $91,000 in 1994, $175,000 in 1995 and $125,000 last year.
"He visited our place a lot, and he always seemed to have friends with him," said Mr. Fowler, whose office arranged for Mr. Chung to take the Chinese delegation to view the President's radio address. 
Mr. Fowler said that he knew nothing about Mr. Chung's business interests and that he "didn't take his effort to free Wu seriously at all."
But, he added, Mr. Chung was "always energetic and enthusiastic about everything."
 
It Was a '92 Debate That Gave Him an Idea
Mr. Chung, who lives with his wife and three children in Artesia, Calif., a Los Angeles suburb, has said in interviews with Los Angeles business publications that he first tried to court political figures in 1992, when he was having trouble getting his fax business off the ground.
In those interviews, he said that he had sunk $2 million into developing a computer system that could transmit a fax simultaneously to thousands of locations, and that he was having so little success that his wife had urged him to give up and get a salaried job. 
He also faced lawsuits from investors who had lost money through the earlier failure of a retail computer company he had owned.
It was while watching a 1992 campaign debate between Mr. Clinton and President George Bush, Mr. Chung said, that it occurred to him that government offices could be a market for his fax services. 
He raced to Little Rock, where he met Hillary Rodham Clinton after knocking on the door at the Governor's Mansion. 
That visit came to nothing more than a little encouragement.
Mr. Chung did not start making political donations until 1994. 
One associate said he started giving only after going with a group of Taiwan-Americans to the White House to complain about Federal rules requiring people born in Taiwan to list China as their birthplace on passports.
At that meeting, Mr. Chung also met John Huang, who then worked as a trade official at the Commerce Department but would soon become a leading Democratic fund-raiser. 
Shortly afterward, Mr. Chung has told associates, other Democratic fund-raisers began soliciting donations from him. 
(Even though Mr. Chung later called Mr. Huang several times at the Commerce Department to try to set up meetings for business associates, he has said Mr. Huang himself never asked him for donations.)
Federal records show that Mr. Chung made his first donations, totaling $11,000, in August 1994 to attend a birthday party for Mr. Clinton in Maryland. 
He then gave $40,000 early that December to bring guests to a luncheon with Mrs. Clinton in Los Angeles.
At that time, Mr. Sun said, Mr. Chung's main goal was to bring investors into his sagging fax company. 
Much of the money so invested, the lawyer said, has come from the Taiwanese family of Liu Li Ching, who has homes in Taiwan and the United States and holds an immigration green card, making him a permanent legal resident of the United States.
But in late December 1994, which is when Mr. Chung took the Chinese beer executives to the White House to be photographed with the Clintons, he was also starting to make deals with citizens of China and Hong Kong who have no resident status at all in the United States.
Mr. Sun said that at the time of that Washington visit, Mr. Chen, the chairman of Haomen, the Chinese beer and soda company, was buying an interest in the fax business, either for himself or for other Chinese. 
During that trip, Mr. Chung paid $40,000 to the Democratic National Committee for Mr. Chen and an associate to attend a fund raiser with Vice President Al Gore.
In addition, Reta Lewis, then a Presidential aide, gave the beer executives a tour of the White House. 
She said in an interview that she had had to stop the Chinese from posing for photos there with six-packs of Haomen beer.
 
Deals for Chung, Donations for the Party
By April 1995, California records show, Mr. Chung had created the first two of at least seven export-import or real-estate companies that he has formed with foreign citizens. 
He and Mr. Chen signed papers to incorporate the two companies that April 10. 
Two days earlier, Mr. Chung had taken Mr. Chen and others to the dinner with the President at Mr. Spielberg's house, paying the Democratic Party $125,000 to attend.
Similarly, Mr. Chung created a company on June 11, 1996, as an agent for Leung Chun Fat, a Hong Kong man who wanted to export American clothes dryers and movie videos to China. 
Mr. Chung donated $20,000 that day to take Mr. Leung and his wife to a Democratic fund raiser at the home of the Hollywood executive Lew Wasserman.
The other companies also involved business people from Hong Kong, including Li Jing Wei, a wealthy real-estate investor.
Associates said Mr. Chung had played varying roles in these ventures, which have had mixed success. 
In some cases he was paid as a consultant, and in others he received partial ownership shares in return for his help in making American contacts. 
In a couple of instances, he received no compensation.
Mr. Sun said Mr. Chung had received no money from the delegation of leading Chinese executives that he brought to the White House to watch President Clinton give the radio address. 
That group included executives of large state-owned corporations, with interests including petrochemicals and real estate.
All in all, Mr. Sun said, "we think there is clearly evidence to show that Mr. Chung had substantial sources of money to make the donations other than what he got from the people whom he did bring to the fund raisers."
"It was his money," Mr. Sun said, "it was in his control, and he had enough money to make the donations."
