
TWO bitter winters in the late 1970's sent this city's temperatures plummeting to minus 2 and killed all but a dozen of the National Arboretum's collection of 956 camellias. 
That led a plant geneticist named Dr. William L. Ackerman to take a close look at one of the survivors, a Camellia oleifera.
"I doubt that the Chinese were very concerned about the beauty of Camellia oleifera," he said early in December in the arboretum, leaning companionably against a trunk of this giant shrub. 
"If you could use it for cooking and frying, fine."
In China, Camellia oleifera is widely cultivated, Dr. Ackerman said. 
The Chinese have been pressing its seeds for oil since at least 2700 B.C., and it is used for everything from cooking oil to cosmetics and hair-dressing products.
The mother shrub he was leaning on enabled him to develop a whole race of hardy camellias that can bloom from mid-September to mid-January, and from late February to April. 
And this is in Maryland, Pennsylvania and Connecticut and on Long Island.
When gardeners think of camellias, they picture varieties of the spring-blooming Camellia sasanqua, or its winter-blooming cousin, C. japonica. 
With their glossy leaves and exquisitely shaped flowers, these plants have been the darlings of the South since the 18th century, when colonists planted what they thought was the so-called tea plant from China. 
What they got was an imposter: C. japonica's leaves made lousy tea. 
But when the plant began to bloom in the dead of winter, it grew as indispensable to Southerners as mint juleps.
The only trouble was, Northerners wanted it, too. 
Enter C. oleifera -- 150 years later. 
"This plant is the basis of our cold hardiness," said Dr. Ackerman, 77, patting the camellia's cinnamon-colored bark. 
"Unfortunately, this bark is genetic recessive."
Oh well, you can't have everything.
This specimen, started in 1948 from a gift seed from the Lu Shan Botanical Garden, in Kuling, China, now stands a magnificent 24 feet tall and 30 feet wide, overlooking the Anacostia River. 
C. oleifera's glossy evergreen leaves are dotted with three-inch single-petaled white flowers with little gold stamens. 
It's such a handsome landscape plant, it's been made available commercially as Lu Shan Snow. 
Its offspring can withstand temperatures to minus 15.
"What other broad-leaf evergreen will flower for eight or nine months a year, and give you a beautiful plant all year round?" said Dr. Ackerman, who has developed just about every shrub form of camellia, from prostrate to globular to columnar to bonsai.
For a kid who grew up on a dairy farm in New Jersey and swore he would never end up milking cows 365 days a year, this isn't too far from the barn. 
From 1979 to 1984, he made 10,000 crosses and came up with 2,500 hybrids, which were field-tested from North Carolina to Pennsylvania. 
Imagine keeping records on thousands of seedlings, devising cone-shaped pots so that 100 seedlings could grow 18-inch tap roots, then digging 100 post-holes in your garden to accommodate them. 
"You get addicted," said Dr. Ackerman, who retired as a research plant breeder at the National Arboretum.
So if you live in an area that doesn't go below minus 15 (being near the ocean helps) you have a fighting chance to get a camellia to bloom outdoors in December. 
Snow Flurry has white peony-like flowers that open in late September and continue to November, and Winter's Beauty, a pink peony type, blooms from mid-December into January.
Even if a sudden freeze damages blossoms, a hardy plant like Winter's Waterlily will usually bounce back with fresh white double blooms within 72 hours. 
Other tough bloomers include Winter's Interlude, with deep pink anemone-type flowers, and Winter's Snow, a white semidouble.
The spring-bloomers, which are generally hardy only to minus 10 degrees, include Jerry Hill, a pink double; Red Fellow; and a red semidouble called Fire 'N Ice. 
Kuro Delight, a maroon-red semidouble, will tolerate cold snaps down to minus 15, but may not be available for another year or so.
Dr. Ackerman warns gardeners north of Virginia that most books on camellias are aimed at Southerners. 
More northerly gardeners should plant camellias in the spring, not the fall, as often recommended. 
They should be protected in winter from winds and morning sun, in a rich humusy soil. 
A mulch of pine needles, bark or oak leaves helps. 
Within six feet of the foundation of a house, they will be somewhat protected, or they can be bedded down in winter inside burlap filled with dry oak leaves.
A list of hardy camellias is available from the National Arboretum, (202) 245-4523. 
Sources include Hills Nursery, Arlington, Va., (703) 527-3472; Behnke Nurseries, Beltsville, Md., (301) 937-1100; Camellia Forest Nursery, Chapel Hill, N.C., (919) 968-0504; and Roslyn Nursery, Dix Hills, N.Y. 
(631) 643-9347.
