
Human Rights Watch, an organization that monitors human rights abuses worldwide, is lobbying International Olympic Committee members in an attempt to gain I.O.C. opposition to Beijing's bid to hold the 2000 Summer Olympic Games.
Robert Bernstein, chairman of Human Rights Watch, said his United States-based organization received "an unacceptable response" from the I.O.C. after his group had sent a letter to the I.O.C.'s president, Juan Antonio Samaranch, protesting the consideration of China as a host country.
Bernstein said that Human Rights Watch might ask athletes to boycott the 2000 Olympics if China were selected as the site.
"The Olympics would be an enormous plum for the Chinese Government," Bernstein said. 
"China would put people away and clean up the city like you wouldn't believe. 
It would be great for the economy. 
The Government would be able to say it was well respected by the world community, while it was still torturing prisoners."
The 93-member I.O.C. will select the site for the 2000 Olympics at its September meeting in Monte Carlo, Monaco. 
The members have begun to travel to potential Olympic sites, which include Sydney, Australia; Manchester, England; Brasilia, Istanbul, Turkey; and Berlin. 
Sydney is considered the favorite, but Beijing has support among I.O.C. members who wish to open the Games to another part of the world.
Anita DeFrantz, the only I.O.C. member from the United States, said she intended to visit Beijing, as well as all the other bidding cities, before making a decision.
"I know the arguments that the opponents of the Beijing bid are making," she said. 
"I am also aware that the United States tends to be on top of many lists for human-rights violations."
Recently, China has released several priests and other political prisoners. 
Skeptical observers believe this is part of a public relations campaign to land the Olympics. 
In addition, I.O.C. members have been assured by local and regional officials in China that there will be no opposition expressed to their visits.
A report by Asia Watch, one of the groups under the umbrella of Human Rights Watch, stated that the campaign of Deng Xiaoping for economic reform "had not prevented new arrests, arbitrary detention, prejudged political trials, torture, and other human rights abuses in 1992."
In response to his complaint to the I.O.C., Bernstein received a letter from Jean-Mishal Gunz, a deputy director of the I.O.C., that stated, "Your comments are duly noted, and we appreciate you keeping us informed."
Bernstein said that this response was inadequate and that his organization would begin an organized campaign aimed at all 93 I.O.C. voting members.
Human Rights Watch has also charged Turkey and Brazil, other Olympic bidders, with serious rights abuses. 
But Bernstein said that China was by far the worst offender.
"The others simply are not as bad," Bernstein said.
