
FREEDOM is heaven-sent, or so it would seem to anyone scanning the red-tiled rooftops of this southern Chinese city. 
The skyline of Guangzhou, one of China's free-market boomtowns, is covered with a forest of satellite dishes that allow television viewers here to enjoy the antics of Bart Simpson and Oprah Winfrey; NFL football and Australian cricket; the scantily clad lifeguards of "Baywatch" and the unclad models of a Japanese pornography channel; CNN and the uncensored local television news from across the border in Hong Kong.
And while almost every one of those satellite dishes is illegal under an 11-month-old decree, the Government seems unwilling to force the owners to take them down. 
Wang Bin, a shopkeeper, said that while his 12-year-old son does not understand a word of English, "he still loves 'The Simpsons,' " the American cartoon show beamed to China by Star TV, a pan-Asian satellite service.
"Maybe the people would protest very loudly if they take away our dishes," Mr. Wang said. 
"Everybody loves satellite television."
 
Hard to Stop
In China and almost everywhere else in the world where freedom is not a given, authoritarian governments are coming to realize their worst fears about the information age. 
Fax machines, video recorders and cellular telephones made chinks in the censorship wall. 
And now it is the spread of satellite television that is threatening to bring the wall down. 
Governments are finding it nearly impossible to stop people from grabbing their entertainment -- and more important, their news and information -- from the skies.
Not that they aren't trying. 
In March, Saudi Arabia banned satellite dishes as "un-Islamic," ordering more than 150,000 dishes in the country to be dismantled, and neighboring Kuwait is moving toward a similar ban. 
Dishes for private homes have long been outlawed in Singapore and Malaysia, where foreign programs are labeled a threat to traditional Asian values. 
Hindu fundamentalists in India, outraged by the racy videos on the Asian version of MTV, have demanded that the Government shut out Western satellite broadcasts. 
An Egyptian province banned dishes last spring after the governor complained that the local furniture industry was dying because "the workers are stuck in front of the sex scenes coming off the dish."
Yet governments that try to shut down satellite technology are often finding themselves outwitted by determined viewers, a problem that will only get worse for repressive rulers as satellite dishes grow smaller, more powerful and cheaper. 
The dishes are already sufficiently low-tech that they can be made in kits that are easily smuggled across borders. 
Dishes sold in China come from several countries.
Bowing to what seems to be the inevitable, some repressive governments are allowing the dishes to stay. 
The junta that runs Myanmar, the nation formerly known as Burma, puts few restrictions on the ownership of satellite dishes -- although few people in Myanmar can afford them -- while the Indonesian Government has welcomed satellite technology as a means of beaming its own programs to the thousands of islands in that farflung archipelago nation.
The situation in China is instructive, if only because China has made the crackdown on satellite television such a public campaign -- and because it has been such an embarrassing failure. 
The Government moved against satellite dishes last October, prompted by the growing popularity of Star TV, the Hong Kong-based satellite service that had been purchased only weeks before by Rupert Murdoch, the media baron. 
Mr. Murdoch, who paid $525 million for control of Star, made few friends in Beijing when he announced shortly after the purchase that new technology "posed an unambiguous threat to totalitarian regimes."
The Chinese decree against satellite television banned virtually all private satellite dishes, estimated to number in the hundreds of thousands. 
Dish owners were ordered to take them down immediately or face heavy fines. 
Foreigners were allowed to continue to receive satellite transmissions in their homes and offices, but the dishes were banned from all hotels with less than a two-star quality rating, the only hotels that most Chinese can afford.
Nearly a year later, little has changed. 
A satellite dish can still be easily, if not so openly, purchased for as little as $600. 
Rather than dismantling their dishes, most dish owners in Beijing have simply hidden them behind brick walls or under canvas tarpaulins. 
To limit the risk, neighbors have joined in communal satellite services, all of them drawing their programs from a single, well-hidden dish. 
In some cities of the more freewheeling south, dish owners do not bother to hide them at all.
Star TV's figures suggest that Chinese viewership may actually have increased since the crackdown. 
An independent audit circulated by Star among Hong Kong advertising executives last summer showed that the number of homes with television able to receive at least one Star channel in Guangzhou rose from 49 percent to 55 percent, while in Beijing it rose from 9 percent to 13 percent.
Mr. Murdoch's own relationship with the Chinese leadership doubtless improved when he decided earlier this year to drop the BBC World Service news from the Star lineup beamed to China.
"The Chinese Government has decided, and I think logically, that it really can't shut out satellite television entirely, whatever the threat," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"We're not talking about a few dissidents here. 
Hundreds of thousands of Chinese have now invested their life savings in these dishes, and there would be a nasty public uproar if the Government really forced the dishes down."
In a few small, rigidly controlled countries, the crackdown on satellite TV has been reasonably successful. 
But even those governments are feeling pressure to open up viewing choices in ways that will almost certainly limit their ability to censor what viewers see. 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are talking about establishing sophisticated cable systems that would offer dozens of channels. 
Singapore has already established a government-controlled cable system that includes news bulletins from CNN and the BBC. 
Even as it continues to deny satellite dishes to its own citizens, Singapore has invited satellite services, including MTV and HBO Asia, to set up their regional headquarters there. 
Neighboring Malaysia has announced that it will partially lift the ban on satellite dishes in 1996.
Even in Iran, where the Islamic Government has long preached about the evils of Western entertainment, there is some hesitation to ban satellite dishes outright. 
In Teheran, an estimated 50,000 satellite dishes sprout from rooftops, and the city's most popular television show is said to be "Dynasty," courtesy of Mr. Murdoch's Star TV. 
Iranian state television is notoriously dull. 
"The cultural invasion will not be resolved by the physical removal of satellite dishes," the Teheran Times newspaper editorialized last spring. 
The paper suggested that the "antidote to poisonous foreign cultural invasion" was simple: improve the quality of the offerings on state television so that viewers do not bother with the satellite fare. 
Even some of the mullahs might buy that logic.
