
As Hong Kong puzzles over its prospects after it is swallowed by China in 1997, there is no better reminder of the risks that lie ahead than the drab, bicycle-filled streets of this wind-swept town on the eastern Chinese coast.
Weihai, a sleepy backwater, does not look anything like bustling, sophisticated Hong Kong. 
And that is the point.
Once a British enclave just like Hong Kong, Weihai (pronounced WAY-hi) was returned to China in 1930 -- with assurances similar to those that Hong Kong is now getting. 
China declared that it would leave Weihai's civil servants in place, retain Weihai's regulations and low tax rates, and allow it to be ruled as a "special administrative region" directly under the central Government.
 
History to Heed
What happened is a cautionary tale for Hong Kong.
The philosopher George Santayana may have been exaggerating a bit when he wrote that "those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."
But whether or not Weihai's fate is repeated in Hong Kong, those who cannot remember Weihai's history are at least condemned to miss a nice yarn.
The past is not the kind of thing that Weihai officials like to talk about. 
They beam at the start of interviews and happily launch into monologues on industrial growth last year; their faces fall and they look reproachfully at a visitor who suggests that the worst nightmare of the residents of Hong Kong is that their colony will turn into another Weihai.
"People in Hong Kong shouldn't worry," Yin Xingyi, a mid-ranking economic official in Weihai, said with a touch of impatience. 
He added, referring to the authorities who ruled China in the 1930's: "The Nationalist Government was corrupt and its word was meaningless. 
Now we have a Communist Party Government, which will keep its word."
Mr. Yin nodded sagely as if that settled the question.
 
Two Ports for Britain
In 1898, Britain forced the declining Qing Dynasty to grant leases on two chunks of land that could be used as port communities and naval bases: the New Territories, which make up most of present-day Hong Kong, and Weihai, 1,170 miles to the northeast.
Weihai then had more people than the New Territories, 128,000 to 102,000, but the two places were roughly comparable and the terms of the two leases were similar. 
Weihai prospered as a duty-free port, and the British energetically built roads, phone lines and a hospital.
While never as dynamic as Hong Kong, Weihai was an oasis of stabilityII in the Chinese mainland, and merchants flocked to the city. 
Taxes were low and the local government turned budget surpluses.
 
No Fond Memories
To be sure, official Chinese history does not remember British rule quite so fondly.
"The British exploited us economically," said Cong Weidong, a young official in the Weihai Foreign Affairs Office. 
Asked if the city had benefited in any way from British rule, Mr. Cong looked blank.
"How could we have benefited?" he said with a shrug. 
"They were exploiting us!
You don't benefit from being exploited."
In any case, London decided that it did not need Weihai, and so it offered to return the city to China.
Negotiations on the return of Weihai in some ways were similar to the negotiations over the future of Hong Kong in the early 1980's. 
The people of Weihai were no more consulted than were those of Hong Kong, for the discussions in both cases were conducted between the British and Chinese Governments.
The negotiations stimulated demands for some local self-government, but the demands were ignored. 
The Nationalist rulers of China used the same kind of nationalist propaganda to stir anti-British feeling as the Communists have used to try to bolster their position in Hong Kong.
After eight years of negotiations, China and Britain agreed in 1930 on the return of Weihai later that year. 
The Chinese leadership promised to maintain the existing building codes, tax system, sanitary regulations and police services.
The local Chinese business community was anxious about the return to Chinese rule, just as Hong Kong investors worry about what will happen after 1997. 
A book on Weihai's history, "British Mandarins and Chinese Reformers," quotes a contemporary newspaper account: "A number of merchants already dispatched money elsewhere while many salt merchants sent their supplies to Japan."
 
A Downhill Course
After it was handed over, Weihai quickly went downhill. 
While the central Government made the town a special administrative zone -- just as Hong Kong is set to become a "special autonomous region" in 1997 -- it sent bureaucrats to run the port and raise taxes.
Local people rioted against the taxes, the economy tumbled when Weihai was robbed of its duty-free status, and tourism plummeted. 
The authorities reinstituted a hated system of forced labor to build roads, and when Chinese protested a judge declared that it was illegal to oppose the Government.
Then Japan seized Weihai in 1938, as part of its invasion of China, giving it up only in 1945. 
Four years later, the Communist Revolution unfolded, and the army made Weihai a naval base and a closed city.
There are, however, several reasons why Hong Kong's prospects may be better than Weihai's. 
For starters, Hong Kong has a promise that it can remain a free port, that its taxes will not be used to finance the central government, and that mainland officials will not be sent to rule the territory. 
Whatever the outcome of the debate now under way over democracy in Hong Kong, the territory will have more decision-making power than Weihai ever did.
Perhaps even more important, however, China seems much more stable today than it was in the 1930's, a period of civil war and foreign invasion. 
While Chinese mismanagement hurt Weihai, it was the wars that caused its virtual collapse -- and for now nothing like that is visible on the horizon to threaten Hong Kong.
