
Ever since Chinese officials this week started publicly criticizing a groundbreaking decision by Hong Kong's highest court, a new sense of tension and uncertainty has crept into the relationship between China and Hong Kong, the former British colony that was reunited with the mainland 19 months ago.
The ruling, handed down by a unanimous Court of Final Appeal on Jan. 
29, says that four children born in mainland China to parents who are Hong Kong residents have the right to live in Hong Kong.
"The court decision is a mistake and against the Basic Law," Zhao Qizheng, the information minister for China's Cabinet, told reporters who gathered on Monday for a Chinese New Year's party. 
"This is a very serious matter."
Although the case's details involved immigration policy, the judges seized the opportunity to make broad statements about the independence of Hong Kong's judiciary and about Hong Kong autonomy in general.
It is the first time that Hong Kong officials have clashed so openly with the mainland authorities over gray areas in the Hong Kong Basic Law, which both sides agreed would serve as the legal foundation for the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region when it reverted to China on July 1, 1997.
And after the charges and the countercharges of the last two days, it is clear that there are major differences of opinion about the meaning of "one country, two systems."
Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, said today that he was sending his Justice Secretary to Beijing to discuss the situation.
The case that sparked the debate was simple enough, concerning the immigration rights of tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of mainland Chinese with a parent who is a legal Hong Kong resident.
The ruling opens the way to admission of people to Hong Kong if at least one of their parents is a resident -- even if the children were born before their parents lived in Hong Kong, and even if they are now adults.
The justices set an important precedent and marched headlong into uncharted and treacherous waters. 
They said Hong Kong's Basic Law, not the laws or policies of the mainland, should decide the matter and that Hong Kong courts have full authority to interpret the Basic Law.
"Many people in Hong Kong believe there was clear intent among the judges to set out a landmark case," said Wang Chenguang, an associate professor of law at the City University of Hong Kong who was formerly at Beijing University. 
"It reflects a desire to use this formal document to reinforce and assert the autonomy of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and also the independence of the Hong Kong judiciary."
The remarks by Mr. Zhao, Chinese official, set off a round of dire predictions and paroxysms of dread among politicians, scholars and diplomats in Hong Kong, who have long feared that Beijing would try to force its values on their territory. 
Thus far, Hong Kong remains a freewheeling place whose newspapers are quick to pick up hints of mainland scandals.
"Any move to restrict the independent judicial power of the Court of Final Appeal would be a matter of serious concern to us," said the British Consulate General in Hong Kong in a statement on Tuesday.
It remains entirely unclear what, if anything, the Chinese Government plans to do about the situation.
Many Hong Kong legal scholars said the decision by the Final Court of Appeals was just that -- final. 
And China's leaders are savvy enough to know that any direct interference with Hong Kong's judiciary would be likely to cause foreign investors to flee from the slumping but still vibrant metropolis.
The central legal issue is how to interpret two somewhat contradictory clauses in the Basic Law. 
Article 22 of Chapter 2, which deals with relations between Hong Kong and the mainland, says Chinese residents wishing to go to Hong Kong must first gain the permission of China's authorities.
But Article 24 of Chapter 3, dealing with Hong Kong citizens' rights, says children of Hong Kong citizens who are born outside Hong Kong enjoy the rights of citizens. 
"According to this," said a legal scholar, who spoke on condition of anonymity, "these kids have an inalienable right of abode and don't need a permit."
In their ruling, the judges put Article 24 above Article 22, in effect proclaiming that mainland rules that interfere with the constitutionally protected rights of Hong Kong citizens are invalid, Professor Wang said.
In narrow terms, that decision means that Hong Kong will now accept children of residents whether or not they have the blessing of the mainland authorities to leave and will give thousands of mainland immigrants already in Hong Kong illegally a legal mechanism for staying. 
But to many liberals in Hong Kong, the significance of the decision is much broader.
"The court asserted in this way both the self-government of Hong Kong and the necessity of rights and the rule of law," Yash Ghai, a well-known law professor the University of Hong Kong, wrote in the South China Morning Post.
China has yet to explain its objections fully, and Mr. Zhao said the Government would present its formal opinion at "an appropriate time."
At a previously scheduled Foreign Ministry briefing on Tuesday, a spokesman said only that the central Government was concerned about the issue, adding that the opinion of mainland legal scholars "is worthy of attention."
But on Sunday, the state-controlled news media featured interviews with four legal scholars who had helped draft the Basic Law. 
They attacked the court decision, contending that the court could not disregard Chinese legislation and that its jurisdiction was limited.
Wu Jianfan of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences said the authority to interpret the law "rests with the National People's Congress Standing Committee."
Some mainland scholars contend that the Congress, China's legislature, should have been called on to clarify any contradiction in the Basic Law.
The Chinese authorities have also said they are worried about a possible large-scale influx of immigrants into Hong Kong at a time when unemployment is rising. 
For the same reason, the court's decision provoked criticism from many Hong Kong residents and from the Hong Kong government.
In the end the decision may not be fully enforceable. 
The court instructed the Hong Kong government to meet with the mainland authorities to devise a new system to process immigrants. 
But mainland officials may be less than eager to cooperate.
