
In an important gesture to the Clinton administration, China today released on medical parole the second of two major figures still serving long prison terms for leading the Tiananmen Square uprising of 1989.
A brief dispatch this morning on the New China News Agency said that Chen Ziming, 42, "has been released on bail for medical treatment" under an order from "Chinese judicial authorities."
Mr. Chen, a social scientist and publisher, is a veteran of China's democracy movement. 
He was branded along with Wang Juntao as the "black hands" behind the political demonstrations that paralyzed the Chinese capital five years ago. 
Each man received a 13-year prison term in February 1991.
 
An Unexpected Move
The release came as a surprise to China's dissidents, many of whom have been predicting that with the April 23 release of Mr. Wang, the Chinese leaders would make no more concessions to Washington in order to win renewal of China's "most favored nation" trade status.
Today's decision follows a steady trickle of actions in recent days that appeared timed to influence President Clinton's decision on whether to renew the trade privileges.
On Friday, five religious activists were released from labor camps because of their "good behavior," China said. 
On Thursday, a 54-year-old woman imprisoned for four years for religious activities was released in southern China's Fujian Province.
Earlier in the week, China issued a passport after ten refusals to a constitutional scholar, Yu Haocheng, 66, who will leave China for an academic year at Columbia University.
A longtime associate of Mr. Chen's, reached this morning, said this series of releases demonstrates the determination of the Chinese leadership to avoid a trade confrontation with the Clinton administration.
"Even if releasing Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming involves a great risk for the Chinese government, today's action shows that the Chinese Government is willing to take this risk in order to win" renewal of its low tariff privileges in the American market, the associate said.
In fact, he added, the risk of losing these trade privileges on $30 billion in exports to the United States, is greater than the risk of releasing two ardent democracy campaigners. 
"China's politics and economy cannot bear this loss," said the associate, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
When Mr. Wang was released he was put on a plane to New York, where he is receiving treatment for hepatitis.
In an interview a week ago, Mr. Chen's wife, Wang Zhihong, 38, expressed pessimism that she would see her husband released this year. 
She said one of her hopes has been that they could have a child. 
"I'm afraid that perhaps I will be too old to have one" by the time he would be released, she said.
Today, she was reported to have accompanied her husband out of Beijing for medical treatment. 
The Reuters news agency quoted Mr. Chen's sister, Chen Zihua, as saying Chinese authorities "originally wanted to send them abroad" for treatment but relented when Mr. Chen said he wanted to stay in China.
Mr. Chen's wife said she had made dozens of petitions to the authorities to release her husband on medical grounds. 
She said he was suffering from a skin ailment that was spreading all over his body, gastrointestinal problems and a diet so poor that his teeth were loosening.
"In 1993 for a whole year, he was not able to take a single shower," she said.
Mr. Chen and Mr. Wang, whose prodemocracy activism began during the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement in Beijing, founded the Social Economic Research Institute and were publishers of a newspaper called Economics Weekly.
