
The Government said today that it was releasing two prominent political prisoners before the completion of their sentences. 
The move was apparently a gesture to Washington and a signal that Beijing may be testing the waters for a broader amnesty.
The better-known of the two is Wang Xizhe, a 44-year-old pioneer of China's democracy movement. 
Mr. Wang's hair has reportedly turned white in his 12 years of solitary confinement.
Mr. Wang would be the first of the "counterrevolutionaries" imprisoned after the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement to be released early.
"In my mind, this is the most important prison release so far," said John T. Kamm, an American businessman and human rights campaigner who has pressed for the release of Mr. Wang. "This is a very good sign. 
It opens the door to possible other releases of long-term prisoners."
Zhao Shaohua, a spokeswoman for the State Council Information Office, said Mr. Wang would be released soon. 
Mr. Wang's wife has been told to go to the prison on Tuesday but not to bring gifts for him, so it is expected that he may be freed then.
Ms. Zhao also said that Gao Shan, a 36-year-old former Government official imprisoned after the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown, had been released in the last few days. 
Mr. Gao had been serving a four-year sentence that would have been completed this summer.
[American officials have been pressing the Chinese to free the imprisoned dissidents and to lift travel restrictions. 
A State Department official said, "We welcome the releases."]
Some top leaders are said to favor a broad amnesty for political prisoners, in part to improve relations with Washington as the Clinton Administration begins to work out its policy toward Beijing. 
Other Chinese leaders oppose an amnesty on the grounds that such a move would embolden dissidents.
In another sign that the political environment may be easing, the Government has allowed several well-known rights campaigners to leave the country. 
In Shandong Province, political prisoners have recently been moved together and are enjoying improved food and a reduction in their workload.
Perhaps the most curious aspect about Mr. Wang's case is that he remains a Marxist, one of the few left in China.
Lo Hoi-sing, a Hong Kong businessman who was imprisoned in a cell adjacent to Mr. Wang after the 1989 crackdown but who has since been freed, said that Mr. Wang remained extremely alert mentally but that the long imprisonment took a toll on his health. 
Mr. Wang complained of stomach ailments and his hair has turned white, Mr. Lo said.
First imprisoned in 1968, Mr. Wang was released after a year. 
He helped write a famous set of wall posters in 1974 that called for democracy and the rule of law.
Mr. Wang was imprisoned from 1977 to 1979, then again became active in the democracy movement. 
After protesting the detention of other democracy campaigners, he was detained in April 1981 and sentenced to 14 years in prison.
Mr. Wang's release may lead to calls to free Wei Jingsheng, an electrician and essayist who was the leader of the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement. 
Mr. Wei is now serving the 14th year of a 15-year sentence.
