
It was class time at Beijing University, but at 10 this morning seven guys in shorts and T-shirts crowded around a color TV in dorm room 511, a spare cement cubicle decorated with three metal bunkbeds and yesterday's laundry. 
Nine student "shareholders" had bought the TV last month in anticipation of just such an occasion, and now hoots and jeers filled the air.
"Aya, that Malone he plays dirty."
"Nice ball. 
Go Rodman!"
"They're losing with three minutes to go. 
I can't stand it. 
Hit me with a hammer!"
Minutes later, half a world away, the Chicago Bulls clinched their sixth National Basketball Association championship with a final basket with only five seconds to play. 
The students jumped to their feet and began a refrain: "Qiao Dan, Qiao Dan, Qiao Dan."
Qiao Dan, of course, is Michael Jordan. 
Sure, Bill Clinton, President of the world's most powerful nation, is about to visit China. 
But to the Chinese, Michael Jordan remains America's king.
Mr. Clinton's state visit this month has brought out citizens' interest in all things American, from books to clothes to movie stars. 
But these all seem like passing fancies compared to the intense passion that Chinese, especially young Chinese, have developed for Michael Jordan and American basketball.
"Michael Jordan is much more famous than Clinton here," said Cheng Qian, 20, a Bulls fan and shareholder in the TV set who is a management major at Beijing University.
The Chinese have named him kongzhong feiren -- "space flier."
In the last week, businessmen, retired teachers, students and government officials have all paused to watch him, live on state-run television, as he led the Chicago Bulls to their 4-2 series victory over the Utah Jazz.
When Beijing Meilande Information Company recently asked 1,000 Chinese to name the best-known Americans ever, Michael Jordan came in second, trailing Thomas Edison by just a few percentage points. 
Behind him were Albert Einstein, Mark Twain and Bill Gates.
On the sidewalks of Jianguomenwai Avenue, vendors sell Michael Jordan posters. 
In department stores, Michael Jordan books and calendars sit beside those featuring Hong Kong movie stars and the late Chairman Mao.
"Of all American things, basketball is the most popular," said Li Fa, a junior, who could not join the crowd in 511 because he is a Jazz fan. 
"Everyone knows Michael Jordan."
State television began broadcasting prerecorded N.B.A. games in the early 1990's, and recently switched to live broadcasts. 
Today, Chinese viewers had three opportunities to see the final playoff game, which the Bulls won 87-86. 
The first was live at 7:30 A.M., then a taped game at 9 A.M. for late risers, and a replay at 9 P.M.
Chinese are hard pressed to say why they so adore the Bulls and Michael Jordan, who scored 45 points in the final game and was named Most Valuable Player.
"I don't know -- because of his skill, and because he alone carries half of the Chicago team," said Li Qixing, 20, another of the TV's shareholders.
American basketball is certainly more colorful than the home-grown variant, where the People's Liberation Army's August 1 team (named for the day the Army was founded) is the reigning champion. 
In skill and in entertainment value, Chinese players are no match for the likes of Dennis Rodman, who played the game with much of his hair dyed green.
Said Han Bai, a junior, sitting on his bunk bed in jeans and a T-shirt, "I couldn't accept this from a Chinese player, but he's an American so we expect it."
And American sportscasts have other attactions.
The students who gathered in 511 on this steamy morning, ooohed when they saw Leonardo DiCaprio, star of "Titanic," sitting at courtside. 
And, in a room full of male college juniors, the Jazz's cheerleaders, dancing in black leotards, got the thumbs up as well. 
Heads nodded in approval as Cheng Qian opined, "In this way, the Jazz are better than the Bulls."
