
Life is unimaginably hard in the burnt umber hills of this part of northwestern China. 
In four of the last five years there has been no harvest and millions of poor farmers are living in a state of hunger, poor health and illiteracy that in some areas approaches the deprivation levels of China's great famine in the late 1950's.
Muslim villagers here in southern Ningxia, known as the Hui Autonomous Region, say that no official from the Xiji County government, 20 miles away, has ever hiked into this desperately poor hamlet to offer assistance to the peasants, most of whom cannot afford to send their children to school and for whom medical care is nonexistent.
To add to their misery this fall, a plague of rats has come down from the mountains to feed on the pitifully small potato crop that sprouted after the blessing of a late summer rain and is all that will keep hunger at bay this winter. 
This year, a farmer named He Delin put it ruefully, "Our life is potatoes."
Although China has made prodigious efforts under Communist rule to eradicate poverty, lifting tens if not hundreds of millions to a higher standard of living through the economic reforms led by the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, since 1978, from 60 million to 100 million Chinese still live on the edge of starvation and despair.
And according to new World Bank estimates, more than one-quarter of all Chinese -- about 350 million -- are in substantial deprivation, subsisting on less than $1 a day. 
In addition, for the first time a significant number of urban dwellers -- perhaps 15 million or more -- are falling below the poverty line as moribund state factories jettison workers in cities with no social security or welfare nets to catch them.
The significance of the new estimates is that they show a larger part of China's population being left behind than previously thought, even as the overall economy continues to register impressive growth. 
Although an average Chinese is better off today than at any time in the last 150 years, a huge part of the population -- more than the population of the United States -- remains on the bottom rung of the economic ladder.
The new World Bank estimates, based on improved data from the Chinese, also show that the big reduction in poverty in the first 10 years of economic overhaul begun by Mr. Deng has slowed substantially, while disparities in income between the rich coastal regions and poor inland regions have only intensified.
Altogether, these new estimates suggest that China will not be the economic colossus in the next century that many experts have predicted. 
Some now believe that the weight of China's poor, added to the weight of its debt-ridden state industries and the degradation of its environment, will limit the pace of development and may well prevent China's emergence as a dominating power.
And the grievances of millions of peasants and workers slipping closer to the edge can only be a source of threat and volcanic instability for the Communist Party leadership, whose legitimacy now derives solely from its ability to deliver prosperity, not ideology, to the masses.
Here in the village of Niujuan, which means Cow Pen, the weight of poverty can be seen in the faces that reflect the grinding fatigue of malnutrition and the corrosion of untreated disease.
"Last year was the worst," said a farmer, Su Dikua, speaking by the light of the kerosene lamp in his one-room mud house, which is a step up from the cave where Mr. Su had lived for most of his 59 years. 
His wife has a "skin disease" acquired during those years in the cave. 
It is possible that it is leprosy, but she has never seen a doctor about it.
Last year, Mr. Su said, they had almost nothing to eat. 
"Those who had the energy, traveled to the city to beg," he said. 
Among those who fled because of the hardship was his eldest son, Su Sanwa, 22, and "we haven't had any letters from him since."
It now appears that the Communist Party leadership has little hope of reaching its goal of lifting this huge population out of its misery by the end of the century.
Although Beijing still spends about $1 billion a year to alleviate poverty, with additional help from the World Bank and the United Nations, "no one believes that the goal is achievable," said one antipoverty expert in a major Western aid institution.
Even senior Chinese officials are beginning to hedge.
Liu Junwen, a senior staff member of the "leading group" on poverty reduction under Prime Minister Li Peng, acknowledged in September that to reach the goal, "that means that we must lift 13 million people out of poverty annually, almost three times the figure we have managed to reach in the past few years."
Speaking to reporters after a poverty conference, he added, "the poverty in which these 65 million people are living constitutes the hardest nut to crack due to the various deep-rooted geographical and socioeconomic adversities."
In other words, the first easy step in poverty reduction is over.
The spurt of prosperity that came in the 1980's from breaking up Mao's communes and freeing 900 million peasants to sell their own produce has proved difficult to match in the 1990's. 
The early gains in living standards were made among the Chinese living in lowland areas with access to roads, markets and ports.
The hardest work lies ahead for hundreds of millions of Chinese who live in mountainous, desert and arid plateau regions where arable land and rainfall are rare. 
And many of the hard-core poor are from China's minority populations, who were flushed into the highlands centuries ago by conquering armies of the Han Chinese.
"You hike into these villages and people are putting dirt in backpacks to haul up onto these rocky slopes to try to get something to grow," said Alan Piazza, a leading specialist on poverty in China for the World Bank. 
"When I bring agriculturists to these areas, they look at the landscape and say, 'Declare this a national park and get everyone out.'
It's ridiculous; there is just no land."
He was referring to the eerily beautiful karst landscapes of southwestern China, where topsoil is scarce among the humpback limestone formations.
Mr. Piazza is the bank's most outspoken advocate for more focused, small-scale programs to put money into the hands of farmers, while also rebuilding rural education and health care so that families might have a chance to break the generational cycle of poverty.
"Most Americans could not begin to comprehend what 65 million Chinese have to endure and what that level of deprivation is all about," he said in a recent interview in Beijing.
"What you find in these villages is that one in 10 children dies in the first year of life," he said; "in some places it's one in five. 
Respiratory infections pick them off at incredibly high rates."
He added, "In poverty areas, the remnant of the health system that once was no longer exists."
As for education, he said: "In the Southwest, only one child in 10 gets through the sixth grade. 
There is no way you will eliminate poverty if you don't educate children through the sixth grade."
China's leaders may have begun to realize that their approach to poverty reduction has been flawed. 
A recent Government survey reported that about $800 million of the $1 billion allocated annually was being spent on subsidies to county governments in poverty areas. 
Other poverty experts say that money has been squandered by local officials who never travel to the countryside, and that other money has been diverted to rural industries that are favored by local party bosses.
"We have heard about poverty alleviation programs," said He Demin, a 43-year-old farmer with eight children who lives down the gully from the Su family and who sold off farm animals last year so the family could eat through the winter. 
"But it never arrives here."
He added, "The central authorities have a good heart, but their programs are not implemented by the officials below."
A neighbor, Yuan Wenqi, added: "It seems that the county government gets some money, and the township enterprises get some money, but not us."
The greatest failure in poverty reduction is in education and health, many experts say.
China has emphasized raising agricultural productivity on the assumption that rising farm incomes will allow peasants to buy the education and health services they need.
But because of the harsh terrain in China's upland areas, increasing agricultural production "is a pipe dream," Mr. Piazza said. 
The best solution, he said, is to educate children so they can find jobs in rural townships and small cities and leave the barren mountains behind.
"We are all illiterate here and so we don't know what is happening," said Mr. Yuan, as he offered boiled potatoes to a visitor. 
"If something is harmful, we don't know it. 
If something is good, we don't know it."
Ma Xinggui, a neighbor down the road, put it a different way as he paused from digging potatoes with his wife: "Because I have never been to school, I am like a blind person, even though I have eyes."
