
One of the puzzles for many visitors to China is how to reconcile the apparent wealth around them with China's official per capita income of just $370 a year.
Part of the explanation is that interpreting China's economic statistics can be a nightmare. 
Prices, for instance, are so low that income statistics are misleading.
Take Zhu Huiyuan, a 46-year-old security officer at a company in the central Chinese city of Bengbu. 
His salary is only $25 a month, a fairly typical urban wage.
But Mr. Zhu also gets a half-dozen supplements -- for haircuts, for buying newspapers, for seniority and so on -- that add up to $14 more. 
His wife, a cook, earns a total of $30 a month in salary and supplements.
While their combined monthly income of $69 a month sounds meager, they pay no income or sales taxes, and expenses are minimal. 
Apartment rents in China average about $2.50 a month including utilities, bus fare is a penny, spinach costs 6 cents a pound, a winter down jacket is $22, and an evening newspaper costs 2.5 cents. 
Even a luxury like dog meat is only $1 a pound.
One way to come up with a more realistic value for China's gross national product is to adjust it by valuing production at international prices. 
This approach, called the purchasing power parity technique, yields a much higher value for the gross national product of China as well as for those of other developing countries.
A potential flaw in this method is that China's products are often of lower quality than Western commodities, so price comparisons sometimes overvalue the Chinese goods. 
Consider Chinese plates: they look terrific but are often contaminated with lead. 
Pricing them at the level of American plates would exaggerate their value.
Because of these kinds of ambiguities, different studies relying on this technique have come up with widely varying estimates of the size of China's economy, from about $650 per person to about $4,000 per person. 
One gauge is that China's figures for life expectancy and average calories consumed are close to those of countries with a gross national product of about $2,000 per capita.
At the highest estimates, China's G.N.P. is substantially bigger than Japan's. 
At the more reasonable level of $2,000 per capita, China's G.N.P. is about $2.3 trillion, behind the official G.N.P. figures for the United States and Japan but larger than Germany's.
When Japan's income is also adjusted for purchasing power, it drops significantly because of high prices in Japan. 
A World Bank analysis using United Nations data, for instance, suggests that in terms of purchasing power China's per capita income in 1990 may have been about $1,950, while in Japan it was $16,950 -- compared with the official Japanese per capita income in that year of $25,430.
