
After a dazzling century in which Japan emerged on the globe first as a feared military power and then as a formidable economic one, its influence may be on the wane.
The real problem is not the economic crisis that dominates the headlines, but a pair of intertwined long-run concerns: the work force is shrinking fast, and Japan undermines its economy's productivity by squandering money on life support for moribund industries and backward regions.
In the next few decades, unless Japan somehow manages to arrest current trends, it may find that its share of global economic output has shrunk considerably.
Japan's working-age population peaked in 1995 and is falling quickly. 
The overall Japanese population will still rise a tiny bit until 2007, because of the long life expectancy of today's retirees. 
But after that, the Japanese Government's official projections show the country's population tumbling rapidly, from 126 million today to 100 million in 2050 and 67 million in 2100.
"If influence is measured by G.D.P., then Japan's influence will decline," said Chikashi Moriguchi, a prominent Japanese economist who has studied the aging of Japan.
While other industrialized countries also face low fertility rates and aging societies, Japan is in a particular bind because for cultural and sentimental reasons, it cannot easily avail itself of the two obvious solutions: easier immigration to shore up the population and ruthless restructuring to bolster productivity.
Japan has some tremendous underlying economic strengths, ranging from well-trained and committed workers to huge private savings. 
Companies like Sony and Toyota may continue to expand and become even more titanic global businesses while their home market becomes relatively smaller.
Of course, the link between population size and global economic influence is far from absolute, as India demonstrates at one extreme and Hong Kong at the other. 
Even if Japan's share of the world's economy continues to decline, ordinary Japanese may live more enjoyable lives in a less crowded country.
"Japan will be more of a middling power, less important than it is now in the scheme of things, and it may be more comfortable with that," said Hugh T. Patrick, director of the center on Japanese Economy and Business at Columbia University.
But Japan's shrinking population, many economists argue, makes it difficult to see how Japan can continue to play the role of Asia's leading power. 
Historically, the world has usually adjusted more easily to the ripples from a declining power like Japan than to those of a rising power like China, but the economic and political ramifications will still be far-reaching.
 
The Safety Net
Picking Losers On a Huge Scale
What will Japan look like in a few decades?
No one knows, of course, but the late-night horror television scenario might be something based on life today in the little island of Akashima, in the Goto chain in southern Japan.
Yoshie Kokou, a friendly 70-year-old fisherman, stood on a bluff on Akashima the other day, smiling shyly and speaking lovingly of the many friends and family members who surrounded him. 
The only catch is that Mr. Kokou was standing in the cemetery. 
Akashima's hospital, school, stores and most of its homes are abandoned, and aside from Mr. Kokou only four people still live on the 128-acre island.
Akashima, its seaside cliffs jutting out of a blue-black ocean that is hospitable mostly to the passing whales, has lost people (it had 300 inhabitants at its peak a few decades ago) not so much because women had fewer babies as because people moved to the cities. 
But Akashima offers a glimpse of Japan's difficulties in generating the kind of boom in productivity that might help make up for a shrinking work force.
From the 1950's through the 1980's, productivity grew much more quickly in Japan than in the West. 
But Japan's Total Factor Productivity, the broadest measure, is now growing by only about half of 1 percent per year, much less than half the level of the United States.
Fundamentally, the reason is that Japan steadily lost its capacity for what the economist Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction."
Japan never built up a huge public welfare system, but it has instituted safety nets and subsidies to create a welfare state for companies and towns and declining industries.
The result is welfare dependency among inefficient corporations and moribund economic sectors and fading islands and villages. 
Instead of "picking winners," Japan is now picking losers and subsidizing them on a huge scale.
Even tiny Akashima, a minnow in the Sea of Japan, is taking up a whale's share of the national resources. 
Just the other day, several barges chugged into Akashima's port to begin a $2.5 million project to expand it and build a new pier.
It may seem odd to be spending so much money on a project that serves only five full-time residents, but that is only the beginning. 
The Government also provides a $490,000 annual subsidy to the twice-daily ferry to Akashima and a neighboring island, Oshima, which has 70 residents.
At a huge cost, the Government has also laid down under-sea cables to Akashima to carry electricity to the five residents. 
Indeed, to demonstrate its absolute disregard for expense and efficiency, the Government has laid down not just one cable but two.
"That is to insure a stable supply of electricity," said Choji Tanikawa, an official in the regional offices on the main island of Fukue.
Then there are the other subsidies: the underwater telephone cable, the postal delivery, the weekly clinic by a public doctor. 
The island of Oshima next door has what must be one of the best student-teacher ratios in the world: there are three students and nine teachers.
 
The Population
Low Birth Rates And Smaller Output
All the subsidies help reproduce mainland life even on the remotest islands.
"There's nobody left here, but I like it," said Tama Shiowaki, a 74-year-old woman who was bustling down the path on Akashima. 
"Feel this fresh air!
I get up at 5 A.M. to feed my chickens and ducks, and I'm so healthy here."
"I just hope young people come back," she continued. 
"When I was a kid, there was a store over there," she said, pointing to a collapsed building peeking from the thick brush. 
"And over there. 
And there. 
And down by the cemetery as well. 
And now they're all gone."
In another world, the bustle of downtown Tokyo, Kaoru Yosano is Minister of International Trade and Industry and is thus charged with maintaining Japan's future international competitiveness. 
Sitting at a conference table in his vast office, the size of a typical Japanese apartment for a family of five, Mr. Yosano sips his tea and admits that he is struggling for solutions to the population problem -- in vain.
"There is no easy answer," Mr. Yosano said bleakly. 
"My mother was one of 8 children. 
My father was one of 11. 
My wife and I were each one of 5 children, and we ourselves have 2 children. 
When we look further ahead at the next generation, well, I don't hear much from my sons about having babies."
(Mr. Yosano's two sons, both married, one with one child and the other without any, both declined to be interviewed.)
"Former Primer Minister Takeshita once told me that in the year 2500, Japan's population will be down to one person," Mr. Yosano said with a glum smile. 
"When that happens, I suppose Japan's global influence inevitably will have declined."
Japan is not, of course, the only country facing low birth rates. 
Japanese women give birth to an average of 1.4 children, while World Bank figures show Spain, Bulgaria and Latvia tied for the lowest "total fertility rate" in the world, at 1.1. 
Even the United States will grow primarily because of immigration, because its total fertility rate, of 2.0, is slightly below the level needed for a self-sustaining population (which is 2.1, to account for such factors as babies who die before adulthood).
So what sets Japan apart is not so much that its women are having fewer babies, but rather the combination it represents: the world's second-largest economy is now one of the world's least fertile and fastest-aging societies. 
Latvia's fertility crisis will affect Lithuania; Japan's will shape the global economy.
The essence of the challenge is a shrinking work force. 
The Government predicts that the working-age population of Japan will drop by about 650,000 a year over the next 50 years.
If those projections hold up, then even assuming that more women and old people hold jobs and that productivity continues to grow steadily at the same rate as in the 1990's, then Japan's gross national product in 2050 will be 5 percent smaller than it is today. 
Assuming that the rest of the world continues to grow economically at about the same pace as it has in recent decades, that will leave Japan with less than one-third the share of global output that it now enjoys.
Moreover, each Japanese worker will have to support more nonworkers, as the aged rise from one-sixth of the population now to one-third by the middle of the next century. 
This means that simply for Japan to retain its present per capita income, each worker will have to increase output to make up for the growing numbers who are idle.
"I don't think Japanese living standards are going to improve," said Robert Alan Feldman, chief economist at Morgan Stanley in Tokyo and one of the first Japan specialists to focus on demographic constraints. 
"Japan's G.N.P. is going to shrink, and on a per capita level it may also be a little bit lower."
 
The Puzzle
A Future Hampered By Past's Subsidies
None of this is fixed, of course. 
If Japan could shore up productivity dramatically, then fewer workers could still produce as much as today's work force or even more.
But the pattern of subsidies to Akashima -- repeated in small islands and hamlets around Japan -- helps explain why Japanese taxes and utility charges are so high, and why Japan has steadily seen its productivity growth slow down. 
Because it lays down undersea cables for people like Mrs. Shiowaki, NTT charges unified telephone rates across the country that are so high that they have stifled growth of the Internet in Japan.
The country has some dazzling technologies, and these could perhaps be the basis for increasing productivity and allowing Japan to hold its own economically for a time. 
But its strongest sectors, like technology, are hobbled by regulation and by the burden of having to support the weakest industries.
High per-minute phone connection charges mean that most Japanese do not spend much time surfing the World Wide Web, for instance. 
National law forbids discounting books, to protect small shops and consumers in remote areas, so there is no incentive to buy books on the Internet. 
The upshot is that Mrs. Shiowaki has her subsidized telephone, and Japan has no Amazon.com.
Likewise, high electrical charges, postal rates and taxes have made it increasingly difficult even for efficient Japanese businesses to compete internationally. 
It is, for example, more expensive to mail a letter within Tokyo than to mail it from America to Tokyo. 
Japanese companies began to do their mass mailings from America, to save on postage, so the Japanese Government banned the mailing of domestic advertising from abroad.
Why does Japan so obstinately subsidize its past at the expense of its future?
One reason is a political system in which small towns and rural areas wield disproportionate influence, such that an upper house member of Parliament from rural Tottori prefecture has only one-fifth as many constituents as a member from Tokyo. 
The economist Mancur Olson, in examining why great economies lose their dynamism, emphasized the rise of special interests that win protections and clog up the gears of a market economy; although he was writing primarily about the experience of the West, the same analysis applies to Japan.
Yet what is just as important as special-interest politics is a profound Japanese commitment to equality across the country, and a revulsion for "jaku niku, kyo shoku" society -- one where the strong eat the weak. 
Most Japanese accept that businesses may be predatory abroad, but there is some yearning for them to be vegetarians at home. 
There is a genuine and broad-ranging sympathy for the weakest elements of the economy, and there are virtually no calls for cutting off the spigots of cash for rural areas or declining industries.
In effect, Japan has fostered a gentle, merciful brand of capitalism, one that keeps dying businesses on artificial life support. 
The effort to run a country as if it were a Disney movie strikes Americans as deeply admirable and hopelessly naive, and Japan has indeed found it increasingly difficult to nurture an economy drawn entirely in cheerful pastels.
In a system too squeamish to let industries or islands die, taxes increasingly go to rescue the feeblest competitors, those that in a more ruthless system would have gone the way of blacksmiths and buggy-whip factories. 
Take Japan's ubiquitous sento, or public baths, for although they are a tiny industry they are symptomatic of Japan's difficulties letting go of its past.
These sento are glorious nooks of steam and history, privately owned, where people can go and scrub and then relax together in an oversize, overheated tub. 
After adjusting to the sensation of being boiled alive, it is difficult to think of anything more pleasant than a Japanese bath, or anything less essential.
In the old days, of course, the sento were necessary institutions, because many families had no bath or shower at home. 
Now nearly all homes have baths, and young people almost never use the sento, but Japan cannot muster the courage to let them go bankrupt. 
So, even though their time is past and they have no hope of competing in the marketplace, many sento are kept alive with Government loans and subsidies that each year total almost $100 million.
The result is not only higher taxes but capital and labor that, in the public bath industry, are at Indonesian levels of productivity and dropping. 
Everybody knows one way to raise productivity here -- let the sento go bankrupt -- but Japan is not prepared to pay that price.
The same kinds of sentimental subsidies keep islands like Akashima alive. 
There has not even been any discussion of cutting back the ferry service to once daily, and islanders seem stunned when they are asked whether the Government should continue to provide expensive services to a tiny, aging population.
"They've never talked about cutting off services," said Mankichi Kokou, 73, an Akashima resident. 
"Even if this becomes a ghost town, the services will continue. 
They have to."
There is a good deal of talk about how Japan may be beginning a "third revolution" of social and economic transformation as great as the late-19th-century Meiji period and the post-World War II era. 
Increasing mergers and the breakdown of the lifetime employment system give some evidence of this, and officials are talking a good game.
"It is essential that we radically transform this nation's system and character in order to promote further prosperity," Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi said earlier this month.
Nonetheless, as Mr. Obuchi suggested, the key changes are yet to come. 
Japan's steps have been tentative, and South Korea has more obviously embraced markets in just the last 18 months than Japan has in the last decade.
 
The Bottleneck
A Resistance To Immigration
Another way that Japan could stave off the demographic projections is by encouraging large-scale immigration.
The United States, in particular, has shown that a country need not worry too much about low birth rates so long as immigrants fill the ranks of workers. 
And America has brought in not only low-wage laborers, working as nannies or farm workers, but also computer technicians and software engineers who have contributed enormously to the dynamism of Silicon Valley.
"The great strength of America is that it draws in continually the best of everywhere," said Jagdish Bhagwati, a Columbia University professor of international economics who is from India. 
"Japan cannot really match that openness."
"Japan has the bottleneck," he said, "of not being really open to foreign cultures."
It has been 145 years since Japan abandoned its "sakoku" policy, which meant barring almost all foreigners. 
Yet even now Japan is more hostile to immigration than any other industrialized country. 
It is, for example, exceptionally difficult for a foreigner to acquire Japanese nationality without marrying a Japanese.
Tens of thousands of Chinese are sneaking into Japan to take dirty or dangerous jobs, and they are beginning to leave an imprint on the country. 
But because some of the Chinese immigrants are violent gangsters, many Japanese are more frightened than ever of large-scale immigration.
"I think the Government would try to find any other means of solving the labor shortage rather than mass immigration," said Charles Horioka, an American economist at Osaka University. 
"Japan is so concerned about maintaining cultural and racial homogeneity."
If Tokyo made an all-out effort, it could recruit many of the best young scholars and engineers from India, Taiwan, Vietnam and China to study and work in Japan. 
That could revitalize the economy and create a boom of entrepreneurship, but few in Japan seem enthusiastic about that idea, and many seem fatalistic about the waves of Asian migration that bypass Japan and continue on to the United States. 
"English has become a common language, so it's natural for the best and brightest to go to America to study," said Mr. Yosano, the trade official. 
"If they come to Japan, then they face the language barrier.
"I envy America for attracting them, but that's just the way it is."
Another alternative is for Japan to try to increase its own fertility rates, by persuading women like Miki Fujii to have babies. 
Mrs. Fujii, 32, has a good office job in Tokyo and the last thing she wants is a child.
"It's really a matter of whether having a child is worth all the stress and pressure," Mrs. Fujii said. 
"Besides, I'd get no help from my husband. 
He has this traditional idea that women should raise children and that they enjoy it."
"I've heard men say they're staying at work late because going home early means having to take care of children, and they'd rather work than do that," Mrs. Fujii continued. 
"I totally understand that. 
I think it's quite natural to feel that way. 
I know I would feel that way."
 
The Work Force
Making Babies, Keeping the Elderly
Japan is a difficult place for a woman to raise a child, partly because in practice this is a nation of single mothers. 
Husbands stagger home late from the office or a bar, and a Government poll found that fathers spend an average of just six minutes a day looking after their children.
Profound social changes -- like the emergence of husbands who changed diapers -- might help fertility rates. 
But the Japanese Government's bleak population projections already assume some recovery in fertility. 
If the total fertility rate stays where it is, then the population will plummet even faster: to 92 million in 2050 and 50 million in 2100.
Some Scandinavian countries have raised fertility a bit by offering improved child care and various other incentives, and some Japanese localities are even offering cash rewards for extra children. 
Still, in countries like Sweden that have tried this approach, the cost has been considerable and the long-term increase in fertility very slight.
Moreover, an increase in birth rates would take a long time to work through the system, for nearly all of Japan's labor force in the year 2025 has already been born.
"We cannot evade the phenomenal change in population structure and phenomenal change in population size," said Makoto Atoh, one of Japan's leading demographers. 
"It's an inevitability derived from the current level of fertility and longevity."
Dr. Atoh said that Japan could partly compensate for the decline in the labor force by having the elderly hold their jobs longer and by encouraging more women to work. 
Fewer women hold jobs in Japan than in most Western countries, so there may be room to expand the rate, he noted, but he said that Japan's population will shrink so quickly that adjusting to it will be very difficult.
Another problem of the aging of Japan's population will be how to pay for it. 
The social security system is underfinanced by a huge sum about equivalent to Japan's annual gross domestic product, and corporate pension funds are underfinanced by hundreds of billions of dollars, leaving them with a burden equivalent in scale to the banking crisis that has dogged Japan's economy for the last half-dozen years.
As for Akashima Island, it remains a gorgeous but depressing reminder of what can happen to a place when its population ages. 
Most of the people remaining on Akashima say they believe that there will still be at least one person living there for the next decade, but there is the sobering example of another nearby island, Himejima, which has been entirely abandoned.
"When I think of my young days, I remember how my friend lived over there, and another friend's house was over there," said Yoshie Kokou, the fisherman, pointing sadly at clumps of bushes. 
"And I long for the past."
"I hear young people aren't having kids now," he said. 
"I guess it's just the changing times."
