
THERE may be prettier cities in Japan than Nagasaki, but there is none where beauty and tragedy are so intertwined, where a walk through the streets makes one alternately smile at the colorful carp in the canals and gasp at a plaque recording the city's wrenching past, where the hot springs in the surrounding hills -- the delight of countless tourists -- are also filled with memories of torture and death.
Largely obliterated by the atomic bombing of Aug. 
9, 1945, three days after the destruction of Hiroshima, Nagasaki has been rebuilt on the rubble and ashes of the old city. 
Set against a hillside overlooking a great natural harbor, Nagasaki is now a sprawling city of 440,000 on the southern island of Kyushu. 
Temples and mansions set among gardens on the hill preside over the bustle of office buildings and noodle shops on the winding streets below. 
Most of Nagasaki's historical sites and monuments are within walking distance of the center of the city, while a couple of miles away on the other side of town is a cluster of sights related to the bombing, including the new Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Museum, which gives powerful testimony to one of the pivotal events of the 20th century.
So Nagasaki is Asia's answer to Dresden, a city of light whose name is also almost synonymous with pain. 
Like Dresden, Nagasaki is thought of today mostly in connection with its wartime destruction, but Nagasaki resonated with tragedy even before 11:02 A.M. on Aug. 
9, 1945, when an atomic bomb exploded over the northern part of the city, missing its military target by a few miles and vaporizing a slum containing the largest Christian community in Japan.
As the most cosmopolitan city in Japan from the 16th through the 19th centuries, Nagasaki was a center for Christian missionaries -- and, accordingly, the center of religious persecution. 
This month marks the 400th anniversary of the first group of executions, when 26 Christians were crucified on a hill in Nagasaki. 
The city is marking the anniversary with special Catholic masses and with a new Japanese-language opera, based on the story of the executions, to have its premiere in November. 
During my latest visit, in October, I couldn't help contemplating those crucifixions as I visited the museums and memorials that recall Nagasaki's proud and tragic past.
I began near Dejima, an artificial island built in 1634 to house European traders in the city. 
Because of landfills, Dejima is no longer an island, and it is hard to tell where it starts and ends, but there are still some signs of its past. 
A stone sundial bears the initials of its Dutch owner of two centuries ago, and a few European cannons can be seen, while reproductions show what Dejima looked like in the old days: an island protruding into the great harbor that for centuries was the center for Japanese trade. 
These days the port is a minor one, but it is still filled with ships and gives Nagasaki a focal point -- as well as great views, since the city rises steeply into the hills from the bay. 
Sometimes called the "San Francisco of Japan" because of its hills, Nagasaki has the same salty charm as Hong Kong and the same historic links with Western traders.
Portuguese traders arrived in Nagasaki in 1571, and the authorities built Dejima to isolate them from Japanese society. 
The 130-acre island was big enough to accommodate not only the Portuguese but also their homes and warehouses and fields where their oxen and sheep could graze. 
After 1639, when the shogun ordered the Portuguese to leave Japan, Dutch traders were allowed to stay, but on condition that they move to Dejima. 
For more than two centuries after that, Japan tried to seal itself off from the outside world. 
Nagasaki was the only exception, and a tiny one: a few Chinese were allowed in a settlement in one part of the city, and a few Dutch were allowed to carry on their trade from Dejima.
The main Dejima Museum is closed indefinitely for renovation, but a nearby museum in Jurokuban-Kan, a mansion built in 1860 to house American consular staff, contains artifacts from the Dutch and Portuguese who lived on Dejima. 
The museum has no English labels on its exhibits, but it is chockablock with old European telescopes, clocks, guns and other antiques.
One of the main imports arranged by the Europeans was Christianity, and it is said that Hideyoshi, the great unifier and ruler of Japan, toyed with the idea of converting until he realized that he would be allowed only one wife. 
But the shoguns grew alarmed at how rapidly missionaries had converted some 300,000 Japanese, particularly around Nagasaki, and in 1597 the Government crucified six European missionaries and 20 of their Japanese followers; the youngest was Luis Ibaraki, a 12-year-old Japanese boy. 
All 26 were declared saints by the Catholic Church, and a small chapel and monument, built in 1962, mark the spot in the center of the city. 
After the crucifixions, the authorities seized those whom they suspected of being a Christian, branding them with hot irons, dunking them in boiling hot springs, burning them alive or suspending them upside down to die slowly in pits filled with filth and vermin.
The Government introduced all kinds of campaigns to stamp out Christianity, and it is said that Okunchi, an annual Shinto festival in Nagasaki, was founded for that purpose. 
Okunchi, which takes place every year from Oct. 
7 to 9, is one of the most famous festivals in Japan, with its 200-year-old floats and its dragon dances supplied by the Chinese. 
One of the aims, however, was to search for those who did not attend and therefore might be secret Christians.
An exhibit with floats from Okunchi and videos of past festivals is the centerpiece of the Nagasaki Museum of Traditional Performing Arts, one of many buildings in Glover Garden, a settlement containing the homes of the European traders who returned to Nagasaki after American gunboats opened up Japan in 1853. 
The centerpiece of this large outdoor complex is the home of Thomas Glover, a British merchant who came to Japan in 1859 at the age of 21, married a geisha and conspired with local lords to overthrow the shogun.
The home, built in 1863, is large and pleasant but would be unremarkable if it were not the oldest Western-style building in Japan. 
It is fun, though, to meander through the gardens and other Western homes, which are redolent of history. 
In Glover Garden these Western traders played on Japan's first tennis court, laid down Japan's first paved road and planned production of the beer now known as Kirin. 
Glover himself founded the Kirin brewing company, whose name apparently came from a couple of statues depicting him as a mustachioed kirin, a mythical Asian animal.
Chinese traders also left a mark on Nagasaki, apparent in the temples scattered on the hillside above Dejima. 
The oldest temple is Kofuku-ji, built in 1620, which presides sternly over the city below. 
Its peaked roofs and scattered halls surround a series of pleasant lawns and gardens, while forests begin just behind the temple. 
Most of Nagasaki is full of tourists, mostly Japanese schoolchildren, but Kofuku-ji was deserted when I wandered through its gardens and the cemetery behind it.
A more modern Chinese icon in Nagasaki is the Confucius Shrine, built at the end of the last century, but because there are few Chinese living in Nagasaki now, it has none of the authentic flavor of a Chinese temple, and the only people lighting incense and praying are giggly Japanese schoolgirls hoping to get into a good university. 
I am also suspicious of the temple's efficacy, for when I paid 100 yen (less than a dollar) for my fortune, the machine spat out a red slip of paper that advised me: "You will enjoy easy childbirth and bear a son."
Not likely.
A short walk away is a more familiar structure with a small steeple. 
In 1865 the Europeans who had settled in Nagasaki built the whitewashed concrete Oura Catholic Church on a hillside facing the spot where the Christians had been crucified in the 16th century. 
A few months after the church opened, its French priest was startled to get a visit from three Japanese, who, reassured by the statue of the Virgin Mary at the entrance, confided that their families -- and countless others -- had secretly been practicing Christianity for more than 250 years, long after everyone thought the faith had been wiped out in Japan. 
Word spread of this discovery, and the Government began cracking down on the Christians, exiling them to remote areas.
A museum attached to the Oura Church has displays, with explanations only in Japanese, about the religious repression, including the Shimabara Rebellion of 1637, in which some 37,000 people, many of them Christians, were slaughtered. 
They show religious documents, tiny crucifixes and religious sculptures, some disguised as Buddhist emblems, that were passed down from generation to generation.
But the most haunting part of any visit to Nagasaki, particularly for an American, is the other end of town. 
As it happened, the atomic bomb was dropped on those who had already suffered the most, for the Urakami neighborhood that was hit worst was a slum inhabited by Christians and by social outcasts known as burakumin, often described as the "untouchables" of Japan.
About 75,000 people died in the blast, and several memorials record the bomb's power. 
A pillar marks the epicenter of the explosion, and remains of the Urakami church are scattered around it on the ground, especially sculptures of saints, looking reproachfully at us. 
The area is now a pair of parks, bordered by a canal, and the peacefulness and prettiness are in a strange way disturbing.
The Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Museum opened nearby last year. 
The exhibits are stark: a dimly lighted room with twisted debris and wrenching large-screen videos taken at the time of charred corpses and whitened skulls. 
Extensive displays show what Nagasaki looked like before the bombing and explain how the bomb worked, as well as offering hideous photos of victims and pictures of human shadows on rock and wood -- the only thing remaining when those near the epicenter were vaporized.
The problem with the museum is that it has almost no context: the atomic bombing is presented like a typhoon that suddenly swept in from the ocean for no reason. 
The subtext is not anti-American; it is anti-historical. 
To be sure, there is in one tiny nook a time line that mentions in a cursory way Japan's wartime activities. 
But this provoked a furor in Japan because of its reference to the Nanjing massacre, the incident in which the Japanese killed tens of thousands of Chinese civilians in 1937. 
Some Japanese deny that the massacre took place, and the photo that had illustrated it has been replaced by a blurred and rather meaningless picture of a crowd.
To leave Nagasaki on a more hopeful note, it is worth visiting the nearby home of Dr. Takeshi Nagai, a doctor and theologian who was a bit like a Japanese version of Dr. Albert Schweitzer. 
Dr. Nagai's wife was killed in the blast, and he lived with his two small children in a tiny hut, the size of an American closet, where he wrote powerful books exploring the meaning of what had happened. 
The most famous of these, "The Bells of Nagasaki," was once widely available in English but is now hard to find.
Dr. Nagai died in 1951, at the age of 43, and a little museum in his honor stands by the wooden shack where he lived and worked, a reminder that Nagasaki witnessed some of the best of humanity as well as some of the worst.
 
A port of many cultures, much history
 
Planning a Trip
About 10 flights a day on several airlines link Nagasaki with Tokyo, less than two hours away. 
There is a tourist information booth in the airport's arrivals area; information in English can also be obtained by calling 23-3631 locally. 
(The country code is 81, the city code 0958; drop the zero when dialing from abroad.)
The best hotel in Nagasaki is the Nagasaki Prince, 2-26 Takara Machi, telephone 21-1111, fax 23-4309, where a double room including tax and service costs $215. 
(Prices calculated at 116 yen to the United States dollar.) There are also some fine traditional Japanese inns in the area; the tourist office can help with bookings.
 
Local Fare
The most famous Nagasaki dish is kasutera cake, based on a Dutch version of a pound cake. 
It can be eaten in coffee shops all over town, but the most famous bakery is Fukusaya, 3-1 Funadaikku Machi, 21-2938. 
You cannot eat at Fukusaya, but you can buy a kasutera for $6 and up.
Another famous Nagasaki dish is shippoku, a multicourse meal that borrows from Europe and China. 
It can be eaten at such restaurants as Kagetsu, 2-1 Maruyama Machi, 22-0191 (reservations required), with its lovely garden; the price starts at $112 a person with tax and service.
Finally, Nagasaki is noted for Chinese dishes such as champon noodles. 
A meal of noodles, with shrimp, vegetables and broth, costs less than $10 a person at a restaurant such as Shikairo, 4-5 Matsugaecho, 22-1296.
 
Places to See
Jurokuban-Kan, 4-15 Minamiyamate Machi, 27-6111, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; admission $3.50.
Glover Garden, 8-1 Minamiyamate Machi, 22-8223, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. in winter; admission $5.20. 
The Okunchi festival is Oct. 
7 to 9 every year.
Oura Catholic Church, 5-3 Minimiyamate Machi, 23-2628, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. in winter; admission $2.15. 
The museum is to the right of the nave.
The Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Museum, 7-8 Hirano Machi, 44-1231, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., admission $1.70. 
The nearby Dr. Nagai Museum, 22-6 Ueno Machi, 44-3496, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., admission free.
Kofuku-Ji, 64 Tera Machi, 22-1076, is open 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. and costs $1.70. 
The Confucius Shrine, and an attached museum of Chinese history, is open 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; admission $4.50.   N.D.K.
