
A rusty, sour odor skewered the gloom that enveloped ranks of steel cages jammed into a third-floor chamber of a decaying tenement. 
Dimly, the silhouettes of men appeared, one by one uncoiling from the stack of cages like cicadas casting off their shells. 
Ma Kwai-han, a feather of a man clad in a skimpy white undershirt and baggy gray pants, padded into a dim circle of light.
"I've lived here 36 years," he said quietly, his hand resting on the chain link cage he calls home. 
"I have no family and can't afford to stay anywhere else."
Here, in one of the world's richest cities -- last week Forbes magazine declared that 2 of the 10 richest men in the world live here -- the growth and persistence of poverty is hidden away, tucked into mildewed tenements and under highway overpasses. 
But the poorest of the poor live in Hong Kong's cage homes -- steel mesh boxes barely large enough for a mattress and a recumbent occupant, stacked in twos and threes -- in the heart of the other Hong Kong.
"These are among the poorest in Hong Kong," said Chong Chan-yau, the director of fund-raising for Oxfam, a private organization that assists poor populations, particularly in the third world. 
"There is undeniable poverty among the poorest section of our community. 
The poorest tenth of the population is getting a smaller and smaller share of the pie. 
The gap between the richest and the poorest is getting wider and wider."
By the time China resumes sovereignty of Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, said Mr. Chong, who said he relied on Government data, there will be 180,000 families on public assistance, in a society in which the dole is viewed with shame.
"That will be about 10 percent of Hong Kong's households," said Mr. Chong. "And there is this surviving Chinese attitude that 'I don't want to be dependent on the Government. 
I feel ashamed of my children not supporting me.'
"
It is not clear how many people live in cages here. 
The Government puts the number at 2,800, while Kalina Tsang, a social worker for a private agency that works in the poor communities and with cage dwellers, says that the number actually approaches 10,000.
"About 70 percent are elderly, single people with no families," Ms. Tsang said. 
"These are the people whose voices are not heard."
On Nam Cheong Street in Kowloon, on the edge of what used to be waterfront, before vast landfill projects moved the street well inland from Hong Kong harbor's fetid waters, sagging six-story buildings huddle together. 
A jumble of simple restaurants, machine shops and electrical supply stores line the narrow streets, and the clatter of jackhammers from never-ending public works echoes off building walls.
Mr. Ma has lived here since 1960, climbing the narrow concrete stairwell to the third-floor room filled with cages. 
His is No. 18.
"I came to Hong Kong in 1955," he explained, shifting from one foot to another as he spoke. 
"There was no food in China, so I came here. 
But life is difficult in Hong Kong. 
From my point of view, there's not much difference between Hong Kong and China."
Every day at 4:15 A.M., Mr. Ma rolls from his cage, hurriedly washes in the one cramped bathroom that serves the 25 people who live in the cages stacked in the room. 
Then he walks a few blocks to the restaurant where he works selling dim sum, a job that pays him about $273 each month.
"I used to work in a garment factory," he explained. 
"I worked there for 18 years, but they moved to China so I had no job. 
I'm illiterate, so that makes it difficult to get a job. 
Anyway, the only thing for me to do is to work hard every day so I can live. 
I don't really think my life will change after 1997, after China takes over."
For his cage, Mr. Ma, 58, pays $41 a month. 
"I'd like to move to a better place," he said, "but I don't see how."
Nearby, sitting on the edge of a floor-level cage, Zhu Qishui sucked on a cigarette. 
"This is O.K., not so bad," he said, glancing at the racks of cages. 
"I just came from China, from Jiangxi. 
Actually it's better back home, but this is not so bad."
Every day, 150 mainland Chinese are allowed to immigrate into Hong Kong, and countless others come on visitors' visas, which many of them overstay. 
Mr. Zhu, who came on a visitor's visa hoping to find some kind of work, has been here for three months. 
"I heard about Hong Kong from friends," he said. 
"They said it was easy to make a lot of money. 
But I still have no work, so I'll have to go home."
Ms. Tsang insisted that the persistence of cage homes in Hong Kong was intolerable. 
"This is one of the richest cities," she said. 
"We want the Government to resettle these people in affordable decent housing. 
But even if the Government resettles these people, new people will come in."
Already, slightly more than half of Hong Kong's population lives in subsidized Government housing, but the waiting time for an apartment now is nine years.
Still, Mr. Chong of Oxfam believes that Hong Kong's Government, with reserves of $57 billion, could do more for its growing poor population.
"The Government does have the resources to lessen the plight of those who are in poverty," he said.
On Nam Cheong Street, though, Mr. Ma does not believe his life will change any time soon. 
He nodded at the small shrine of Guangong, a figure of a robed Chinese god, the symbol of justice. 
A small pile of oranges was placed before the figure, illuminated by faint red bulbs. 
"Nothing can be improved here," he said, sighing. 
"This is our life."
