
In 1992, the last time Bill Clinton talked economics at the University of Pennsylvania, he was a governor, times were tough, and his campaign manager kept saying, "It's the economy, stupid."
President Clinton returned to the same campus today, with just 11 months to go in his second term, to gloat a bit about his economic stewardship and suggest, without naming names, that Gov. George W. Bush's approach to economics might not be any more successful than that of his father.
Mr. Clinton's 1992 economics speech laid out his strategy of emphasizing education, investment tax credits and an overhaul of the nation's infrastructure. 
At the time, he was down in the polls, his throat was raspy and he pulled no punches in condemning his opponent, President George Bush.
When he talked of the state of the economy, Mr. Clinton derisively labeled it the "Bush recession."
Today, Mr. Clinton took no similar shots at the younger Mr. Bush, who is engaged in a fierce battle for the Republican presidential nomination. 
But Mr. Clinton suggested that Vice President Al Gore best understood how to keep the current prosperity going and he made clear his preference for paying down the debt rather than making large cuts in taxes.
"We have to maintain our fiscal discipline," Mr. Clinton said. 
Back in his campaign speech, which presidential aides distributed to reporters today, Mr. Clinton spoke of a battle to stay competitive in a world where Japan and Germany were "beating our brains in" with smarter investment and growth decisions.
Today, however, Mr. Clinton ignored those nations and focused on the need to admit China into the World Trade Organization. 
Addressing critics, he said differences between the United States and China should not prevent a deal.
"If we do this, 20 years from now we'll look back and wonder why we ever even debated it," he said. 
"And if we don't, 20 years from now we'll still be kicking ourselves in the seat of the pants."
Earlier in the day, Mr. Clinton made a vigorous pitch to the Business Council, a coalition of corporations that is pushing for congressional passage of China's admission to the World Trade Organization. 
Vowing "a full-court press from our administration," the president again took on the detractors.
"Most members of Congress don't question the economic benefits," he said. 
"Critics are more likely to say things like this: China is a growing threat to Taiwan and other neighbors. 
We shouldn't strengthen it. 
China is a drag on labor and environmental market rights and, if you put them in the W.T.O., they will block further progress on those issues. 
Or, China is an offender of human rights and we shouldn't reward it. 
Or China is a dangerous proliferator. 
We shouldn't empower it."
Mr. Clinton called the concerns legitimate but said "the problems will be worse if we do not bring China into the W.T.O."
Mr. Clinton's powers of prediction in his 1992 speech proved a mixed bag. 
He said, for instance, that bullet trains would be shuttling 500,000 passengers a day at speeds of up to 300 miles an hour. 
That did not happen.
But Mr. Clinton pointed out today that he had emphasized back in 1992, when the Web was in its infancy, the importance of a national informational network. 
"Just as the interstate highway system in the 1950's spurred two decades of economic growth," Governor Clinton had said, "we need a door-to-door fiber optics system by the year 2015 to link every home, every lab, every classroom and every business in America."
      
