
BLACK HANDS OF BEIJING
Lives of Defiance in China's Democracy Movement.
By George Black and Robin Munro.
Illustrated. 390 pp. 
New York:
A Robert L. Bernstein Book/John Wiley & Sons. 
$24.95.
AFTER street protests in 1976 against the hard-line Gang of Four, the Chinese Government denounced a young man -- a "crewcut shorty," it called him -- who had been photographed making speeches to the crowds. 
But the crewcut shorty vanished and the police never found him.
The crewcut shorty, whose name is Chen Ziming, was then a convicted "counterrevolutionary" on a weekend furlough from prison. 
By the time the Government denounced him, he was back behind bars -- the one place the police never thought to check.
The authorities finally caught up with him after he was released and played a major behind-the-scenes role in the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement. 
Following the massacre of protesters, Mr. Chen tried to escape from the country. 
But he was betrayed by one of his associates and is now serving a 13-year prison sentence -- with no prospect of weekend furloughs.
Mr. Chen suffers from a malady that is universal among Chinese political prisoners: anonymity. 
There is no Chinese equivalent of an Andrei Sakharov, and one of the greatest challenges Chinese dissidents face in winning sympathy abroad is that few Westerners can even pronounce their names. 
Consequently, as Deng Xiaoping, China's de facto emperor, has boasted, the Government can lock protesters up without the West paying much attention.
"Black Hands in Beijing" is an attempt to address this problem by focusing on the lives of Mr. Chen and a couple of other important dissidents: Wang Juntao, an ebullient 34-year-old colleague of Mr. Chen's who is now also serving a 13-year prison sentence, and Han Dongfang, a 30-year-old railway worker whom the authorities released from prison because they thought he was dying from the tuberculosis with which they had infected him.
The Government dubbed these three people -- along with a few others -- the "black hands," and claimed they were responsible for the Tiananmen democracy movement. 
Yet as this book records, Mr. Chen and Mr. Wang in fact were relative moderates, who tried to persuade the student protesters not to force a dangerous confrontation with the leadership.
The authors know their stuff. 
Robin Munro is a Hong Kong-based researcher for the organization Asia Watch and one of the world's leading specialists on human rights conditions in China. 
George Black writes a column on foreign affairs for The Los Angeles Times.
"Black Hands of Beijing" is sensible, interesting and insightful, but it is not riveting. 
Part of the problem is that this is about the 30th book on the Tiananmen protests to have come out since 1989. 
Another part is those Chinese names again: non-Chinese speakers may have difficulty keeping track of all the characters who scoot in and out of the narrative.
The larger challenge is that Mr. Chen and Mr. Wang remain behind bars and impossible to interview. 
Thus the descriptions of them inevitably seem a bit austere and shallow, shorn of some of the passion and anguish of the times. 
For a richer account of their personal feelings and internal conflicts, we will have to wait until the "crewcut shorty" is released or gets another furlough and can again emerge into the daylight.
