
FROM THE TIME Ronald Colman stumbled into Shangri-La in the 1937 movie "Lost Horizon," Tibet in its various Hollywood manifestations has come to represent a kind of ultimate otherness, a golden-hued sanctuary teeming with a quiescent people too simple, too trusting, too good for this world.
For Mr. Colman's character, a disillusioned British gentleman yearning to escape a noisy and conflicted world, Shangri-La was a haven of peace, contemplation and unlimited reading time.
More recently, in "The Golden Child" (1986), Eddie Murphy rescued a Dalai Lama-like child monk from a band of demon kidnappers in a Tibet portrayed as a snowy, somewhat comical place full of chanting and special effects. 
In "Little Buddha" (1993), Bernardo Bertolucci told the improbable story of a young American couple who willingly surrender their child to monks who tell them that he is the latest manifestation of a Buddhist holy man.
Now, however, with two major films about to be released about Tibet and its exiled leader, the 62-year-old Dalai Lama, Hollywood seems to be trying to clear away some of that golden fog. 
Both "Seven Years in Tibet," directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud, and "Kundun," directed by Martin Scorsese, aim to present an exotic but more realistic version of Tibet's tragic recent history. 
The first film is opening on Oct. 
8; the second, on Christmas Day.
Both directors say they had no particular political motive in mind, but the release of these films is likely to focus popular attention on Tibet, coming at a time of growing international tension over China's behavior toward a land it has controlled since 1949. 
(The Dalai Lama, in India, said he did not want to discuss the films until he had seen them.)
Because of the political situation in Tibet, neither film could be filmed there. 
Mr. Scorsese's Tibet is actually the ragged peaks and arid plains of south-central Morocco; Mr. Annaud's is the sharp valleys and icy peaks of the Argentine Andes and the Canadian Rockies. 
Both filmmakers employed numerous Tibetan religious and political leaders to insure historical accuracy and realism. 
And both said their goal in such attention to detail was not the thrill of the exotic but the deeper feelings stirred by a sense of real life.
One afternoon last month, Mr. Scorsese peered between his outstretched hands as if they were an imaginary movie screen hanging in the air. 
"The idea," he said, "is to make the story as human and as emotional as possible, right?
So I thought the way to do that was to do it, as much as possible, through the eyes of the little boy. 
Very subjective."
Mr. Scorsese was describing the opening sequence of his straightforward, dreamlike evocation of the life of the Dalai Lama. 
The scene, which had just played on the screen in Mr. Scorsese's New York projection room, was replaying itself in his head as he spoke. 
He rattled off the sequence of shots, his small hands slashing through the air.
"We see what the boy sees: two parents talking," he said. 
"The boy turns and teases his brother. 
A door opens. 
We see someone's feet coming into the room, but it's sideways on the screen because the boy is lying in bed. 
A smiling face. 
We move across the room and the next thing you know----" Smack!
He clapped his hands. 
"Bright white light!
We're out in the courtyard in the sunshine."
Mr. Scorsese, 55, laughed nervously, occasionally plucking at his bushy eyebrows. 
"I wanted this to be a very human story," he said, "About real, recognizable people who just happen to live in Tibet."
Mr. Annaud, too, said he felt a very clear obligation to cut through some of the earlier Hollywood images of Tibet.
"YOU KNOW, I THINK for many people, Tibet is really a kind of fantasyland," said Mr. Annaud, 54, speaking from London, where he was putting together the final sound mix for his $65 million film. 
"What we really tried to do was to recreate Tibet, to bring it to life and to make it real."
Becky Johnston, who wrote the script for Mr. Annaud's film, said her chief desire was to bring the country to life for a Western audience "and for it not to be a glossy, laminated version of Tibet."
Melissa Mathison, who wrote the script for Mr. Scorsese's film, agreed. 
"I think part of the tragedy of Tibet is that it's been Shangri-La," she said. 
"Nobody believed it existed in the first place, so its destruction was the destruction of a fantasy."
In "Seven Years in Tibet," Brad Pitt portrays an Austrian mountain climber who escapes from a British prisoner-of-war camp in India during World War II and makes his tortuous way over the mountains into Tibet, where he eventually befriends the young Dalai Lama. 
Based on a memoir by Heinrich Harrer, who became famous in the 30's as a member of the first team to conquer the north face of the Eiger, this film chronicles the real-life redemption of the arrogant mountain climber through his relationship with the young spiritual leader.
The film drew unwanted publicity earlier this year when it was revealed that Mr. Harrer had been not only a member of the Nazi Party when he went on his Tibetan expedition but a member of Hitler's SS, a fact that he had never revealed. 
Nevertheless, Mr. Annaud decided that his film did not need to be updated.
"It was not what our movie was about," Mr. Annaud said. 
"I had always suspected that -- how shall I say -- that Harrer had a sympathy or a connection with the Nazi movement."
In the early scenes in "Seven Years in Tibet," Mr. Harrer is portrayed as a selfish, obnoxious character who is only gradually humanized by his encounters with the Dalai Lama. 
"Our film is about guilt and redemption, so this latest issue does not really affect it," Mr. Annaud said.
"Kundun," Mr. Scorsese's $28 million movie, is less an adventure film than a contemplation of nonviolence through the life of the Dalai Lama. 
The director said he had been attracted to making a movie about the Tibetan leader because he wanted to explore the implications of the philosophy. 
"I felt I knew what a violent life was all about, after growing up in lower Manhattan," he said. 
"I wanted to explore the other side."
The film follows Tenzin Gyatso from 1937, when he was discovered by Buddhist monks at the age of 2 and "revealed" to be the 14th incarnation of the Dalai Lama, the earthly manifestation of the Buddha of Compassion, to his final escape from Tibet in 1959 in the face of a Chinese invasion. 
(The word "Kundun" is an affectionate, reverent form of address used by those close to the Dalai Lama.) There are no Hollywood stars; everyone in the movie is either Tibetan or Chinese, all of them amateurs except for the Chinese actors who play Mao Zedong and one of his generals.
Tenzin Tethong, who works with Survivals International, a human-rights group in San Francisco that helps victims of torture and political abuse, is directly connected with both films. 
A former personal representative of the Dalai Lama in New York, Mr. Tethong acted as an on-set consultant during the filming of "Seven Years in Tibet," and his son, Guyrme, now 11, plays the Dalai Lama as a young teen-ager in Mr. Scorsese's film.
"There is a considerable amount of sympathy for Tibet," Mr. Tethong said, "but it is limited to people who are well informed, well intentioned or have some special connection to that part of the world. 
These two movies are obviously going to bring the stories directly to the ordinary person. 
I think the impact will be considerable."
Mr. Tethong is concerned, however, that the films still may not be realistic enough to dispel the well-entrenched Western image of Tibet as an otherworldly place.
"I think it is still perhaps going to keep fueling this fantasy image of Tibet," he said. 
"When you see the movies, you will see Tibet in its very exotic colors, in a golden glow. 
Sometimes, that seems to help because it draws attention. 
But other times, it doesn't help, because it makes everything look like it's not in this real world, it's something in the imagination."
Robert Thurman, a professor of Indo-Tibetan studies at Columbia University and a founder of Tibet House in New York, thinks that Tibetans like Mr. Tethong "want to be thought of as real people who are suffering atrocities and genocide."
"They make much of the fact that Tibet becomes a Western fantasyland," he said, "which excuses Western people from taking action to stop the suffering."
But Mr. Thurman believes that the inevitable benefit of having two such high-profile films about Tibet released around the same time should outweigh any concerns about perpetuating Western fantasies.
In the real world, Tibet's recent history has been anything but golden. 
Citing a 200-year-old document that they said proved Tibet was a part of China, Communist Chinese forces pushed into the once-secluded nation in 1949, first promising to respect Tibet's religious traditions but soon closing monasteries, sending monks to re-education camps, killing some, torturing others and resettling tens of thousands of Chinese farmers in the country, a process that continues today. 
When Chinese forces put down a Tibetan insurrection in 1959, the Dalai Lama and many of his followers felt they had no choice but to flee to India, keep their religious traditions alive and argue their case to the outside world.
IN 1991, THE DALAI LAMA WAS awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 
The cause of the Tibetans has been adopted by many figures in the entertainment industry, including Richard Gere and Harrison Ford, Ms. Mathison's husband. 
But Western nations have been reluctant to embrace the Tibetan cause, in part because of concerns about alienating the Chinese leaders.
In November, while filming was still under way in Morocco on "Kundun," Chinese officials complained about the film to the Walt Disney Company, which was to release it under a subsidiary, calling it an intrusion into China's internal affairs. 
But Disney officials said they intended to go ahead with the movie.
Mr. Scorsese said last month that he had heard nothing directly from either the Chinese Government or Disney about whether China continued to object to his film, though he had heard "indirectly" that Beijing was still very much concerned.
The Chinese may be right to be concerned. 
Mr. Thurman believes that these two films, coming out at around the same time, will succeed in raising the level of understanding of Tibet's recent tragic history.
"I think these films will be inspiring people, and they come at a very desperate time for Tibet," he said. 
"For the world to get a look at this, the reality of the Tibetan story, and for them to have a sympathetic perspective on Tibet from two sources, kindles a spark of hope in the Tibetan community."
Ms. Mathison said she spent about two years researching the Dalai Lama's life, meeting with him and others and roughing out a first draft of the script. 
She and Mr. Ford then flew to India and Mr. Ford read the script to the Dalai Lama while Ms. Mathison sat, quietly watching.
"The Dalai Lama was very astute," she said. 
"It's really very difficult to talk about him without sounding like a Moonie. 
With the script, his concerns were often technical. 
How could I move from this room to that room?
Things like that. 
He was also very concerned about the way some Tibetan characters and ceremonies might be presented, such as the Dalai Lama's court oracle. 
He knows how that might appear to Western audiences."
Mr. Scorsese also met with the Dalai Lama several times and particularly remembers one meeting at Mr. Ford's ranch in Wyoming. 
"The Dalai Lama came in," Mr. Scorsese said, "and the first thing he said was, 'Does that bird have enough water?'
He also thought the dog wanted to go outside. 
He was more concerned about the animals than anything else."
It was a rough shoot, Mr. Scorsese said, made none easier by the unskilled cast. 
"I'd come out of my trailer in the morning," he recalled, "and there would be the assistant director with that day's problems. 
This person is sick. 
That thing is broken. 
The sandstorm is due to hit in an hour. 
And over at the side there would be these Tibetan monks bowing to me. 
It's far from downtown Manhattan, you know what I'm saying?"
