
Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, has been called a colorful assortment of names by Chinese officials in recent months, including "prostitute," "serpent" and -- his own favorite -- "tango dancer."
So it was unusual for Mr. Patten, during a visit to Washington and New York last week, to find himself squarely on China's side of a debate over its trade status in the United States. 
A man China regards as its enemy came to argue China's case to President Clinton, Congress and whoever else would listen.
"It's very agreeable to find myself in such good company," Mr. Patten said with a smile, referring to his fresh alliance with Beijing. 
"I admit that I'm not quite used to this."
No, he said, he had not exactly come to do China's bidding. 
But yes, he allowed, his case for renewing China's "most favored nation" trade status is virtually identical with Beijing's.
Hong Kong could lose more than $20 billion of trade that now passes through the colony on its way between China and the United States if China's trade status were revoked and tariffs increased, Mr. Patten estimated. 
More trade, not less, he argued, is the best way to promote China's evolution into a modern nation.
But politics is a different story. 
Since last fall, when he proposed expanding the right to vote for a legislature in 1995 -- the last election before Hong Kong is returned to Chinese rule in 1997 -- Mr. Patten has been tagged with a stream of invective from Beijing.
"A cunning political trickster" and "colonial oppressor" are among the names he was recently called in public by Chinese officials, who oppose broadening the base of voters. 
They argue that in the past Britain has never shown much interest in more democracy for Hong Kong and that there is no reason for it to do so now.
Mr. Patten, 48, who left his post as chairman of the Conservative Party in Britain to become Governor of Hong Kong in July, has refused to alter his plan for the election, which would to the voting age to 18 from 21 and would allow more people to vote for legislators selected by industry.
Mr. Patten's tough stance against Beijing has earned him credibility with those in Washington who most oppose his views on trade, and who favor linking China's trade status with progress in human rights and other issues.
"He is a person who has taken risks, who is courageous," said Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California. 
"You listen more carefully to someone like that."
Ms. Pelosi introduced legislation in the House last month to revoke China's most-favored-nation status in 1994 if measurable progress is not made in human rights and other issues. 
She said that although Mr. Patten did not change her mind, he had persuaded her to adjust her proposal by eliminating its references to Hong Kong.
