
Chinese Treasures
Chinese art has attracted a flurry of attention recently. 
Over the last two years the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, have given it considerable time and space. 
Now the National Gallery of Art in Washington is weighing in.
It announced this week that together with the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, Mo., and the State Administration of Cultural Heritage and Art Exhibitions in China, it has put together "The Golden Age of Archeology: Celebrated Discoveries from the People's Republic of China."
The show, to be on view in Washington from Sept. 
19 through Jan. 
2, will travel to the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston and the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco.
The National Gallery is calling the show "the greatest survey of Chinese art and archeology ever lent by the People's Republic of China."
The show commemorates the 50th anniversary of the People's Republic. 
It will have about 200 examples of recent archeological discoveries, objects dating from 6000 B.C. to A.D. 960, as well as sculpture, ritual implements, musical instruments, paintings and calligraphy, plus decorative objects made of jade, stone, wood, bamboo, gold and bronze.
"It's very different from other Chinese shows in the U.S. because it focuses on archeological finds of the last 20 years," said Earl A. Powell 3d, director of the National Gallery. 
"It's a fascinating and beautiful show that tracks the evolution of Chinese art."
In 1974 the National Gallery presented a similar exhibition, "Archeological Finds of the People's Republic of China."
The forthcoming show is expected to present new perspectives on early Chinese civilization and art, documenting the most recent excavations and theories while showing the various ancient cultures that flourished simultaneously throughout China.
Mr. Powell said the show would demonstrate that Chinese civilization sprung not only from the valley of the Yellow River, as previously thought, but from the interaction and achievements of various cultures throughout the country.
 
Raising the Flag
Since he painted his first flag in 1954, Jasper Johns has created nearly 100 versions of what is now his most famous image. 
He has drawn flags, painted flags, produced flags in watercolor and as prints and created lead and bronze-relief sculptures of them. 
With so many examples of Mr. Johns's flags in such a variety of guises, why do auction houses consider it a coup when a Johns flag painting comes on the market?
"It's an icon of American art," said Franck Giraud, who heads Christie's 19th- and 20th-century art departments worldwide. 
"Flags just don't come on the market that often."
In November, at Sotheby's in New York, a small 1959 "Flag" drawing that was estimated to bring $500,000 to $700,000 sold for nearly $1 million. 
In February 1998 Christie's in New York sold a collage of a "White Flag" from 1960 for $1.2 million, twice its $600,000 high estimate.
On May 13 Christie's in New York will auction a "Flags" painting from 1973. 
It is made of two sets of three canvas panels, and depicts two vertical flags in red, white and blue. 
The work is estimated to sell for $7 million to $10 million. 
Some art experts suggest that the price may be high; they recall that in November Sotheby's unsuccessfully pushed its luck by offering "White Numbers" (1958), an important Johns encaustic-on-linen painting of numerals in a progression from 0 to 9, with a $7 million to $9 million estimate. 
No one was willing to pay more than $6 million.
Mr. Giraud said the estimate for "Flags" was justified because of "the tremendous popularity of the three Johns's we sold from the Ganz collection last year, each for way above their estimates, and for the rarity of the object."
The painting has been for sale before. 
In 1989, at the height of the auction market, Sotheby's in New York sold it for $11 million to Bo Alveryd, a dealer who purchased the painting on behalf of Renault, the French car manufacturer. 
While officials at Chrisite's will not identify the current seller, art world experts who know the painting say it is being sold by Renault.
"The flag is Johns's most desirable image," Mr. Giraud said. 
In October the Metropolitan Museum acquired a "White Flag" from 1955 directly from the artist. 
It has become one of the jewels in the museum's 20th-century collection.
 
American in Paris
The sale of the super-contemporary $41 million Frank Gehry building that had housed the American Center in Paris from 1994 to 1996 has been completed. 
The French Ministry of Culture bought the building for about $21 million and plans to turn it into a film center, with three screening rooms, a film library and spaces devoted to a museum, educational activities and a film and video research center. 
A lack of money forced the American Center to put its large building, in eastern Paris, up for sale in 1996.
"The American Center has continued out of a small office in Paris and now it will have an endowment," said Frederick B. Henry, the center's chairman. 
"We will be a grant-making foundation, which will support a variety of artistic endeavors."
Mr. Henry said that the exact focus of the grants has not been determined, but that the center was committed to "innovative philanthropy."
He added that the institution may join with two or three other arts organizations or foundations to develop special projects.
 
A New Venture
Alexander Apsis, a 25-year veteran of Sotheby's, who for the last five years has headed its department of Impressionist and modern art in New York, has resigned. 
He is to become a partner of C&M Arts, the Manhattan gallery on East 78th Street that was founded seven years ago by Robert Mnuchin, a retired investment banker.
"I've spent my whole working life at Sotheby's, and I wanted a new challenge," Mr. Apsis said. 
When he starts his job in May, Mr. Apsis will concentrate on Impressionist and classic 20th-century art.
