
China raised interest rates today on United States dollar deposits in an effort to stem a flow of hard currency out of the country that has come as international banks cut credit lines to Chinese borrowers.
The Bank of China, acting on orders of the central bank, raised the rate on one-year dollar deposits in Beijing to 4.66 percent from 3.75 percent. 
It also increased one-year rates for deposits denominated in the Hong Kong dollar -- which is linked to the American currency -- to 5.25 percent from 5 percent.
The rate increases "will encourage repatriation of hard-currency earnings by Chinese exporters," said Fred Hu, executive director of Asian Economic Research at Goldman, Sachs in Hong Kong. 
He called the increase a "correction" that brought Chinese bank rates more in line with international rates.
Other Chinese banks typically follow the lead of the Bank of China, a large commercial bank here. 
The new rates will vary among Chinese cities and banks.
Despite the higher rates paid on deposits of dollars, local currency rates "still have room to go lower," Mr. Hu said.
Seeking to rekindle economic growth, and to lower the interest payments that state-owned companies must make, China has cut interest rates paid on deposits of the local currency, the yuan, five times since November 1996. 
The economy is projected to grow 7 percent this year; although that is much faster than the growth expected in other Asian countries, it would be the slowest expansion in China since 1990.
Chinese banks currently pay 3.78 percent on one-year yuan deposits.
In 1997, China's foreign-exchange reserves rose by an average of $3 billion a month. 
But last year, despite increases in the trade surplus and in foreign investment, exchange reserves rose about $400 million a month.
The concern over currency reserves comes as foreign banks have instituted a near-freeze on new loans to Chinese companies. 
The foreign banks curtailed lending after the collapse in October of the nation's second-biggest trust company. 
Many of them are also demanding early repayment of loans to minimize further losses if more Chinese companies fail, bankers say.
Still, the $5 billion gain in reserves last year brought China's total to $144.96 billion at the end of 1998, second only to Japan's.
Today's interest-rate increase will narrow the gap between Chinese and foreign rates. 
The Bank of China's rate of 4.66 percent for one-year dollar deposits in Beijing is below the average of 5.23 percent offered by banks in the United States. 
The 5.25 percent rate offered for Hong Kong dollars is still below the 7 percent that Hong Kong banks are paying in Hong Kong.
Still, the increases may prove to be an incentive for Chinese exporters to repatriate some of their foreign funds. 
Exporters are permitted to retain 15 percent of their foreign-currency earnings, much of which is believed to remain outside China.
