
Liang Bingjun, chatting on his mobile telephone, is one reason the West ought to be excited about China joining the World Trade Organization next year.
A quarter of every dollar spent on the phone by Mr. Liang and other mobile phone owners in China could belong to a foreign company as soon as China joins the W.T.O. 
That's not small change. 
With more than 65 million cell phone users, China is already the world's second-largest wireless market and is expected to surpass even the United States by the end of next year.
Telecommunications is just one way in which China's trade organization membership will make an immediate splash. 
While reams of questions remain about what will happen after the world's most populous country joins the global trading club, there are some reasonable certainties about instant changes that will alter the global market forever. 
Others will happen gradually over five years.
China's W.T.O. membership will not change everything: the country will continue to protect many of its sectors from foreign competition. 
But joining the organization will force open the nation's economy more in the first five years than during the previous 20 years of reforms. 
Some of the biggest changes will come on the first day.
Tariffs are set to fall on a wide range of products. 
On the first day of China's W.T.O. membership, for example, the import duty on some automobiles will drop to 63.5 percent from 80 percent now, the first step in a five-year decline that will bring all car duties down to 25 percent.
Finance companies like GMAC, meanwhile, will be allowed to offer car loans, putting millions of Chinese consumers within sudden reach of buying an imported car.
And China has promised to scrap the murky, politicized process by which it decides what companies have access to its market.
Insurers, for example, will no longer wait years to hear if they are among the anointed ones. 
The day after China joins the W.T.O., the country's insurance regulator is supposed to have applications on hand for qualified companies that want to sell insurance in the country. 
And, under W.T.O. rules, the regulator will have to act on the applications within a set period of time, giving a written explanation to companies whose applications are turned down. 
That will be a relief to insurers that have spent millions of dollars waiting for word from the regulators with no information at all.
Insurers are eager to start: China's entire insurance market is still smaller than Taiwan's, but the government expects it to expand at a double-digit rate for at least the next decade.
"With incomes rising, there's little doubt the market will grow quickly," said Patrick Cranley, the Cigna Corporation's representative in Shanghai and the chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce here.
As a W.T.O. member, China won't be able to arbitrarily limit the number of foreign insurance companies operating here.
Other foreign services will become immediately legal. 
Foreign law firms, which have operated in a gray area for years, will at last be allowed to counsel clients on Chinese laws and rules related to commercial transactions, though they will not yet be allowed to argue cases before Chinese courts.
In some cases, China is already amending those laws and regulations to comply with W.T.O. standards. 
The country's legislature has drafted amendments that will lift burdens from foreign investors setting up factories in China. 
Those amendments will take effect when they are approved by the full legislature, a largely rubber stamp body, at its next session early next year.
Among other changes, foreign companies will no longer be required to use a certain amount of local materials or components in the products they make in China. 
And factories that are 100 percent foreign-owned will no longer be required to export at least half their China-made goods. 
Nor will licenses for wholly foreign-owned manufacturers be granted based on the level of technology they bring to China.
"That should make it easier for foreign companies to invest," said Patrick Norton, a Shanghai-based lawyer with the American law firm O'Melveny & Myers.
Few of the immediate changes will be as momentous as the opening of China's telecommunications industry, though, which itself is on the verge of explosive growth. 
Upon China's joining the W.T.O., foreign companies will be allowed to buy up to 25 percent of Chinese mobile telephone networks, and up to 49 percent within three years.
Foreign telecommunication giants are already jostling for position: Britain's Vodafone Group paid $2.5 billion for a 2 percent stake in China's biggest mobile telephone company, China Mobile Communications, earlier this year and has said it is ready to buy more. 
Hong Kong's Hutchison Whampoa holds a 2 percent stake in China Unicom, China's second mobile telephone operator, which is shopping for a still larger strategic investor. 
And there may also be more mobile telephone licenses issued in China after the country joins the W.T.O.
Mr. Liang, 25, who keeps his cell phone glued to his ear at a coffee shop on Shanghai's bustling Nanjing Road, said he was happy about the changes W.T.O. entry will bring. 
"If there are foreign companies in the market, there will be more competition and prices will come down," he said.
