
At the Sidaokou wholesale market they have been snapped up, these strange golden orbs bedecked with American flag stickers and the name Ocean Spray.
Some people have driven two hours to purchase them. 
But most just regard these fruits with curiosity -- are they oversized oranges?
-- and read the poster that explains: "Grapefruits from Florida . . . Famous Brand Name . . . Healthy and Tasty . . . Good for Your Blood and for Beauty."
"It's my first imported product, and sales are very very good," said Rong Zhifang, a saleswoman, hovering behind her cartons.
When China joins the World Trade Organization, probably later this year, it will be forced to allow a huge range of foreign goods greater access to its vast markets. 
But a few American agricultural items -- including citrus fruit and pork -- have already attained sharply improved entry in the last few months, under a recent United States-China agricultural agreement.
And, in Beijing, the fate of the invading oranges and grapefruits is seen as a glimpse of China's future, presaging the sudden new opportunities and problems that free trade will bring.
"The arrival of American agricultural products is just a start," said The Beijing Morning News, in one of many articles that have appeared recently about the American fruit. 
"Once China joins the W.T.O., the story about the boy crying wolf will soon become a reality."
Indeed, Western companies are drooling at the prospect of China's potentially huge market, aggressively promoting their products.
At the annual Food China 2000 Exhibition last week in Beijing, American producers of chicken, ice cream and fruit juice -- to name a few -- turned out in stands decorated with red, white and blue bunting to give buyers from Chinese restaurants, supermarkets and hotels a taste of the future. 
There was even a booth promoting American pork, to a country where a surplus of pigs has driven pork prices to near record lows this year.
But it was the citrus booth -- with its free fruit slices and drinks -- that commanded the longest lines. 
"This will certainly open up new business opportunities for me," said Ding Yong, a food distributor for cafeterias. 
"The juices are great."
Price, of course, is something of an issue. 
Imported oranges are about three times the price of Chinese products. 
Grapefruits here cost about $1.50 each, compared with about 10 cents for somewhat similar Chinese fruits, called youzi (pronounced yo-zuh) and huyou (pronounced hoo-yo).
These price differentials will narrow somewhat when China enters the W.T.O., since the fruits now carry an average import tariff of 40 percent. 
But even as tariffs are cut, imported fruit is likely to remain quite a bit more expensive.
And other hurdles are likely to remain for a long time, as China's slow-moving bureaucracy adjusts to the realities of more imports. 
The Florida grapefruits that arrived in China on April 20, for example, were stuck in quarantine for the next four weeks, their release blocked by a series of logistical problems.
First, the inspection documents provided by the Florida producers were considered invalid by Chinese customs authorities. 
Then the quarantine inspectors sealed the warehouse after noticing that some cases contained dead insects. 
The inspectors ultimately cleared the fruits, but not before Chinese distributors had paid them thousands of dollars in storage fees.
"I have met with so many troubles from these fruits, and I still have many grapefruits in the ports waiting to be inspected," said Zhang Zhimin, the sales manager for the China Cereal Import and Export Company, which is handling the citrus imports. 
"Although sales are good now and I am quite optimistic, there are still many problems."
The citrus fruits are coming in under the United States-China Agricultural Cooperation Agreement signed late last year. 
Under the accord, China said it would drop barriers that had previously prevented the import of some American agricultural products.
China agreed to recognize the American pork inspection system, for example, which it had called inadequate. 
It also dropped what had previously been a near-blanket ban on citrus imports, put in place to protect against infestation by the Mediterranean fruit fly, or medfly.
Under the new agreement, the United States promised not to send fruit to China from counties experiencing medfly infestations.
Since April 20, more than six huge shipments of fruit have arrived here, including 16 tons of Sunkist oranges in the northeastern part of Dalian and 60 tons of grapefruit in the coastal city of Tianjin. 
By the end of May, they could be found in upscale markets in Beijing, where the press has provided detailed analyses of their flavor, appearance, breeding and value.
In Shanghai, the 1,800 cartons of oranges that arrived on May 11 sold out within two hours. 
In Dalian, they lasted just three days. 
Tens of thousands of grapefruits have sold in Beijing since they arrived on May 20.
"Will the high prices affect sales in China?" asked The Beijing Morning News. 
"It seems not. 
The Chinese people have showed unexpected enthusiasm for these fine-quality oranges."
Chinese experts urged their compatriots to carefully observe the invasion and learn from American farmers.
Of course, the initial burst of enthusiasm for the fruit may not be surprising in a country where consumers worship all things American. 
American fruit growers and distributors are determined to maintain the momentum.
Calling grapefruit the "No. 
1 Fruit in the U.S.," material from the Beijing Shiyi Futai Trade Company says its grapefruits help "protect your heart, blood vessels and kidneys."
The fruit "has the natural anticancer element of folic acid, and natural fruit colloid, which can lower cholesterol."
A series of flashy television ads, featuring a popular music TV host named Ke Lan, is planned to promote American oranges.
There is still much work to be done. 
At the China Food 2000 Exhibition, Sunny Chen, an executive chef from a hotel in Xian, declared that consumers there were "not ready" for the flavor of grapefruit, as he threw a rind into the trash can -- even though he personally liked the fruit and predicted success with the more worldly palates of Beijing.
But at the huge Xidan Market in the capital, six flag-festooned grapefruits sat forlornly on the shelves one recent day, more museum pieces than comestibles.
"Look!
Fruit from America," said Gui Shufeng, a retiree who was strolling in the market with his wife.
"I like them -- a little tart and a little sweet," said Mr. Gui, who had tasted grapefruit while visiting his daughter in New York. 
"But I'm not sure if Chinese will buy them. 
They're expensive."
