
The United States Treasury Secretary, Lawrence H. Summers, finished two days of meetings in China today with both sides extolling financial cooperation and exuding friendship. 
But there was no sign of progress on the overarching issue, China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
Still, by all accounts, the meetings Sunday with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and today with the Finance Minister, Xiang Huaicheng, and other senior officials were friendly and free of rancorous talk -- perhaps an achievement in itself since the countries are still emerging from the icy silence that followed the NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade last May.
Without discounting the difficult market-opening concessions that the United States demands of China before it will endorse membership in the global trade body, Mr. Summers and other American officials appeared optimistic that agreement was still possible in the coming month, before new global negotiations begin.
Mr. Summers and other senior economic and security officials came to China for a meeting of the China-U.S. 
Joint Economic Committee, a periodically scheduled exchange of ideas. 
Officials said no trade negotiations were held.
The leaders on both sides clearly wanted to present a cheerful public face and an exchange at today's news conference expressed the mood.
Asked about the prospects for a trade agreement, Mr. Summers said: "Any differences can be bridged with good will on both sides. 
But certainly there are differences that have to be resolved."
Mr. Xiang, smiling, replied, "I agree with the point that with good will, all the problems can be solved" -- subtly suggesting, perhaps, that a decision to give China some leeway was now required.
To which Mr. Summers quickly retorted, to laughs from the room of officials and journalists, "But there is something to be solved."
That "something" is, in the American view, concessions by China to allow global competitors gradually to enter protected, state-run sectors like financial services and telecommunications and to lower barriers to American farm products.
Mr. Summers, in meetings and in a speech today at Qinghua University extolling the merits of market forces and the free flow of information and technology, contended that China would be better off for allowing in competition. 
This is accepted in principle by many of China's leaders, but is difficult to carry out in a country with serious problems of unemployment, farmer unrest and a huge, dying state enterprise sector.
In a visit to Washington last April, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji was said to have made deep concessions that he hoped would secure the trade deal, but President Clinton decided the moves did not go far enough to satisfy Congress, which will ultimately have to cooperate.      
