
President Clinton promised today to wage an all-out campaign to get Congress to back a landmark trade deal with China, and administration officials have enlisted numerous corporate chief executives for what they describe as the most aggressive pro-trade lobbying effort since the United States opened its borders to free trade with Canada and Mexico seven years ago.
The campaign will pit the administration and its business allies against a network of labor, environmental and consumer groups, which oppose the new trade agreement with China and are eager to test their strength after successfully mobilizing street demonstrations that helped to scuttle world trade talks in Seattle late last year.
The vote concerns the November agreement between the United States and China that paves the way for China to enter the World Trade Organization. 
American companies will not benefit from the deal, which sharply cuts tariffs and clears barriers to freer trade in agriculture and services, unless Congress grants China the same access to the United States market that most other major trading partners have, forgoing an annual review of that country's trade status.
Clinton administration officials say they are guardedly optimistic that Congress will approve the terms of the deal. 
But having been stung by surprise defeats on previous trade accords and by the collapse of trade negotiations in Seattle, they are promising a steady stream of pro-trade events, speeches by Mr. Clinton and high-level administration attention until Congress votes on the issue in the spring or summer.
"I will be working hard over the coming weeks and coming months to make sure we don't let this opportunity slip away," Mr. Clinton said at a news conference to announce the members of an administration team appointed to oversee the campaign. 
"This is something that is in the national interest."
Mr. Clinton named William M. Daley, the commerce secretary, to lead the effort, a signal to many in the business community that the China trade deal has a higher political priority than some other recent votes on trade. 
Mr. Daley led the successful effort to win backing for the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 and 1994, and is now seen as one of the few members of the administration who can orchestrate a successful political campaign.
Mr. Daley will be working on the issue with Steve Ricchetti, Mr. Clinton's deputy chief of staff, and they have already begun lining up some top corporate leaders, including the chiefs at Boeing, America Online and Intel, to become directly involved in selling the benefits of the trade accord to Congress and the public. 
The hope is that the lobbying campaign will have a high-technology edge, with popular companies that are pillars of the new economy supplementing stalwart trade supporters like Boeing and General Electric.
Technology companies and farmers have much to gain from the trade deal, which will, at least on paper, pry open parts of the Chinese economy that Beijing has tended to shelter from foreign competition. 
These include telecommunications, the Internet, and grain and meat products, all which are particular areas of American strength.
But the vote is nonetheless seen as a close contest. 
Trade divides Democrats like few political issues, pitting core labor and environmental supporters against business support. 
The administration fears that the Republicans, who control Congress, will seek to delay the vote until the fall, when the election season is at its peak, to make the vote as politically costly as possible for their opponents.
In part for that reason, Mr. Clinton vowed today to put pressure on Congress to bring the China trade accord to a vote before the summer.
Labor groups, meanwhile, have vowed to see the China trade deal defeated, with many expressing optimism that the momentum generated in Seattle will propel opposition to the China accord. 
Unions say that Congress cannot treat China like any other big trading partner because it treats its workers badly and regularly violates trade agreements.
"We will flood every Congressional office with phone calls, letters and visits," James P. Hoffa, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, said. 
"We will do whatever it takes. 
And with the momentum from Seattle, we will win."
      
