
Zhang Guoyang is packing up his six-foot Santa Claus samples today, but come March he'll be taking orders again for plastic reindeer, flocked Christmas trees and Styrofoam snowmen.
Sales of Mr. Zhang's Christmas kitsch are growing by about 50 percent a year, and the volume he ships is growing even faster because prices are falling. 
About half of his products go to the United States, but his fastest-expanding market is right here at home, where hotels, restaurants and shops bought nearly $50 million worth of Christmas decorations this year. 
That's a lot of tinsel.
Christmas has been co-opted by the Communists as good for stimulating business and is already a bigger deal than New Year's Eve in China's cities. 
Thousands of vaguely Asiatic Santa statues stand guard across China in November through December. 
And millions of paper Santa-head cutouts adorn shop windows, his face beet red, in China's traditional celebratory color.
That, despite the fact that few Chinese have any idea who the "old foreigner" is, or what Christmas is all about.
"It's the foreigners' New Year," Jiang Hui, a 20-year-old waitress at a small Shanghai restaurant festooned with Christmas decorations, said a few days ago. 
She compared it with the Chinese lunar New Year celebration that, for now, still eclipses Christmas as China's most important holiday.
Eyeing the red-cloaked effigy standing on the sidewalk outside the restaurant, she put her hands together in a gesture of prayer and suggested uncertainly that Santa Claus "makes wishes come true."
Even Mr. Zhang, a Santa expert to the Chinese who visit his crammed showroom, laughed nervously when asked who the rotund bearded mannequins represent. 
"He's a character in the story about Jesus, that's all I know," he replied.
The spread of Christmas in China has less to do with the growth of Christianity in this officially atheist country than it does with the growth of foreign joint-venture hotels. 
When foreign hotels began opening here 20 years ago, their annual Christmas decorations were hugely popular among locals.
Soon, Chinese hotels were putting up decorations of their own to pull in business, and before long restaurants were offering Christmas Eve banquets to state-owned companies. 
They readily subscribed, using the events as novel year-end perks for their employees.
Mr. Zhang was working for a trading company at the time, importing Christmas decorations from America and selling them to hotels. 
Most of the decorations were made in China, so bringing them back added an expensive round trip to their cost.
He quit the trading company eight years ago and started his own business to make and sell Christmas decorations in China. 
Today, his company is one of the top three domestic Christmas trimming suppliers in the country, having sold more than $1 million worth of synthetic trees, tinsel and other Yuletide items this year.
Like the other domestic suppliers, he copies American designs or has factories fashion items based on his specifications -- often to strange effect. 
The country is populated at this time of year with his and other vendors' fiberglass interpretations of Santa, some with odd pear-shaped bodies or maniacal eyes that look plain freakish to Westerners.
The decorations often overlap with more traditional Chinese ornamentation. 
At the restaurant where Ms. Jiang works, a plastic, tinseled Christmas tree stands beside a gaudy, red-lit shrine to the Chinese God of Fortune. 
The Saint Nick standing outside looks like Ronald McDonald in a Santa suit.
Year by year the Santas and associated paraphernalia make their way to increasingly remote places. 
Mr. Zhang has shipped his oversized Santas to every Chinese province except Tibet and Qinghai. 
Even the Muslims of far western Xinjiang province now have dozens of Chinese Santa Clauses in their midst.
He still exports decorations to the United States, but he said the future is here in China. 
Competition from other low-cost manufacturing countries like Pakistan and the Philippines has cut the profit margin on exports to less than what he makes selling decorations at home.
For the next month, Mr. Zhang will be busy shipping beanie-topped fiberglass boys and golden Styrofoam coins and fish for the Chinese New Year at the end of January. 
Then he'll turn his attention to designing next year's Christmas novelties and wait for the Noel orders to start rolling in.
