
The first of China's leading Internet companies is set to go public in the United States later this week -- sort of.
The initial public offering of the company, Sina.com, will be the first of what are expected to be many new Nasdaq listings of China-based Internet content providers. 
But investors who buy the stock will not actually own a stake in China's most popular Internet portal. 
Instead, they will own a piece of the company's marginal Hong Kong, Taiwan and North American portals -- a fraction of its core business.
Sina.com, incorporated in the Cayman Islands, holds various licensing agreements with a Chinese company that owns the Chinese portal.
People in China's Internet industry are closely watching the offering, somewhat aghast that American investors may be willing to buy into a company gutted of content. 
Still, Sina.com's stock offering will determine whether other Chinese Internet companies take the plunge now or choose to wait until China's ever-shifting regulations change.
"I can't believe it will fly," a Chinese Internet entrepreneur said today at an industry party in Beijing.
Sina.com, founded by a 32-year-old Beijing University graduate, became the hottest Web site in China last year after it posted reports of the NATO bombing of China's Belgrade embassy within minutes of the official news media.
And Sina provided more information on the bombing than any other mainland source, relying heavily on foreign reports.
The company's main Chinese portal is linked to nine different "channels," Chinese-language Web sites that offer everything from news to online shopping for cellular phones, flowers, even food. 
The company's free and fast e-mail accounts and timely news updates have made it the most popular portal in China for nearly a year.
Investors in the initial public offering, however, will own none of that, because of regulations intended to allow Chinese Internet companies to raise capital on overseas stock markets while adhering to China's longstanding ban on foreign investment in the telecommunications and media industries. 
Those rules are supposed to change when China joins the World Trade Organization.
While the country has welcomed private foreign investment in the Internet, it remains fearful of allowing ownership of its new e-businesses slip overseas.
Earlier this year, Beijing-based AsiaInfo listed its shares on the Nasdaq, but that company provides technical services and software products, not Internet content.
Sina's staff quickly grew from a handful of people to more than 500 today in Zhongguancun, a section of Beijing akin to Silicon Valley. 
Investment bankers were soon offering the company bundles of cash, and it subsequently raised nearly $100 million.
The company's boldness won it fans, but not among China's conservative officials, who made it clear that Sina.com would not be given approval to list abroad unless the company toed Beijing's line.
To win regulators' favor, people familiar with the company say, Sina dropped news from all sources other than the state-run press and removed links to foreign media sites.
      
