
Wall Street's top-drawer investment firms are falling all over each other to take China's state-owned companies public. 
After the furor unleashed by the latest deal, they may wonder whether it is worth the grief.
Goldman, Sachs & Company set the price today for its initial public offering of the PetroChina Company, China's dominant oil and gas producer. 
At 1.28 Hong Kong dollars a share, or about 16 cents, it is at the low end of the company's predicted range. 
That will hardly soothe the architects of the deal, who spent months putting it together, only to see it ripped apart by critics ranging from Republican lawmakers to Tibetan monks.
"The PetroChina offering has been a very complex and grueling process," said Paul Shapira, a managing director at Goldman, at a news conference here last Sunday.
When PetroChina's bosses traveled to the United States on March 20 to sell the offering, they were hit with charges of human-rights and labor abuses. 
Critics said the listing would lead to a million layoffs at PetroChina's parent, China National Petroleum. 
They also said the company was damaging the environment in Tibet and abetting an outlaw regime in Sudan through a joint venture there.
Not content just to criticize, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. organized a shadow road show in New York and other cities to persuade investors to steer clear of PetroChina. 
Fund managers in Hong Kong said today that the campaign had an impact -- scaring off some American funds.
"The political concerns have been a major overhang," said a fund manager, who, like most people interviewed for this article, spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"Not that many Asia-Pacific funds invest in oil and gas companies, so you need demand in the United States."
PetroChina's bumpy ride has far-reaching implications for China's campaign to overhaul its sclerotic corporate sector. 
As part of that effort, Beijing hopes to sell shares in dozens of huge state-owned companies, including Sinopec, the second-largest oil company; China National Overseas Oil, the No. 1 offshore oil company; and China Unicom, the No. 2 telecommunications company.
With PetroChina limping into the market, however, the prospects for these other deals are now cloudier. 
The A.F.L.-C.I.O., emboldened by its success, said it planned to protest future Chinese stock offerings that it feels are bad investments or represent companies that violate human rights and labor practices.
"Our understanding is that there is going to be 120 of these I.P.O.'s coming out of China," said Richard Trumka, the secretary general of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. 
"On ethical issues and shareholder governance issues, most of these are going to be just as bad as PetroChina."
In the face of such criticism, PetroChina may feel vindicated that it was still able to raise about $3 billion from the offering, which values the company at roughly $30 billion. 
China National Petroleum will retain a 90 percent stake and will appoint the entire board, including the two independent directors.
Shares of PetroChina begin trading next Thursday in New York and next Friday in Hong Kong. 
In New York, they will trade as American depository receipts that represent 100 Hong Kong shares, or $16.44 at the price set here today.
China National Petroleum had initially hoped to raise $5 billion or even $7 billion. 
To meet even the more modest goal, Goldman was forced to round up strategic investors to soak up the shares. 
BP Amoco agreed to buy 20 percent of the offering, or as much as $1 billion, while three politically friendly property developers in Hong Kong agreed to chip in another $350 million.
Goldman's performance was also tainted by an unauthorized e-mail message that four of the firm's sales representatives sent to 83 clients. 
Because the note contained claims that the firm feared may have violated securities laws, Goldman tried hard to recall it. 
Later, on the advice of lawyers, it took the extraordinary step of reprinting the e-mail message -- and correcting portions of it -- in the prospectus.
"It clearly was a mistake," Mr. Shapira said tersely at the news conference.
The disputes surrounding PetroChina obscure the fact that it is, in many respects, a trail-blazing company for China. 
It has instituted an incentive plan for its top 300 managers, tying as much as 75 percent of their compensation to profit targets. 
That is unheard-of among state-owned companies in China, which only recently began paying attention to profits, let alone the role of managers in producing them.
"We are a world-scale oil and gas company, and the flagship of China's reform," said Ma Fucai, the chairman of PetroChina, in the news conference in Hong Kong.
Because China National Petroleum is a classic state-owned enterprise -- with a vast network of hospitals and schools in addition to oil and gas operations -- the company decided to carve out its most valuable assets and place them in a separate venture, PetroChina.
By doing that, the company also removed the burden of its bloated payroll from PetroChina. 
The new public company will retain 480,000 employees, while the remaining one million workers will stay at China National Petroleum, where most are likely to be laid off.
These layoffs were a main reason that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. decided to oppose the deal. 
But the labor federation also warned that the proceeds from the stock offering could be siphoned off by the parent, where they could contribute indirectly to its activities in Tibet or Sudan.
"The fire wall they created between PetroChina and C.N.P.C. is illusory at best," Mr. Trumka said, "so money will find its way back into the parent company."
According to the company's prospectus, 90 percent of the proceeds will be used by PetroChina to pay off debt and finance capital expenditures. 
The remaining 10 percent will go to China National Petroleum to reduce debt and pay for employee severance and retraining. 
Mr. Ma said the company had hired outside auditors to guarantee that the money would not be used for other purposes.
Mr. Ma also tried to distance PetroChina from its parent's activities in Sudan. 
China National Petroleum is an investor, along with Malaysian and Canadian companies, in a pipeline there. 
"PetroChina does not have any overseas assets and operations," he said. 
"We do not have any plans to expand overseas."
Even aside from questions about Sudan, PetroChina has been hurt because it is indisputably an old-fashioned company. 
At a time when investors are bewitched by technology stocks, PetroChina's discussion of benchmark crude prices does not send hearts fluttering -- even though the company has proven oil reserves of 10.3 billion barrels, making it the world's fourth-largest publicly listed oil company.
Given the low price of its shares, analysts said PetroChina might prove a shrewd investment. 
For its labors, Goldman, Sachs also gets a high fee. 
The firm can expect to split a payment of 3 percent to 4 percent of the offering, or about $90 million, with the other underwriters.
 
--------------------
Oil Companies to Merge
By The New York Times
SHANGHAI, March 30 -- China's second- and fourth-largest oil companies will merge by order of the government, the companies said today. 
The move will make China New Star Petroleum, the country's fourth- largest producer, a subsidiary of China Petrochemical, or Sinopec, the country's second-largest oil company. 
The combination is expected to reinforce Sinopec's strength in oil and gas exploration as the company prepares for a global public offering of its shares. 
Sinopec plans to list on the Hong Kong, New York and London stock exchanges by the end of June. 
Despite the merger, the China National Petroleum Corporation remains the country's largest producer.      
