
For China, which has spent years trying to claw its way into the world's club of trading nations, the benefits of such an expanded reach and strong connections are clear.
But for Hong Kong, which has thrived as a middleman between China's closed markets and the outside world, the possibility of a more open China raises hard questions about the future of this trading post.
At first blush, China's success in moving closer to joining the World Trading Organization has buoyed local investors, on the theory that Chinese membership would be a good thing for Hong Kong. 
Stocks rose to their highest level in 12 months today, capping a week of powerful gains, in part because investors liked the progress they had seen in negotiations between the Chinese and American Governments.
"There are lots of people who think if China wins, Hong Kong wins," said Marc Faber, the managing director of Marc Faber Ltd., an investment firm here. 
"But I'm not sure. 
I think, on balance, the entry of China into the World Trade Organization is a negative for Hong Kong."
Although a deal would greatly expand business with China, Mr. Faber said it could also threaten Hong Kong's role as the broker for much of the wheeling and dealing that surrounds the China trade. 
With so many more ways into China, foreign companies may be ready to cut their own deals.
"This is further marginalizing Hong Kong," he said.
As a former British colony and now a semiautonomous region of China, Hong Kong is a separate trading entity with its own membership in the W.T.O. 
But its economic fortunes are so intertwined with China that people here have followed Beijing's campaign as if it were their own.
"The W.T.O. issue has helped sentiment in the market," said Miron Mushkat, global head of economics and strategy at Indocam Asset Management. 
"But it doesn't take much for sentiment to turn around."
Indeed, investors might have second thoughts if they scrutinized the implications of China's admission to the organization that sets the rules of global commerce and arbitrates disputes.
Already, some of the concessions Beijing has made in trade negotiations pose a threat to companies here. 
On Wednesday, just before Prime Minister Zhu Rongji flew to Washington, Chinese and American officials agreed to double the frequency of commercial flights between their countries and to increase the number of Chinese cities that United States air carriers can serve with direct connections.
That could deprive Hong Kong of its role as a gateway to China. 
Dragonair, the regional airline that serves many mainland cities, could lose Western passengers who fly to Hong Kong and switch carriers for the short hop to popular Chinese destinations like Xian and Guilin.
As China opens other industries, like telecommunications, financial services, and accounting, some analysts said foreign companies would rely less on Hong Kong as an interlocutor. 
That shift is already occurring in shipping, where Hong Kong's role as a gateway is still most pronounced.
In 1997, half of all Chinese exports passed through Hong Kong's container port on their way out of the country. 
But as China has opened more ports on the mainland, Hong Kong's share of exports declined, from 60 percent in 1992. 
Last year, container traffic rose less than 1 percent in Hong Kong, while Shenzhen, a large city nearby in Guangdong Province, reported a 70 percent increase.
"Clearly, more and more trade is carried out between China and other countries directly, rather than through Hong Kong," Mr. Faber said.
Yet for every downbeat consequence of freer trade with China, there is an offsetting positive one. 
Even if China opens its markets and adheres to global trade rules, analysts say it will still be a bewildering place to do business. 
The only difference is that more foreign companies will be taking the plunge.
"If you have a proliferation of people outside who are dealing with China, you need someone to act as a go-between," Mr. Mushkat said. 
"It doesn't necessarily mean pushing cargo through Hong Kong. 
But it may mean more skill-intensive activities, like lawyers or bankers."
Other experts said Hong Kong could assume a new role as an anchor of stabilityI in a commercially freer China. 
Once China gains entry into the W.T.O., analysts said it would be likely to make its currency, the yuan, fully convertible. 
The Hong Kong dollar, with an exchange rate linked to the United States dollar, could offset fluctuations in the value of the Chinese yuan.
Hong Kong's local companies would also benefit from having greater access to Chinese markets. 
Although Hong Kong is the largest source of direct foreign investment in China -- a cumulative $99.3 billion through 1996 -- its companies are still classified as foreign entities. 
Like American companies, they are barred from ownership in many Chinese industries.
Once those restrictions were lifted, Hong Kong companies could have an edge over others. 
For example, the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, a unit of HSBC Holdings, has decades of experience in China and would be well placed if foreign banks were allowed into Chinese consumer banking. 
Shares of HSBC helped propel the stock market rally here in recent days.
"Hong Kong should have demanded that its companies be classified as Chinese when it was negotiating the handover," said Robert C. Broadfoot, managing director of the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy in Hong Kong. 
"Now, it has a second chance to invest in China."
Regardless of the links between Hong Kong and China, some economists said it would be several years before the impact of a Chinese membership in the World Trade Organization made itself felt here.
"There's no doubt the business community would regard this as a positive," said Ian K. Perkin, chief economist of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce. 
"Just how positive is impossible to tell without knowing the details."
