
While China officially remains committed to joining the World Trade Organization, Chinese economists say that apparent divisions in the nation's leadership are likely to further stiffen Beijing's negotiating position and make agreement difficult to achieve in coming months.
With China experiencing a wave of nationalist politics after the NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade on May 7, orthodox politicians, skeptical about the benefits of forcing open Chinese markets, as membership in the global trade group would require, seem to be gaining influence.
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji is widely considered China's strongest proponent of entry into the trade group, which sets the rules of global commerce. 
But Mr. Zhu has become vulnerable to accusations that he was giving too much away in the broad concessions he offered to American negotiators during his visit to the United States last month.
Foreign Trade Minister Shi Guangsheng said today that China had not changed its basic negotiating position. 
But he also re-emphasized that Beijing would join the trade organization on its own terms. 
"China will never enter the W.T.O. at the expense of its own basic interests," Mr. Shi said at a meeting with visiting Australian officials in Beijing.
An assistant United States trade representative, Robert Cassidy, had been scheduled to return to Beijing this week to resume talks, but his visit has been indefinitely delayed.
A Beijing economist with ties to the Government said the mood surrounding the trade talks had darkened and many economic changes were likely to be delayed while the leadership was preoccupied with a campaign to promote nationalism. 
"No one dares do or say anything until they see a direction from the center," the economist said. 
"It limits everyone's ability to work."
After President Clinton turned down a deal on Chinese membership in the trade group during Mr. Zhu's visit, Chinese and American negotiators looked to early June as a deadline to reach an agreement, when China's most-favored-nation trading status expires.
Reaching a deal by then would enable the Clinton Administration to advocate a single vote in Congress to give China permanent favorable trading status, as required under trade organization rules.
Without a deal, Congress would have to vote once to renew Beijing's most-favored-nation status, and then vote again on giving China that status permanently. 
With so many anti-China voices in Congress, made louder by recent accusations of nuclear spying, the Administration wants to avoid giving Congress two chances to oppose an agreement.
Yet reaching a deal before June now looks increasingly unlikely. 
Former Prime Minister Li Peng, now the chairman of the Chinese legislature, has been leading the ranks of old-line leaders in attacking the United States for aggression in Yugoslavia, charges that have no direct connection to the trade talks but that inevitably affect the flexibility of Chinese negotiators.
Over the weekend, Mr. Li argued that the bombing had enabled the Chinese people to see "the hypocrisy of the democracy and human rights advocated by the United States."
He denounced the Western view that student demonstrations in Beijing and other cities had been orchestrated by the leadership to gain better leverage in the trade negotiations.
United States officials have said that the final areas of disagreement with Beijing are over financial services. 
The Americans have sought full rights for foreign banks operating in China to do business in local and foreign currencies and to serve both Chinese and foreign customers.
Too many operating restrictions on American banks, insurers and other financial companies are discouraging them from doing business in China, American negotiators have said. 
In response, Chinese officials maintain that changing the rules to make them even for Chinese and foreign banks could be disastrous for China.
