
China appears to have toughened its stance in talks aimed at gaining entry to the World Trade Organization, making United States negotiators pay for President Clinton's decision earlier this month to delay a final deal.
In the latest turn in China's long and complex path toward membership in the group that makes the rules for global commerce, Chinese negotiators have accused American officials of making excessive demands.
"Some negotiators are reaching out for a yard after taking in an inch," Wu Yi, a State Councillor and senior trade official, said in Beijing. 
"They are demanding too high conditions that are impractical and unacceptable for China."
China also seems to be trying to use international leverage with European trade officials to put pressure on the United States to agree to a World Trade Organization deal more quickly.
Today, Chinese negotiators met for a third consecutive day in Beijing with negotiators from the European Union, in preparation for a visit by Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, who is scheduled to arrive in Beijing on May 5 and is expected to announce an agreement that China should finally be allowed into the world trade body.
Two separate groups of negotiators met about tariffs and on trading services, the New China News Agency reported.
Long Yongtu, China's chief negotiator, was quoted by the agency as saying that China was prepared to make extensive efforts to push forward the negotiations, apparently appealing for international support to counter American demands in its trade talks with China.
Just before Prime Minister Zhu Rongji's trip to the United States early this month, China made a broad array of concessions aimed at overcoming United States opposition for Chinese entry to the trade body, which China has sought for 13 years.
China agreed to import more American beef, citrus products and wheat, and to allow more openness in the telecommunications, financial services and entertainment fields. 
President Clinton rejected a proposed agreement, though, apparently judging the anti-China mood in Washington to be too strong to accept an accord.
After vigorous protests from United States business leaders that a good deal had been within reach, the Clinton Administration authorized a fresh round of negotiations aimed at preserving the momentum that had been achieved.
With the Americans on the defensive for what is widely seen to have been a lost opportunity during Mr. Zhu's visit, Chinese negotiators seem to want to take advantage of a suddenly strengthened negotiating position.
American officials now say that their latest round of talks with China, held last weekend, focused on financial services, an area where they say the most obstacles remain. 
They have demanded full rights for foreign banks operating in China to conduct business in local and foreign currencies and to serve both local and foreign customers.
The American negotiators say that China is insisting on too many restrictions on United States banks, insurers and other financial companies that want to enter the country. 
In response, Chinese officials argue that equalizing market access for Chinese and foreign banks could be disastrous for domestic banks.
"Excessive growth of nonbank financial institutions could lead to a financial crisis," The China Economic Times reported, quoting a position paper from the State Development and Planning Commission. 
"Foreign-invested firms, supported by their banks, could easily take over sectors of the market and monopolize industries."      
