
In a report that made the Asian crisis seem like a distant memory, Hong Kong said today that its economy grew 4.5 percent in the third quarter of this year. 
The government also upgraded its forecast of growth for the full year to 1.8 percent from 0.5 percent.
The numbers, which were well above estimates, attest to Hong Kong's remarkable recovery from its worst recession since World War II. 
Like other Asian economies, Hong Kong has shrugged off the calamitous events of two years ago and is regaining its strength far faster than analysts had predicted.
"Hong Kong is poised for a dramatic rebound," said Victor Fung, the chairman of the Hong Kong Trade Development Council. 
"The conditions were there, but we needed a strong confirmation and a boost to confidence. 
We've now had a whole series of such events."
In addition to the new data, Hong Kong has been buoyed in recent weeks by the Walt Disney Company's announcement that it would build a theme park here, by the successful debut of a government-linked investment fund, and by the landmark trade deal between the United States and China.
That last milestone, however, could prove to be a distinctly mixed blessing. 
As China opens up its economy in an effort to enter the World Trade Organization, analysts said, this former British colony could lose its prized role as the middleman between China and the outside world.
Nor is that the only cloud looming over Hong Kong. 
Today's numbers also show that the territory is caught in a deflationary spiral unique among the recovering economies of Asia. 
The consumer price index declined 3.9 percent in the first 10 months of 1999, and the government increased its projection of the full-year decline in the index to 4 percent from an earlier forecast of 3.5 percent.
Prices of everything from office space and imported wine to designer clothes and cars are plunging here. 
Although people are spending more in stores -- retail sales rose 2 percent in the third quarter -- they are lured by deep discounts. 
The number of tourists visiting Hong Kong is up 11 percent so far this year, but they are spending much less per person, economists said.
Much of this deflation is viewed as necessary. 
Hong Kong's prices were among the highest in the world, and made the territory a forbidding place to do business. 
But the falling prices are cutting profits at local companies, a trend that discourages them from resuming investment. 
"This is what I call a profitless recovery," said Dong Tao, an economist at Credit Suisse First Boston in Hong Kong.
Mr. Tao said the recovery would remain tenuous as long as companies did not have the confidence to take out fresh loans and begin spending. 
Also, even though commercial rents have fallen by more than 40 percent, Hong Kong is still more expensive than New York or London, he said.
Ian K. Perkin, the chief economist of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, said the government had masked the effect of weak corporate investment by starting several costly projects, including the $3.6 billion Disneyland, which will be built largely with public money.
"We have to persuade domestic companies to begin investing again -- and real investments, not just the stock market," Mr. Perkin said. 
"I don't know how we do that."
The new trade agreement between the United States and China is a more long-term challenge for Hong Kong. 
The government's economist, K. Y. Tang, said that it was premature to estimate what impact the deal would have on economic output. 
"In general terms, I agree with those who say that it must be a very positive development for both the mainland and Hong Kong," he said.
Mr. Fung, of the Hong Kong Trade Development Council, and others contend that Hong Kong will benefit from the agreement because it will generate vast new trading opportunities for China. 
As the world's largest container port and the main clearinghouse for Chinese exports, Hong Kong will get a share of that increased traffic.
But a growing number of experts are questioning whether Hong Kong will miss out on most of the new wealth. 
As China opens its markets to foreign companies and products, American and other foreign companies could start dealing directly with the mainland Chinese.
"Hong Kong has been very successful in exploiting the gray areas of doing business in China," said Jason Felton, the chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce here. 
"But the W.T.O. is going to force the Chinese to be more transparent. 
Hong Kong companies will lose that niche, and they are clearly worried about it."
Mr. Fung said the trade agreement would encourage hundreds of small and midsize American companies to try to crack the China market. 
Lacking the resources or connections of major corporations, these companies would need the advice of people in Hong Kong, he said.
"If you're talking about the Fortune 100, it's probably true that these companies will put increased emphasis on dealing directly with China," he said. 
"What I think we'll get is a rush of medium-size multinationals, who have heretofore not dealt with China."
Mr. Fung acknowledged that Hong Kong would be forced to change. 
But he predicted that the territory would remake itself -- much as it did in 1979, when Deng Xiaoping opened the Chinese economy. 
At that time, Hong Kong was a center for low-cost manufacturing. 
But companies here recognized that China would usurp that role, so they moved their factories to neighboring Guangdong Province.
Now, Mr. Fung said, Hong Kong needs to retool its economy to provide information-age services to the growing Chinese market. 
The territory has become a hothouse for Internet companies that are focusing on the mainland. 
On Thursday, in an effort to create a Nasdaq exchange for Asia, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange opened a second board for technology-related stocks.
