
As Mannesmann of Germany and the British company Vodafone Airtouch roll out the heavy artillery for their bitter takeover battle, there is already one undisputed victor: a Hong Kong tycoon who is watching Europe's great corporate war from the penthouse of a skyscraper half a world away.
He is Li Ka-shing, the billionaire developer and chairman of the Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa. 
With its deal to sell its British mobile-phone operation, Orange P.L.C., to Mannesmann, Mr. Li's company has become the largest single shareholder in the German company.
Mr. Li has already made an enormous profit because of the Orange-Mannesmann deal and could make more if Vodafone buys Mannesmann.
That would be the latest of many shrewd moves for Mr. Li, 71, who has amassed a $12 billion fortune since he came to this former British colony in the 1940's as a penniless refugee from mainland China.
As Vodafone seeks to entice Mannesmann's shareholders with its $127.7 billion hostile bid, analysts said the British company would have to win over Hutchison, which in addition to its 10.1 percent stake has a seat on Mannesmann's supervisory board. 
That will not be easy, since Mr. Li said on Tuesday that he would back Mannesmann's chief executive, Klaus Esser, in rebuffing Vodafone's advances.
Analysts and bankers noted, however, that Hutchison's loyalty stemmed at least partly from a legal obligation to hold its shares in Mannesmann for 18 months after the mobile-phone deal. 
Should Vodafone further sweeten its offer, Mannesmann would probably feel obliged to let Hutchison sell its shares.
"They've been incredibly lucky," said Peter Milliken, an analyst at DBS Securities here. 
"But Li Ka-shing isn't just a lucky guy. 
Some of it is foresight."
Mannesmann paid $14 billion in cash and stock to buy Hutchison's controlling stake in Orange -- a sky-high price that analysts said was driven by Mannesmann's urge to protect itself from a predatory Vodafone.
When Vodafone started its hostile bid for Mannesmann, the value of Hutchison's shares soared 25 percent. 
If Mannesmann accepted the current bid, Mr. Li would make more than a 40 percent return in barely a month.
Moreover, Vodafone has indicated that if it won control of Mannesmann, it would spin off Orange to the German company's existing shareholders. 
Although that move would be aimed at mollifying British regulators, it would also leave Hutchison with a stake in the same company it just sold.
"First they sold Orange at a huge premium," said an executive close to Hutchison who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"Now they're getting a double-dip with the Vodafone bid for Mannesmann. 
If Vodafone were to spin off Orange, it would be a triple-dip."
Neither Mr. Li nor his lieutenants would comment beyond a statement on Tuesday in which Hutchison said it viewed its stake in Mannesmann as a long-term strategic investment. 
"Jointly with Orange, Mannesmann will be an outstanding company and better positioned than Vodafone for the future opportunities in the telecom sector," said Canning Fok, the managing director of Hutchison.
Analysts said that reaction was not surprising. 
If Vodafone took over Mannesmann, Hutchison's stake in the new company would be diluted to 4.5 percent. 
Though that might be enough to secure a board seat, Mr. Li would clearly not enjoy as much influence.
Hutchison cannot stand in the way of a takeover. 
Under Mannesmann's bylaws, no single shareholder exercises more than 5 percent of the vote. 
Mannesmann's fate will be determined more by Vodafone's next move -- it has declared it will not raise its bid -- than by the wishes of an Asian tycoon.
The beauty of Mr. Li's position, according to analysts, is that regardless of the outcome, Hutchison will be a player in the global mobile-phone business. 
In addition to its interest in Mannesmann, Hutchison controls cellular companies in Australia, India and Israel. 
The company is also active in wireless in the United States, through an investment in the VoiceStream Wireless Corporation.
In Hong Kong, a city where nobody leaves home without a cellular phone, Hutchison is the leading service provider, with 1.6 million subscribers. 
The company also competes with the dominant local phone company, Cable and Wireless HKT, in fixed-line telephone service.
Last week, Hutchison announced a $1.2 billion joint venture with Global Crossing Ltd., the operator of a worldwide fiber optic network, that will further expand its presence in its home market. 
The new venture, to be called Hutchison Global Crossing, will build a high-speed fiber optic voice and data network. 
Global Crossing will contribute $400 million in stock and $50 million in cash.
"It's really a classic Hutchison deal," said Tim Dattels, the head of investment banking in Asia for Goldman, Sachs & Company, which advised the company. 
"They've chosen their partners well."
Mr. Li took over Hutchison Whampoa in 1981, becoming the first Chinese businessman to control a traditionally British trading company in Hong Kong. 
The company's roots are in ports, and it now runs container ports in Hong Kong, mainland China, Indonesia, Britain and the Panama Canal. 
That last franchise recently landed Hutchison in a tempest in Washington. 
The Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, said the canal would fall under Chinese influence after the United States departs in December because Mr. Li had links to the Chinese Army.
United States officials have dismissed Senator Lott's claims, though nobody denies that Mr. Li has cultivated close ties to China's leaders. 
That could come in handy in the aftermath of a landmark trade deal between the United States and China. 
As part of the agreement, Beijing has pledged to open its telecommunications market to foreign companies. 
Few are better positioned than Hutchison Whampoa.
"That's the reason Global Crossing was willing to pay so much," Mr. Milliken said. 
"They were paying for Li's connections -- and not just telephone connections."
