
With a solemn raising of the Chinese flag and the dulcet tones of Hong Kong schoolchildren singing the Chinese national anthem, this former British colony observed the third anniversary of its reversion to Chinese sovereignty this morning.
Hong Kong may seem more like China with each passing year, but it is still wrestling with the legacy of 156 years of colonial rule. 
Last week, this prosperous city was treated to the spectacle of 2,000 well-dressed homeowners taking to the streets to protest a plunge in property prices.
Brandishing signs with such unproletarian messages as "Negative Equity Is Eroding Our Society," the crowd demanded that the government prop up the real estate market. 
Some may have poked fun, but the rally has started a genuine debate about one of Hong Kong's most durable colonial-era practices.
Property prices here are effectively set by the government through a system of land auctions that dates from the time when the British Crown owned all the land in Hong Kong and parceled it out through 99-year leases. 
That arrangement worked nicely as long as asset values in Asia rose year after year.
In recent years, though, residential property prices have dropped 50 percent -- a lingering effect of the Asian financial crisis. 
Unlike other parts of Asia, in Hong Kong the real estate market shows little sign of recovery. 
And the government, as the regulator of prices, is being blamed.
"There are a lot of middle-class people who are under financial strain, and they're angry," said David Dodwell, the author of a book, "The Hong Kong Advantage," about the local economy. 
"A lot of them paid very high prices for apartments because they assumed the price would continue to go up."
One of those people is Thomas Lo, the sales director of a health care company here. 
Mr. Lo bought his two-bedroom apartment in April 1997, near the peak of the market, for $610,000. 
Two months later, on the eve of Hong Kong's handover to China, a real estate agent offered him $650,000. 
Mr. Lo decided to hold on to it. 
Today, he thinks the apartment is worth no more than $320,000.
"With my kind of income, I should be able to live a comfortable, relaxed life," Mr. Lo said. 
"But now I'm looking at buying a used car. 
Before, I would always buy the latest model of a car."
Mr. Lo, 38, said he did not feel sorry for himself. 
He can still afford to make his mortgage payments. 
But he said he could not imagine selling the apartment at a big loss. 
So, rather than trading up to a bigger place in a few years, he fears he will be stuck in this one until retirement.
Peter Churchouse, a property analyst at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, estimates that 20 percent of Hong Kong residents are in Mr. Lo's situation -- that is, the current market value of their apartments is less than the amount they still owe on their mortgages.
But far more people have suffered significant losses of wealth, which has led to bitterness toward Hong Kong's postcolonial government. 
The organizers of the homeowners' rally, the pro-government Liberal Party, were nonplused when demonstrators shouted "Down with Tung," a reference to the city's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, who was appointed by Beijing.
The collapse in property prices is also rippling through the economy in the form of weak consumer spending. 
Although Hong Kong is enjoying a robust economic recovery, it is driven largely by exports. 
A decline in export markets, particularly the United States, could derail the recovery.
"There is a cliff here," said Nicholas Brooke, chairman of Brooke International, a real estate agency. 
"There is the potential to fall off that cliff, either by inactivity or intervention."
Hong Kong's land policy has also widened the gap between rich and poor. 
Because the government doles out undeveloped land sparingly, it commands high premiums. 
Private developers recoup their huge investments by charging astronomical rents. 
More than 70 percent of residents cannot afford to own homes.
About half of Hong Kong's seven million people live in public housing. 
Twenty-five percent buy private housing subsidized by the government. 
With salaries frozen in the wake of the Asian crisis, these middle-income people have little hope of moving up to better apartments.
"As Hong Kong becomes gradually more democratic, the divisions between the rich and poor are no longer tenable," Mr. Dodwell said.
He and other experts say Hong Kong needs to overhaul its land policy. 
During the Asian crisis, the government suspended land sales to stabilize prices. 
In mid-June, under pressure from property tycoons, it took a more modest step -- pulling off the market 16,000 subsidized apartments it had planned to sell.
A few commentators have called on Hong Kong to get out of the property business. 
They say that as long as the government controls the land, the territory will be doomed to cycles of boom and bust. 
But even these advocates concede that it would be extraordinarily difficult to unravel a system so deeply rooted in Hong Kong's colonial past.
