
Stock markets across Asia are riding out the millennium on a cloud of euphoria generated by -- what else?
-- the Internet.
Shares in Tokyo, Seoul, Hong Kong and Kuala Lumpur rose again today, providing fresh evidence, if any were needed, that the information revolution has replaced the Asian economic crisis as the preoccupation of investors in this part of the world.
"Asia has lagged the West in information technology," said Dong Tao, a regional economist with Credit Suisse First Boston in Hong Kong. 
"But with Asia recovering from the crisis, companies are now willing to invest in this area. 
People see the possibility of a real breakthrough."
In South Korea, the market rose 2.2 percent to a five-year high, while stocks in Taiwan were up four-tenths of 1 percent, in the last trading sessions of 1999 for those markets. 
The gains capped a rally that began early in the year, as fears about Asian finances receded. 
After a setback during the summer, the rally reignited in October as companies began pursuing a flurry of Internet-related ventures in the region.
This jolt of excitement helped the benchmark South Korean index gain 82.78 percent for the year -- and more yet in dollar terms, 92.58 percent -- the best performance of any Asian market outside Japan. 
Taiwan's exchange, despite the devastating earthquake there in September, rose 31.63 percent from its final trading session of 1998.
Nowhere has the giddiness over technology been more pronounced than in Hong Kong. 
The benchmark Hang Seng index has moved from strength to strength over the last week, up more than half a percent today, to 16,928.29. 
It has risen 68 percent so far this year, and is higher now than it was at the peak of the territory's real estate boom in the mid-90's.
Analysts said today's gain was led by a company that did not exist a year ago: Pacific Century Cyberworks, which invests in Internet start-ups and is creating its own satellite-delivered Internet service. 
Its shares jumped 22 percent today, after soaring 44 percent last Thursday and Friday. 
The surge began in the United States last Wednesday, when the company's shares doubled in over-the-counter trading.
Pacific Century Cyberworks -- which was founded by Richard Li, the son of the Hong Kong tycoon Li Ka-shing -- loses money and will for several more years. 
Still, the company is being hailed as the vehicle that could turn Hong Kong into a technology mecca. 
And the younger Mr. Li spent last week denying rumors that he was about to swap shares with Microsoft or seek a listing on the Nasdaq market.
"Pacific Century does not even have a core business yet," Mr. Tao of Credit Suisse First Boston said. 
"But it has demonstrated its ability to raise funds, and that's what's important in this business."
With a market capitalization exceeding $30 billion, Pacific Century is worth almost as much as the elder Mr. Li's flagship company, Cheung Kong Holdings. 
Mr. Tao suggested that Richard Li had created as much wealth, on paper, in five months as his father did in 50 years.
Hong Kong's Internet bubble has expanded to encompass Internet-related companies like Cable and Wireless HKT, Hong Kong's local phone provider, and China Telecom (Hong Kong), the publicly listed arm of the entrenched mainland Chinese phone company.
China Telecom, which owns the gateways that Chinese use to gain access to the World Wide Web, is regarded by investors as a way to capitalize on the rapid growth of the Internet there. 
Cable and Wireless HKT recently signed a deal with Star TV, an Asian satellite television company controlled by the News Corporation, to provide high-speed Internet access and television programs throughout the region.
Despite the resurgence of Asian stocks, many analysts do not think that Hong Kong and other Asian markets are as steeply priced as those in the United States. 
Brokerage firms here predict that the Hang Seng index will finish next year significantly above its current levels, even with 1999's ascent.
"The Hong Kong market could easily pull back a bit from here," acknowledged Richard Margolis, a regional strategist at Merrill Lynch here. 
"But it's not as heavily underpinned as the U.S. markets by companies whose only valuation is a multiple of their losses."
One reason for the optimism is that Asia's underlying economies have recovered faster than almost anyone predicted. 
Mr. Tao, for example, recently increased his forecast for Hong Kong's economic growth in 2000 to 5.1 percent, from 3.2 percent. 
He says the territory is enjoying a sharp, "V-shaped" rebound.
With exports from South Korea booming and foreign investors pouring money into stocks there, the Korea Institute for Industrial Economics and Trade estimated that the country's gross domestic product will increase this year at an outsized rate of 9.5 percent, and a very respectable 6.5 percent in 2000.
Still, analysts are wary of projecting a future of unbroken gains. 
The enthusiasm for Internet shares is an export of the United States, and it has made Asian markets more dependent than ever on stock performance in New York, especially on the Nasdaq in recent months. 
If either the Nasdaq or the Dow Jones industrial average were to fall significantly from their current levels, analysts said it could halt the rebound in the region.
Simon L. Ogus, former head of Asian economics at Warburg Dillon Read, said: "There has always been a lot of correlation between the U.S. and Asian markets, because many of them are small, trading economies. 
But there is more correlation than ever now. 
We've got one huge correlative bet going on here."
