
Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, apparently trying his best to sound angry, today attacked China's growing trade imbalance with the United States.
Visiting Beijing for trade talks, Mr. Daley said he tried to pressure China's leaders to open their markets further or do anything that would reverse the widening gap between what China sells to America and what it buys.
"The trends have just got to change," Mr. Daley said after meeting President Jiang Zemin. 
"It's just unacceptable for them to continue this way."
His words, however, essentially repeated complaints that United States officials have made over the last 10 years with little discernible effect, since the imbalance has enlarged. 
The Commerce Department estimates the trade gap will reach $44 billion this year.
With his trip aimed partly at laying groundwork for President Jiang's meeting with President Clinton in Washington at the end of this month, Mr. Daley was also engaged in some multisided diplomacy that reflected the Clinton Administration's tricky position in China.
On one side, acting as American business's biggest booster, Mr. Daley encouraged Chinese officials to buy American and, more specifically, commit to a pending deal for up to $2 billion of Boeing aircraft.
At the same time, with the Clinton Administration sensitive to accusations it is capitulating to Chinese demands to make sales here, Mr. Daley went out of his way to sound tough, attacking Beijing for keeping out American goods.
"When they're growing at the pathetic pace that they are today," Mr. Daley said, referring to United States exports to China, "we need to see significant change."
China's market is hardly open -- Mr. Daley pointed to distribution controls, import licenses and special product standards as typical barriers -- but as a poor country, it is debatable how many Chinese could afford American products.
Chinese officials contend that the imbalance comes mostly from the huge American demand for China's cheaply made goods, like shoes and toys and electronics, and less from Chinese Government policy. 
As China's Trade Minister, Wu Yi, put it this week, the imbalance comes from "historical inevitability."
To appease the United States side a bit, Ms. Wu announced today that China would soon send a buying mission to the United States to sign what she called "substantial economic contracts."
Failing to identify the timing, value or kind of goods involved, however, suggested that the announcement was largely symbolic.
Mr. Daley acknowledged that the trade dispute was so brittle that neither side could even agree about how to compile trade statistics: The United States counted $40 billion more in imports from China than exports in 1996; China said it only sold $10 billion more than it bought.
Many economists say the true figure lies in between, because each side fudges figures with the trade that passes through Hong Kong. 
Asked about the discrepancy today, Mr. Daley said trends were important, not specific figures.
But he insisted the Clinton Administration would pursue more trade and cooperation with China.
"Ignoring reality by retreating from the global economy and China's expanding role in it is not an option," Mr. Daley said.
Washington supports China's entry into the World Trade Organization, Mr. Daley said, but only on terms acceptable to the United States and other members. 
Chinese officials have demanded "developing nation" status that would allow them delays in opening their markets.
Asked about the possibility that China might win permanent most-favored-nation trade status with the United States -- which Beijing has repeatedly demanded -- Mr. Daley said it was unlikely until "we see progress on a whole host of other issues."
      
