
As American exports continued to fall, the United States trade deficit jumped to a monthly record of nearly $17 billion in January, fueled by a flood of imports from China that could stir further protectionist sentiments in Congress.
Among the imports flowing into the United States, Chinese-made steel surged 65 percent from December. 
On Wednesday, the House of Representatives overwhelmingly passed a bill that would sharply limit steel imports, a movement that may gain momentum now that China is joining Japan, Brazil and Russia on the list of nations pouring inexpensive steel into the American market.
The figures were released today just as China and the United States entered a critical phase in negotiations over China's push to enter the World Trade Organization, which sets the rules for international trade. 
China wants the international prestige that comes from joining the trade organization and would also get a measure of protection against trade barriers to its exports.
Intense talks are under way in Geneva over the terms of China's entry in hopes of reaching an agreement before the Prime Minister of China, Zhu Rongji, visits Washington in early April. 
The deadline has breathed life into talks that have sputtered for a decade.
One American negotiator said this week that "we've made more progress with the Chinese in the last three weeks than in the last three years," and this morning President Clinton's top economic advisers met at the White House to assess China's intentions.
But they emerged uncertain -- both about the prospects of getting China to dismantle huge barriers and the prospects of getting any deal though Capitol Hill, where it would become instantly wrapped up in the politics of nuclear espionage, human rights violations and growing anti-China sentiment.
"Altogether, we have a mounting series of problems that are going to be difficult to manage, to say the least," Commerce Secretary William M. Daley said today.
The soaring monthly trade deficit -- after a record $170 billion deficit for all of 1998 -- considerably exceeded analysts' expectations of $14.9 billion. 
The $16.99 billion deficit in goods and services was the highest since monthly statistics began being reported in 1992.
The deficit in manufactured goods rose to a record $23.42 billion in January from $20.5 billion in December. 
The United States, however, ran a $6.4 billion surplus in services, from consulting to insurance.
But the deficit also reflected the continued strength of the American economy, which has created an enormous demand for imported consumer goods. 
The sharp increase occurred even though there was no rise in the value of imported gasoline and other petroleum products, now selling at prices lower than at any point in the last quarter-century.
Perhaps the most worrisome part of the report was not the rise in imports but the falloff in exports. 
They decreased to $76.8 billion, from $79.5 billion in the month a year earlier, led by falling demand for farm goods including corn, oil seeds and cotton and manufactured products including oilfield drilling equipment, farm machinery, aircraft and autos. 
Imports of goods and services rose to $93.8 billion, compared with $89.6 billion in January 1998, led by shipments of foreign autos, food and consumer goods.
So far the decline in exports has had little effect on the unemployment rate or the growth of the economy, which expanded 6 percent in the fourth quarter of last year. 
Except in hard-hit steel towns, booming domestic consumer demand has made up for the falloff in exports. 
But the numbers suggest that the United States will not have export markets to fall back on if the domestic economy cools this year.
The export figures are particularly troublesome for the White House, where officials who once proclaimed that America's surging exports were creating jobs and fueling the economy are now arguing that rising imports can be healthy, too. 
Today, officials cautioned about reading too much into the January numbers.
"I don't worry much about the monthly numbers of any kind," Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said today. 
"We are the only major economy that is growing at a robust rate."
At the same time, Mr. Rubin and other Administration officials have begun explicitly warning Europe that the United States cannot be expected to continue to absorb such a huge share of the goods the rest of the world produces.
But so far, the United States remains the world's only real engine of growth -- meaning that the trade deficit will likely swell further this year. 
Despite hints that a modest revival may be in the offing, Japan remains in deep recession, and American exports to Japan fell 10 percent compared with those in January 1998. 
Perhaps more politically important, exports to China for the month were down to $779 million from $1.35 billion in December, a tiny figure compared with imports of $5.56 billion. 
Put another way, the ratio of United States imports to exports with China is 7 to 1. 
With Japan it is roughly 2 to 1, suggesting that the problems of access to the Chinese market are far worse.
The Administration argues that a deal to get China into the World Trade Organization would solve some of those problems over the long run. 
It would force China to sharply reduce its protective tariffs, and it would include access to the Chinese market for American food producers, banks, insurance companies and other businesses. 
American computer makers are pushing hard for a deal and wrote to Congress this week urging a relaxing of export restrictions of American technology there -- something that stands little chance of happening given the politics of relations between China and the United States this week.
The combination of allegations about spying at American weapons laboratories and the rising deficit with China combine into a sense that China is intent on playing outside the rules -- and many members of Congress think that W.T.O. membership would be a reward to Beijing.
That belief could hinder any chances for a deal, a senior Chinese diplomat, He Yafei, said at a news conference today.
"I believe the political atmosphere will have a bearing on any negotiation between our two countries," he said. 
"Especially when some members or senators are saying, 'Even if you have a deal, even if that deal is good for the U.S. business community, we will not give China permanent normal trade relations.'
"
Mr. He concluded, "That is absurd."
      
