
China's newly elevated economic chief, Zhu Rongji, said today that he planned to move cautiously in opening the nation's markets and exposing its sclerotic state-owned enterprises to foreign competition.
But Mr. Zhu, in his first public comments since becoming one of the country's three top leaders last week, also declared that it was "unreasonable to exclude China from the W.T.O.," a reference to the continued insistence by the United States that China agree to a rigorous timetable for liberalizing its economy before it can join the World Trade Organization.
The Clinton Administration, officials in Washington say, is under growing pressure to relax some of those requirements before President Jiang Zemin makes a state visit to Washington late next month. 
Later this week, Secretary of the Treasury Robert E. Rubin will spend two days in Beijing to set the stage for that meeting.
While Mr. Zhu doled out morsels to a hungry audience of bankers and investors here today -- about new tax policies, protecting China's currency and finding work for millions of laborers whose jobs are threatened by privatization plans -- what he said was nearly overshadowed by how he said it. 
He joked easily, answered questions right from the floor, and made no effort to minimize the problems of China's deeply troubled banking system.
"It wasn't exactly Oprah," a senior American official said afterward, "but it wasn't the China we are used to seeing."
On a key question many in the audience wanted answered -- how, exactly, China plans to transfer ownership of industries from the Government to some form of shareholding without casting millions of workers into the streets -- Mr. Zhu bobbed and weaved. 
But that was expected, mainly because he is considered the likely successor to Prime Minister Li Peng next spring. 
He has nothing to gain by further angering local officials who already view him as the architect of the downsizing process sweeping through China's resolutely noncorporate factories.
For the Clinton Administration, perhaps the stickiest issue Mr. Zhu raised today was Chinese membership in the trade organization, a group of nearly 130 nations pledged to lower tariffs on imported goods and a regimen of steady economic liberalization. 
Two years ago, the Administration sent China a road map of changes it would have to make before it qualified, including a rapid end to subsidies of state enterprises. 
While some progress has been made in negotiations, officials fear there has not been enough for Mr. Clinton to declare at the talks next month that China is well on its way to membership.
"This problem will be solved eventually," Mr. Zhu said with a broad smile today. 
"It is unreasonable to make such demands on China, which is still a developing economy."
There are some hints that the United States may soon back away from its hard-line stance, showing flexibility over the amount of time China will be allowed before it must comply with the rules. 
Japan has said it is ready to let China into the organization, which also acts as a court of world trading rules. 
Mr. Rubin is expected to talk about the issue when he meets Mr. Zhu and President Jiang at the end of the week.
There were also hints today that China has been alarmed by the speed with which its Southeast Asian nations fell into a contagious currency crisis in recent weeks. 
Mr. Zhu said he had been advised to take his time before allowing investors to freely move capital of all kinds across Chinese borders.
The Government-controlled China Daily said today that Liu Jibin, vice minister of finance, was backing away from any quick move to make the Chinese currency fully convertible into dollars, and vice versa. 
Mr. Liu was quoted as saying that the Southeast Asia crisis had sent "a warning signal" to other developing nations about the dangers of surrendering control of the currency to speculators and investors.
Unlike the smaller Southeast Asians, though, China is coming to the markets well armed. 
Mr. Zhu disclosed today that foreign exchange reserves now stand at $131.6 billion, one of the highest levels in the world. 
They are so high, in fact, that officials traveling with Mr. Rubin say they believe the decision to keep that war chest securely in the bank may be unwise when the money could go toward buying power plants and other equipment that could help modernize industries that have changed little since Mao Zedong's death in the mid-70's.
But over the long haul, Mr. Zhu declared today, Washington will get what it seeks: a far more transparent financial system.
"To step up the reform of the financial system," he said, "China will strengthen the currency-regulation function of the central bank and the financial supervisory systems, and promote the commercialization of state-owned banks."
It is unclear, however, how he will dispose of huge loans that the banks made for political reasons rather than on the basis of credit-worthiness to failing state industries.
"China will also improve the capital structure and quality of the commercial banks," he concluded, "vigorously but steadily develop and regulate the financial market, improve and enact financial laws and regulations, and learn modern financial-management expertise."
Already, Chinese leaders have found something in common with President Clinton that they can talk about next month: They have all been surprised that revenue has flowed into Government coffers faster than anyone expected.
As a result, Mr. Zhu said, China would restore a series of tax exemptions for foreign technology and other goods that was revoked last year.
"We will resume our policy of tax exemptions as early as possible," he said, leading some in the audience to speculate that in recent months the country had grown worried that American and Japanese companies were slowing their direct investments. 
Nonetheless, Motorola and General Motors, among others, are planning investments that could run into the hundreds of millions of dollars, and tax incentives might help close the deals.
 
--------------------
I.M.F. to Raise Assessments
By Bloomberg News
The International Monetary Fund plans to increase its members' contributions by 45 percent, to the equivalent of $285 billion, reflecting the increased size of the global economy.
In a statement, the I.M.F. said on Saturday that its executive board had agreed to recommend that the amount of money members add to the fund be increased by the equivalent of $88.4 billion.
The contributions, called quotas, determine the amount that a country can borrow from the fund as well as its voting power within the 181-member organization.
The increase comes as the fund is warning private lenders that they may have to share more of the pain in future bailouts like those engineered for Thailand and Mexico.
The United States is the biggest contributor, providing more than 18 percent of contributions, or $36.1 billion. 
This is to drop under the new formula to 17.73 percent, and the Administration is expected to ask Congress for a further $14.45 billion.      
