
China's two stock markets have fallen sharply since the weekend, when the Government moved to stem speculation, pointing darkly to the possibility of a crash after a steep recent run-up in prices.
On Monday, the two markets, in Shanghai and the southern city of Shenzhen, were down 10 percent. 
Early today, the main stock indexes were down nearly as much.
Hundreds of thousands of Chinese, many with little or no experience trading stocks, have recently rushed to buy shares, hoping to cash in as prices reached dizzying heights.
The bull run has worried market officials, who fear that investors are leaping in blind. 
They have also expressed concern about market manipulation and other irregularities.
In along announcement on Sunday, the official New China News Agency said the nation's markets were overpriced, that recent sharp increases were abnormal and irrational, and that investors risked getting burned.
"The present overheated state of China's share markets makes us think of the stock crash in America in 1929," the statement said. 
"Chinese shareholders should draw lessons from stock crashes that have happened repeatedly worldwide."
The announcement reflected official concern about the markets as a potential source of popular unrest. 
Set up in the early 1990's to draw funds into ailing state enterprises, the markets are looked at suspiciously by Communist Party hard-liners.
The number of stock investors has more than doubled this year, to more than 21 million, with 8 million new trading accounts opened in the last few months, and one major Chinese stock index has more than tripled.
On Monday, though, Shanghai's class A share index, which reflects shares officially available only to Chinese investors, closed at 1,047.68, down 115.37 points, while the class B share index, which represents shares officially open only to foreigners, was at 59.32, down 6.36 points. 
In Shenzhen, the A shares were down 46.61 points, at 417.20, and the B shares were down 14.95 points, at 134.43.
Even with those sharp drops, however, the Shenzhen A shares are up more than 250 percent for the year, with the other indexes up by smaller, though still significant, amounts.
China's markets are among the world's most volatile even in quieter periods, and the drops on Monday reflected a 10 percent daily limit on declines that was imposed this weekend as part of the Government's plan to rein in speculation. 
The declines were continuing this morning.
In part, the recent gains were caused by a tacit relaxing of the rules preventing the Chinese from investing in B shares, which often traded at a big discount to the A shares.
The Government also said that big investors, many linked to well-connected state-run companies, had been manipulating the market, along with banks that were illegally providing loans for share speculation.
 
Help for Korean Stocks
