
In his hometown, Li Ka-shing, the tycoon known here as Superman, still vaults tall buildings with ease. 
But in Europe, where Mr. Li is just another mogul, he seems to have lost his extraordinary powers.
Mr. Li earned his nickname among Hong Kong investors by amassing more wealth and influence than any other local businessman here ever had. 
His flagship conglomerate, Hutchison Whampoa, reinforced that reputation today when it reported earnings of $4 billion in the first half of 2000.
Most of Hutchison's profit, however, came from a special one-time gain after the sale of its European mobile phone operations. 
And the company's encore, an ambitious plan to offer next-generation cellular services throughout Europe, is in doubt. 
Last week, Hutchison unexpectedly gave up a coveted license to offer advanced mobile services in Germany, saying it was too costly.
Today, even as Mr. Li and his lieutenants basked in the glow of rich earnings, they had to explain why the German setback had not scrambled their plans.
"We don't for a moment concede that we will be out of Germany," Canning Fok, the group managing director of Hutchison, said in an interview. 
"But we have to be more creative about getting into that market. 
To throw money around is not the way to do it."
In the great race to carve up Europe's electromagnetic spectrum, Hutchison Whampoa has emerged as an unpredictable outlier. 
Aggressive in bidding for a British license, abrupt in backing out of Germany, Hutchinson Whampoa, a conglomerate that can trace its roots to Hong Kong's early colonial days, has left many telecommunications experts scratching their heads.
Mr. Fok insists that there is no mystery. 
The company could someday buy back its share of the German license from its partners, Royal KPN of the Netherlands and NTT DoCoMo of Japan. 
Even if it never breaks into Germany, he said, Hutchison will create a valuable cellular franchise in Britain, where it recently won a license, and in other countries like Italy, where it is still in the running.
"Each asset is valuable as long as you get it at the right price," Mr. Fok declared. 
"We haven't lost anything from Germany. 
I won't say we've gained, but we haven't lost."
Despite their qualms, most analysts are willing to give Mr. Li the benefit of the doubt. 
Hutchison has become one of the most highly valued companies in Hong Kong on the strength of its chairman's ability to sniff out good deals and steer clear of bad ones. 
At a price for the three partners of more than $7 billion, Hutchison considered the German mobile license extremely expensive.
"Hutchison is a company where pragmatism is very much the watchword," said John Tysoe, a telecommunications analyst at the investment firm WestLB Panmure in London. 
"They avoid the mistake that other telecom operators make, which is to fall in love with their businesses."
By ceding Germany, however, other analysts say that Hutchison has effectively abandoned its dream of building a pan-European cellular network. 
Had the company been able to assemble such a network, it would have been an enormously valuable franchise -- perhaps even more valuable than Orange, the British mobile network that Hutchison sold last year to Mannesmann of Germany for $14 billion.
"The reason everybody owns Hutchison's stock is because they expect Li Ka-shing to pull off another massive deal," said Anil Daswani, a Salomon Smith Barney analyst. 
"We were all expecting them to build a European network, and then sell it off or spin off part of it."
Hutchison's recent attack of caution has deflated its shareholders. 
The company's stock has declined 6.4 percent since Aug. 
18, when it gave up the German license. 
The shares fell 1.8 percent today, to 110.5 Hong Kong dollars, or $14.17, though the earnings were released after the market closed. 
Hutchison stock traded lower early Friday as Hong Kong share prices declined.
The first-half earnings show a generally healthy company, even subtracting the one-time gain of $3.2 billion. 
Operating earnings rose 32 percent, to $1.3 billion. 
Hutchison's container ports, telecommunications and energy divisions turned in particularly strong performances, while the results of its property group remained lackluster.
The company would have reported even greater profit if it had not taken a $3.8 billion provision against fluctuations in the value of its 3 percent stake in Vodafone AirTouch, the British cellular giant. 
Hutchison picked up the stake when Vodafone acquired Mannesmann earlier this year.
Some experts say that Mr. Li's phenomenal record as a deal maker has placed unreasonable expectations on the company. 
Last year, after a previous round of blockbuster asset sales, Hutchison reported a profit of $14.25 billion. 
On that basis, it made the company, whose annual sales were around $7 billion, the most profitable in the world, ahead of General Electric.
"Our shareholders have gotten accustomed to big numbers," Mr. Fok said. 
"We've done it for two years now. 
But I won't guarantee it for every year."Hutchison's investors, he went on, recognize that no company can produce an endless stream of $14 billion transactions. 
The trouble is, they may have become spoiled: Mr. Li has pulled off more lucrative deals since the sale of Orange.
Hutchison's earnings do not include the roughly $9 billion profit it reaped last month when Deutsche Telekom agreed to acquire VoiceStream Wireless, a United States cellular company, for $53 billion. 
Hutchison began investing in VoiceStream late in 1997. 
It paid a total of $1.2 billion for a 23 percent stake, which is now worth about $12 billion.
If Hutchison's shareholders seem hungry for deals, it is because they have been trained by Mr. Li. Since he took over the company in 1981, he has treated it more as a collection of assets than an industrial empire. 
This reflects Mr. Li's background -- he came to Hong Kong from mainland China in the 1940's and traded his way up from selling plastic flowers to building skyscrapers.
But it also reflects Hutchison's roots in the mutable world of Hong Kong. 
Founded in the 1860's as the Hong Kong and Whampoa Dock Company, it built dry docks and ship-repair yards on the South China seacoast when Hong Kong was a young British colony. 
Over the years, it cobbled together a disparate array of assets, ranging from drugstores and supermarkets to container ports.
By 1980, Hutchison was losing money and was ripe for the picking by Mr. Li, the most aggressive of a new generation of Chinese entrepreneurs eager to supplant the British. 
Under Mr. Li, Hutchison's reach expanded beyond Hong Kong and into new industries like telecommunications. 
But its trading mentality never changed.
"There was never a strategy to dominate the world," said Simon Murray, a British investor who was managing director of the company in the 1980's and still sits on the board. 
"Hutchison always moved forward on an add-on basis, accumulating assets, building on the bricks we had."
Although the company's telecommunications holdings have accounted for its multibillion-dollar asset sales, they contribute only 6 percent of the operating profits. 
Indeed, Hutchison has made much more money selling telephone networks than running them.
Despite its retreat in Germany, Mr. Fok said Hutchison was ready to "go for it" in bidding for a third-generation license in Italy. 
He said the company would also consider investing in such networks in the United States, when Washington begins auctioning the airwaves.
Further down the line is China, which is still building its first generation of mobile phone networks. 
Hutchison has a $400 million stake in China Unicom, the second-largest telephone operator nationwide. 
Mr. Fok said, however, that Hutchison would not expand its presence there until the rules on foreign investment in the telecommunications industry became clearer.
For all his prudence, Mr. Fok seems exuberant when discussing the prospects for third-generation mobile service. 
With its emphasis on data transmission, Mr. Fok says this technology has more in common with the Internet than with traditional cellular service. 
And the German pullback notwithstanding, he says the scramble for licenses in Europe is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to seize a dominant position in a new industry in a single year.
"It's like there is a piece of triple-A land available for development in every major city in the world at the same time," Mr. Fok said. 
"When do you see that?
You don't."
