
With the collapse of Peregrine Investments Holdings today, Asia's biggest underwriter of stocks has disappeared off the map of Asian investment banking just one decade after it was created by a swashbuckling former British racing driver and his Hong Kong partner.
The factors behind Peregrine's downfall were many and complex, and had much to do with its brash -- some would say insolent -- culture. 
Yet some executives at Peregrine, as well as financiers familiar with its final days, said its demise became inevitable only after First National Bank of Chicago, a unit of First Chicago NBD, its lead banker and an investor in the firm's putative restructuring, pulled out of a proposed rescue effort and canceled financing for Peregrine at the last moment.
The flame-out of Peregrine, the largest investment bank in Asia outside of Japan, spread panic through the Hong Kong stock market and raised further questions about the depth and duration of the economic crisis that is ravaging the fruits of more than a decade of explosive regional growth.
Yet, in many ways, Peregrine's downfall was emblematic of the fault lines in the foundations of Asia's once-vaunted economic miracle. 
Its headlong rush to do deals, its reliance on connections in high places and its willingness to skim the edges of legality and propriety mirrored the region's reckless economic growth and its tolerance of widespread corruption and cronyism.
But even in a part of the world where risk-taking had become the key to economic success, Peregrine stood out. 
It largely pioneered the market for junk bonds in Asia. 
After cozying up to the Chinese authorities in Beijing, it became the powerhouse behind virtually every initial listing by Chinese companies on Hong Kong's stock exchange. 
And it foraged markets -- North Korea, Vietnam and Myanmar -- that few others would go near because of their horrendous human-rights records.
Today, as Peregrine filed for liquidation, Hong Kong's stock market plummeted 8.6 percent, continuing a meltdown that has stripped it of more than one-quarter of its value so far this year. 
Even so, Hong Kong monetary authorities played down the threat the bank's collapse posed to the financial system. 
Donald Tsang, Hong Kong's financial secretary, turned down Peregrine's request for assistance over the weekend after a rescue package with a Swiss financial group fell apart. 
Mr. Tsang said a bailout would not be "in the public interest."
The market rebounded Tuesday, with the main index rising about 5 percent in midmorning trading.
In the end, analysts here and elsewhere said, it was arrogance that did Peregrine in -- an arrogance emanating from the personality of its founder, Philip Tose of Britain, and his Hong Kong partner, Francis Pak To Leung, and that pervaded the bank's culture. 
That arrogance, they said, led the company to lend too much money for questionable projects and to exercise too little supervision over managers, and especially over Andre Lee, who ran its highly profitable and nearly autonomous bond department.
As a result, when Asia's financial crisis broke last summer, Peregrine was ill equipped to cope with the fallout. 
Indeed, it was the failure of an Indonesian taxi-cab company that fatally undermined Hong Kong's premier investment bank.
Sometime last summer, when bullishness was still the sentiment of the day, Peregrine made a bridge loan of $260 million to Steady Safe, run by one of Indonesia's flashiest wheeler dealers, Jopie Widjaya. 
Mr. Widjaya's dream was to move from his profitable but humdrum Jakarta taxi business, with its fleet of 4,000 cabs, to rail projects, ferries and toll roads. 
Mr. Widjaya had the right connections; he had even bought a stake in a toll road owned by Siti Hardiyanti Rukmana, the eldest daughter of President Suharto.
Steady Safe had all the elements of a Peregrine-style deal: access to the corridors of power, seemingly assured earnings and sweeping opportunity. 
The problem was that Peregrine lent the $260 million in American dollars -- fully one-third of Peregrine's capital -- against Steady Safe's revenues in Indonesian rupiah. 
At the time, Peregrine seemed convinced that the rupiah was sound and that it could soon resell the bonds backing the loan. 
Moreover, the fixed-income team that cut the deal had earned 38 percent of Peregrine's profits the previous year; this was just one more deal.
Analysts say such confidence was misplaced. 
Any lender entrusting the equivalent of one-third of its capital to any borrower, much less a little-known company in a country notorious for corruption, shows poor financial judgment, they say.
But far from having second thoughts after the financial turmoil that shook Thailand last July spread throughout Asia, Peregrine remained upbeat. 
In late October, even though the rupiah had by then lost 30 percent of its value, Peregrine's own weekly analytical reports, boldly titled Greed and Fear, argued that the rupiah's collapse "certainly looks overdone and suggests a countertrend rally may be overdue."
It was not to be.
That same month, rumors began percolating in Hong Kong that Peregrine had taken $1 billion in trading losses, rumors denied by Mr. Tose. But even as he insisted on the bank's solidity, the rupiah was slipping and Peregrine's chairman was looking for an investor to replenish the company's capital.
In November, Mr. Tose, 51, announced that he had struck a deal with Zurich Center Investments Ltd., part of Zurich Group, a Swiss financial-services company, to buy a 24.1 percent stake in Peregrine for $200 million.
But the deal never went through.
According to Zurich Group, the two companies planned to set up an Asian investment fund, called the Peregrine Direct Investment fund, with a commitment of $50 million from each partner and an expected infusion of $350 million to $500 million from institutional investors.
But the continuing financial tumult in Asia apparently made Zurich nervous. 
A spokeswoman declined to go into details about the group's decision to back away, saying only it was the "end result of the negotiations to rework the conditions" of Zurich's participation.
Meanwhile, events in Indonesia tumbled out of control, and its currency collapsed. 
Steady Safe, with its earnings in rupiah, could no longer meet payments on its dollar loans, particularly the huge loan from Peregrine. 
The taxi company's stock sank to a sliver over one penny and, last week, it locked its doors.
As Peregrine's stock continued to slide, trading in the bank's stock was suspended. 
As Zurich Group was preparing one final offer to Peregrine, there seemed little hope of a deal. 
"When Zurich came back last week," said a senior Peregrine official who only agreed to speak anonymously, "they were going to buy our bond portfolio for 16 cents on the dollar. 
The bond portfolio was $600 million plus; there's a lot of good paper in that portfolio. 
But when you have a situation where they say you have $260 million, $270 million worth of bad paper, they say, 'What else have you done?'
It just snowballed."
At the table with Zurich was First Chicago, one of Peregrine's principal creditors. 
At about one o'clock in the morning on Friday, First Chicago left the negotiations. 
"Zurich walked away six hours later," said the Peregrine official. 
"It just unraveled from there."
A spokesman for First Chicago declined to comment. 
But executives at both Peregrine and Zurich said today that First Chicago had initially pledged $25 million for a small stake in Peregrine, then had a change of heart. 
First Chicago's departure from the negotiations Friday morning prompted Zurich's decision to throw in the towel, they said, in part because it did not wish to raise its stake in the company significantly beyond 24 percent.
"They did not want to go up to 35 percent and make a general offer," as required by Hong Kong law whenever a buyer's stake exceeds 30 percent, a Peregrine executive said.
Meanwhile, Peregrine executives desperately tried to salvage something from the fiasco, maintaining that the firm's brokerage and corporate-finance businesses would make good acquisitions for the right buyer. 
"We still have a first-class franchise and it would be highly regrettable if that was not kept intact," said Timothy Voake, chief executive officer of Peregrine Brokerage Inc., which has headquarters in New York.
After the collapse of negotiations in Hong Kong, a news conference announcing a deal was abandoned. 
Swiftly, the Securities and Futures Commission ordered Peregrine to stop all trading activities. 
Peregrine's seat on the stock exchange was also suspended.
Peregrine was bust. 
Scarcely six months ago, Peregrine was the enfant terrible of Asian banking, a champion of "buccaneering" as Mr. Tose put it.
"One of Peregrine's great advantages in its heyday was to commit its own capital rapidly to transactions, with bridge loans, for example," said Richard Margolis of Merrill Lynch (Asia Pacific) Ltd. 
"It could take decisions quickly."
Peregrine was created in 1988 on $38 million raised by Messrs. Tose and Leung -- both refugees from Citibank's foundering investment banking venture -- from some of Hong Kong's tycoons, including Li Ka-shing, a leading property and infrastructure developer; Gordon Wu, an Asian infrastructure developer, and Larry Yung, China's principal investment banker here. 
Peregrine grew exponentially, with Mr. Tose and Mr. Leung capitalizing on personal contacts cultivated over the previous decade. 
Both men enjoyed lavish life styles.
Connections, combined with speedy decision-making and a penchant for risk, catapulted the bank forward. 
And it rushed in where others hesitated to tread. 
Typical was Peregrine's response to China's massacre of civilians in Tiananmen Square in June 1989. 
"These events were just a hiccup," Mr. Leung said in an interview two years ago. 
"We decided we wanted to take advantage of depressed market conditions at the time."
Quickly, Peregrine emerged as one of the largest underwriters in Hong Kong. 
And while China and Hong Kong remained the core of the bank's business, it spread its wings and splashed offices across 14 countries.
Even Asia's widespread culture of corruption did not seem to trouble Mr. Tose. After all, he said in an interview with The South China Morning Post last year, it is "quite an open form of corruption."
"It is not stalling advances in Asia," he added, "but is an accepted way of life in many ways."
Unfortunately for Peregrine, though, it often ruffled the feathers of local authorities. 
In Vietnam, it formed Peregrine Capital Vietnam with a fast-talking nightclub owner and car dealer named Nguyen Trung Truc, for example. 
Shortly afterward, Mr. Truc's other businesses were raided by tax authorities, and he wound up spending most of the year in jail for tax evasion. 
Peregrine itself was fined for operating a business without proper licenses.
Last June, although storm clouds were rapidly gathering on Asia's economic horizons, Peregrine was buoyant. 
It reported hefty profits for the first six months of $82.5 million (United States) on revenues of $19.6 billion.
When the end came this weekend, however, many people were asking why Peregrine's vaunted connections with some of Hong Kong's wealthiest and most powerful people did not result in the firm's rescue.
As the day wore on today, hundreds of customers shuttled in and out of Peregrine's brokerage operations to close their accounts.
"I was very surprised," said K. Chan, a 60-year-old retiree. 
"I've been with Peregrine for six or seven years. 
I'm going to transfer my stocks to another company."
But, Mr. Chan continued, Hong Kong was not to blame. 
"What happened to Peregrine was caused by external forces, the Southeast Asian currencies," he said. 
"It's not because of Hong Kong itself."
