
A surge of imports driven by the continued strength of the American economy pushed the United States trade deficit to another record in May, more than $21 billion, fueled both by rising oil prices and growing evidence that China is using exports to support its lagging economy.
The China deficit comes at a politically inopportune time for the Clinton Administration: Next week, the House of Representatives is expected to vote on a one-year renewal of China's preferential trade status. 
While the House is expected to approve the measure, the rising deficit with China -- it totaled more than $23 billion in the first five months of 1999 -- further complicates a relationship already deeply strained by the accidental bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade and China's renewed threats to use force if necessary to keep Taiwan from declaring itself an independent state.
The trade deficit is also one of the few economic indicators that Republican Presidential candidates can seize on to argue that not all is well with the American economy. 
But it is, in fact, a byproduct of American economic health; with unemployment at record lows, low-cost imports have helped keep inflation near zero.
"The May trade figures reflect the continuing large gap between the strong growth in the United States and weaker conditions in many foreign countries," Commerce Secretary William M. Daley said today. 
He estimated that the deficit was running at an annual rate of $224.8 billion, which would be nearly 37 percent higher than last year's record, $164.3 billion. 
China is not the only cause. 
The trade deficit with Japan remains large, though it dropped slightly in May, and there is a rising deficit with Canada and Mexico, the two other members of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The size of the May deficit surprised many economists and led a few today to lower their predictions for American economic growth in the second quarter a bit. 
But perhaps more important, it was a strong indication that the American consumer spending binge is moving ahead unabated, which is bound to worry the Federal Reserve.
"Five years ago if we had seen numbers like this, what you would have heard on Capitol Hill was politicians blaming the Japanese and the Chinese," said Richard Medley, who heads Medley Global Advisors, an international investment firm in New York. 
"Now what you hear more often is that this proves we are spending too much and saving too little."
In fact, a number of economists and American officials are increasingly concerned that the accumulating current account deficit could ultimately hurt the value of the dollar -- and that, in turn, could set off an international exodus from the stock market.
The Japanese, meanwhile, are clearly worried about the effects of a weakening dollar -- not on the United States but on their own hobbled economy. 
They intervened Monday night to weaken the yen and prop up the dollar, in hopes of making their own exports cheaper on world markets. 
While the purchase was carried out through the New York Federal Reserve, acting as Japan's agent, there are increasing signs that the United States and Japan are at odds on exchange rate policy. 
A stronger dollar would further hurt declining American exports.
Today's report suggested that the decline is modest, but is made worse by the growing demand for foreign-made cars, crude oil and medium-technology electronics. 
Oil prices increased in May to an average of $14.54 a barrel, the Commerce Department said, from $12.71 a barrel in April.
Exports decreased to $77.6 billion from $78.2 billion in April, but they were up fractionally from May 1998. 
Imports increased to $98.9 billion from $96.8 billion in April and $92 billion in May 1998.
The latest figures suggest that some of the areas that the Clinton Administration concentrated the hardest on bolstering during Mr. Clinton's first term in office -- autos, auto parts and machinery -- are the exports now in greatest decline. 
They are also the products that are being imported in increasing numbers. 
Administration officials who once boasted of the auto and auto parts agreement they reached with Japan in 1995, after a trade dispute that nearly resulted in an embargo on Japanese luxury cars, now rarely discuss the subject.
Nor is there much discussion from the White House about how to deal with the complex trade problems with China. 
Over all, Chinese exports to the world are in decline. 
But their continued rise here suggests that the United States, now more than ever, has become the market of last resort for the Chinese.
The politics of the trade deficit with China are messy. 
Opponents of President Clinton's China policy -- on both the left and the right -- say the trade figures show that the President's decision to delink human rights and the annual renewal of China's trade status has helped neither dissidents nor American companies. 
Arrests by Chinese authorities continue -- there was a major crackdown today -- and exports to China are clearly not increasing.
Yet there has been little real resistance to the renewal of what was once called "most favored nation" trade status, and which has been delicately renamed "normal trade relations."
American companies have argued annually on Capitol Hill that unless China has the benefit of low tariffs on their imports here, the Chinese market will gradually be shut down for them.
If China and the United States reach an agreement this year on Beijing's entry to the World Trade Organization, the terms of its move to join the group should, in theory at least, open more markets to American goods. 
But opponents on Capitol Hill, both those on the left who are concerned with China's human rights record and those on the right who see China as a growing threat, view its admission as a favor to the Chinese, and not one that will necessarily benefit American workers.
