
China Everbright Group, one of the nation's largest financial conglomerates, announced today that its chairman had resigned and been replaced by a deputy governor of the People's Bank of China.
The move, officially described as a normal transfer, appeared instead to be one of several personnel moves related to the shifting fortunes of Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, whose reform program has been under attack from conservative rivals in Beijing.
The departing chairman of China Everbright, Zhu Xiaohua, was one of China's most prominent executives, a relatively aggressive and ambitious financial operative in an environment that favors political caution and bureaucratic timidity.
Mr. Zhu, China Everbright's chairman since 1996, was widely reported to enjoy a close relationship with Prime Minister Zhu, who is no relation. 
The Prime Minister has been trying to spearhead sharp reform in China's lumbering financial sector, where state-run companies are plagued by mismanagement and bureaucratic politics.
Although China Everbright is considered one of the brighter stars in the collection of Hong Kong-based, China-owned financial companies, it is widely regarded as lacking the efficiency and flexibility of private competitors in Hong Kong.
China Everbright runs a wide range of businesses that extend from securities trading to banking to toll collection. 
It reports directly to China's State Council, or cabinet. 
It has three subsidiaries that are publicly listed in Hong Kong: China Everbright, China Everbright Technology and China Everbright International.
Like other state-run companies, China Everbright does not publicly report revenue or profit, and much of its other financial data are not disclosed.
China Everbright's commercial banking arm, Everbright Bank of China, had more than $10 billion in assets at the end of 1998.
Hong Kong newspapers reported rumors that Zhu Xiaohua was under investigation for his role in bad deals that had lost more than $200 million.
But in a field of state-owned financial companies where enormous losses are routinely written off, other, still unclear factors may also have been at play.
An investment banker at another Chinese company said Mr. Zhu's removal had more to do with Beijing politics than with China Everbright's balance sheet. 
A related move, the banker said, is the expected removal of Wang Qishan, deputy governor of Guangdong Province, who was sent by Prime Minister Zhu to sort out the financial mess left there by state-run companies, namely the Guangdong International Trust and Investment Corporation.
"We can't see what the whole picture is," the banker said. 
"But these moves are all related."
Prime Minister Zhu's aggressive reform program is said to have been sharply criticized by fellow Politburo members in Beijing, where the political atmosphere has become unusually tense and volatile. 
Leaders are currently confronted with crises over Taiwan, the spiritual movement Falun Gong, and strained United States-China relations, on top of a vulnerable economy and rising unemployment.
China Everbright's new chairman, Liu Mingkang, served for 11 years as a deputy governor of China's central bank.
Yet his background is as much in politics as finance. 
Before joining the People's Bank, Mr. Liu was a vice governor of Fujian province. 
He has an M.B.A. from London's City University.
At a news conference in Hong Kong, where Everbright is based, Mr. Liu said he would not change his predecessor's strategy of focusing on financial services businesses.
"The financial industry is our core business," Mr. Liu said. 
"That means commercial banking, including personal banking, institutional banking, corporate banking, and I am very happy to see that our commercial banking is getting stronger and stronger."
He denied that Mr. Zhu's removal was unusual in any way.
"As far as I'm concerned, this is part of normal operations, nothing more, nothing less," Mr. Liu said.
