
In the 1950's and 60's, China mobilized higher education to produce physicists and rocket engineers capable of giving the Communist Party leadership the ultimate in international prestige: a thermonuclear weapon deliverable by intercontinental ballistic missile. 
It was an enormous achievement for a nation of peasant farmers led by rough-hewn revolutionaries.
But Mao Zedong, the Communist Party chairman, then decided to tear it all down in the name of permanent revolution and class struggle, and higher education was suspended during the years of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.
When it recovered in the late 1970's, higher education was still permeated by the tradition of excellence in hard sciences. 
Today, after a wave of Chinese immigration to the West following the reform policies of Deng Xiaoping, the discipline and excellence of Chinese students have made significant contributions to Western universities.
But at home, higher education remains hobbled. 
Chronic, crippling fiscal limitations coupled with Draconian political repression on campuses are eroding any prospects for serious education reform. 
As a result, China's stated goal of developing 100 universities of "international repute" by the 21st century is little more than official sloganeering.
SINCE THE late 1970's, when higher education began rebuilding, both the number of colleges and total enrollment have more than doubled. 
But state funding in real terms has made only small gains.
The result: bleak dormitories with six to eight students crammed to a room; teaching material typed by hand and run off on archaic mimeograph machines, and libraries pathetically short of up-to-date books and periodicals.
Professors live on subsistence salaries, and an alarming percentage of them are leaving their posts to sell their talents in China's burgeoning private sector. 
"The more you teach, the thinner you get," goes the ditty that is a play on the Chinese characters that stand for "professor."
Life is little better for students, who are under increasing financial pressure to pay a greater share of their education costs. 
Fees and other expenses now have risen beyond the income of an average public-sector worker.
The number of "self-paid" students has grown to nearly 15 percent of enrollment, and some professors bemoan the loosening of admission criteria that is evident for the children of China's new wealthy.
The commercialization of Chinese universities has not loosened the ideological grip on history, the humanities, social and political sciences.
Textbooks are highly selective, and sensitive subjects like Tibet and the 1989 protest movement are banned from classrooms.
But mandatory military training and manual labor for students have been eased. 
Last summer, one class of sophomores was shepherded out of Beijing to "engage in agricultural labor" for 10 days in a peasant village. 
Upon returning, they confided: All they had had to do was watch.   PATRICK TYLER
