
When a typical Japanese trading company gets an order for copper in Bangkok, Thailand, it might take two months to move the metal from the mines in Africa to the docks in Bangkok.
But the Sumitomo Corporation can do it in 10 days.
"Their response to customers is incredibly quick for any brand, any amount and any time," said a rival copper trader.
Sumitomo's disclosure that the company's star copper trader lost $1.8 billion in futures has led traders and investigators to suspect foul play. 
But what the scandal obscures is Sumitomo's efforts in recent years to become a leading world player in copper itself, from mines to phone lines, not just in copper futures and options and other fancy trading instruments.
The copper wire that carries telephone conversations, the copper coils in compact disk players and the copper in car radiators may all have been supplied in some earlier shape by Sumitomo. 
Already, some analysts say, Sumitomo controls from 5 to 20 percent of the world market.
That could mean, as some traders say, that the company's copper trading influenced prices and supplies in ways that likely benefited Sumitomo's business in mining and smelting, as well as in the physical copper business. 
Thus, when commodities trading led to higher prices, that may have helped Sumitomo and other copper-related companies in the Sumitomo group at every step of the way -- from extracting the copper to smelting and refining it and finally to shipping and delivering loads of the metal around the world.
Copper has always been special to Sumitomo, partly because copper is the business that gave birth to this conglomerate three centuries ago. 
And more than other trading companies, Sumitomo has been rapidly expanding its copper business lately, stockpiling and blanketing copper buyers with an assertive sales strategy.
With a surging appetite for copper in Southeast Asia and China, Sumitomo and its affiliated companies have stepped up investments in the more profitable areas of copper mines and smelters around the world, as well as in the trading of the flat metal itself.
At the center of this boom was Yasuo Hamanaka, the Sumitomo copper trader accused of hiding losses of $1.8 billion over 10 years. 
Coincidentally, it was just a decade ago that Sumitomo began its resurgence into copper mines and smelters, and Mr. Hamanaka seemed to soak in business. 
Foreign partners came with new venture proposals, seeking to work with Sumitomo's copper king, and Mr. Hamanaka visited copper mines around the world.
Mr. Hamanaka won awards from Sumitomo's president and helped resurrect the copper business within the company. 
And with his complex trading strategies dovetailing with Sumitomo's growing copper empire, Sumitomo executives may have been less eager to investigate deeply into his activities, much less halt them.
"I find it very difficult to believe that a guy could run up a loss for 10 years," said Paula J. Sugawara, an analyst covering trading companies at Lehman Brothers Japan Inc. 
"It makes me wonder whether the company was turning a blind eye because he was making profits."
Sumitomo has rejected any suggestion that its top executives were involved in the scandal and says it is conducting its own investigation.
Other copper companies affiliated with Sumitomo would also have received a boost, of course, but no evidence has emerged that Sumitomo was deliberately trying to push up prices to bolster profitability in its other copper operations. 
Indeed, some analysts say that is implausible, partly because companies in the Sumitomo Group are decentralized and the traders at Sumitomo would not be inclined to take risks to help distant cousins in the group.
Still, the trading scandal and the motivations behind it are murky, and some traders say that Sumitomo's diverse copper holdings may have played some role. 
In addition, it is clear that Sumitomo stood to gain from higher copper prices in ways that other trading companies did not.
"As a total copper business, compared to trading groups like Mitsubishi or Mitsui, Sumitomo gained greater benefits because its operation is larger," Hiroaki Kawabe, a metals analyst at Yamaichi Research Institute, said about the effect of higher copper prices on Sumitomo.
Earlier this year, Sumitomo and the Sumitomo Metal Mining Company, one of Japan's largest copper mining and smelting companies, held an opening ceremony in Copiapo, Chile, for a $600 million copper mine. 
Sumitomo companies, which took a 20 percent stake, developed the mine with the Phelps Dodge Mining Company, and it has been operating since September 1994 with the capacity to produce 400,000 tons of copper concentrate each year.
Also earlier this year, Sumitomo announced a minority stake in a new $1.5 billion copper and gold mining venture in Indonesia with an American company, the Newmont Gold Company, and P. T. Pukuafu Indah of Indonesia. 
The operation, in which Sumitomo is investing $100 million and financing up to $800 million more, is expected to produce 245,000 tons of refined copper, beginning in 1999.
Next year, a $185 million joint venture among China and other investors, including Sumitomo and Sumitomo Metal, will begin a smelting operation with a capacity of 100,000 tons of copper in Anhui Province. 
In addition to this smelter, Sumitomo also has a technical cooperative arrangement with a Chinese partner in Jiangxi Province.
And two years ago, copper production began at a $200 million mining project in New South Wales, Australia, a venture among Sumitomo, Sumitomo Metal and an Australian company, North Broken Hill Peco Ltd.
Sumitomo also has a 10 percent stake in a $37 million mining venture in Mexico. 
It has interests in a highly successful mining operation with Phelps Dodge in Arizona, as well as another venture in the development stage in British Columbia, Canada.
"They are trying to integrate their business and they are targeting upstream, natural mining in particular," said Kenichiro Yoshida, a senior analyst at Nikko Research Center. 
"Trading and distribution margins are quite thin, but mining companies' profits are very high."
Other Japanese trading companies were also expanding, but Sumitomo was more aggressive, perhaps because it could take comfort in its large, captive clients. 
Sumitomo Electric Industries, for instance, is Japan's largest maker of electric wires and cables, and a member of the Sumitomo Group.
When asked if Sumitomo as a whole profited from Mr. Hamanaka's trading activities, Yoshinao Nemoto, a Sumitomo spokesman, said: "It may have produced profits. 
We cannot say if it increased because of Hamanaka. 
It may have, but we cannot tell you."
Instead, Mr. Nemoto provided a copy of a 1995 report by Brains, an industry newsletter, saying that Sumitomo was by far the most competitive Japanese company in the copper business, and was expanding aggressively. 
The report added that the overall "rise in copper prices had contributed greatly to an increase in sales in its network of copper businesses."
Revenues on Sumitomo's copper business were $11 million in the fiscal year ending in March, slightly less than for the corresponding period last year, and copper trading volume this year was $8.8 billion, also a small dip from last year.
Though this may suggest a less than distinguished performance for an influential trader like Mr. Hamanaka, trading volume surged 23 percent in the year ending March 1994 from the previous period, and was a significant 5 percent of the trading company's overall business, analysts said.
Copper traders and analysts said that Sumitomo had amassed large holdings of the physical copper -- it may have had as much as one million tons at one point, according to one Japanese rival trader.
Sumitomo stores vast quantities of copper in both its own and other warehouses in Singapore, California, Europe, India, Japan and elsewhere. 
With more warehouses spread around the world than other trading companies, Sumitomo can fill orders quickly, particularly with rapidly expanding demand for copper in Southeast Asia and China.
Japanese traders, however, said that Sumitomo might have initially achieved this stature at a price. 
It seemed to gain market share, they said, by shaving commissions and offering price quotations below the market level.
"They must have made a loss on the physical business to gain a big share," said another Japanese copper trader. 
He added about Mr. Hamanaka: "But the big share means he has big power in the market."
