
Shares in Chinese companies have been surging on world markets since the year began, a marked contrast to their weakness in 1995. 
While analysts and fund managers say that some of the stocks are likely to maintain their gains, they warn that other issues have been merely pulled up in the excitement and could fall sharply if corporate earnings weaken.
Lifted by an improving Chinese economy, an appetite among American investors and strength among Asian stocks over all, Chinese share prices rose sharply this week on the New York Stock Exchange, in Hong Kong and on China's two stock exchanges. 
Because the shares fell sharply last year, investors are buying them at bargain prices.
"China has engineered a very good economic landing, and conditions will improve this year," said Ean Wah Chin, a Singapore-based managing director at Morgan Stanley Group Inc., which manages $4 billion in Asian equities outside of Japan. 
Fund managers in the United States, flush with cash from investors betting that American stocks may run out of steam, are looking for inexpensive stocks in Asia, she said.
But Simon Lee, manager of the $8.8 million China Fund at Sun Hung Kai Fund Management, was cautious. 
"The consolidation should happen any time now," he said. 
"Share prices have been going up 50 percent and 60 percent and no one can explain it."
Mr. Lee said that low trading volumes in some of the stocks suggested that investors with large holdings were trying to manipulate prices to feed the frenzy.
Chinese stocks have drawn attention in the United States this week. 
On Thursday, for example, five of the eight leading percentage gainers on the New York Stock Exchange were Chinese companies. 
The issues ended the week with strong gains. 
Among them, Brilliance China Automotive Holding closed today at $7.25, up 87 percent from its closing price at the end of 1995, and China Tire Holding closed at $8, up 47 percent.
Overseas, the index of stocks in Chinese state-owned companies that trade in Hong Kong rose 2 percent, bringing its gain for the week to nearly 19 percent. 
Last year, the index fell 29 percent, in contrast to a gain of 23 percent in the Hang Seng Index, which tracks the stocks of major Hong Kong companies.
In trading in China today, B shares, which are shares in Chinese companies that foreigners can buy, rose 1.8 percent on Shenzhen's stock exchange but fell nine-tenths of 1 percent on Shanghai's exchange. 
So far this year, B shares are up 7 percent in Shanghai and 1.2 percent in Shenzhen.
Through the close of Hong Kong trading today, the CLSA China World Index, which tracks leading Chinese companies listed on world exchanges, was up 13 percent for the week. 
It had fallen 11 percent during the last two months of 1995.
One reason for the strength in share prices is the improving state of the Chinese economy. 
The Government announced in Beijing today that economic growth slowed slightly last year but still remained above the official target. 
The Government has been trying to hold down growth to restrain inflation, which did show a sharp slowdown last year.
Another factor aiding stocks is an absence of changes in Chinese taxes that would hurt corporate earnings. 
There had been speculation that such changes were near, but the Beijing Government, which usually announces any tax changes on Jan. 
1, did not disclose any revisions as the year began.
"If there were any more tax reforms, they would have come out by now," said Sonja Jong, assistant director at Mees Pierson Capital Management, which has $1 billion invested in Asian equities. 
"People think it's safe to get in, especially at these low levels."
The improvements in China's economy have come at a cost, however. 
As part of its efforts to fight inflation, the Government restrained credit last year, making it difficult for companies to finance operations and expansions.
As a result, analysts expect some companies to report 1995 earnings that were weaker than had been expected. 
The analysts said they did not expect earnings to improve until this year's second half. 
Corporate reports for 1995 are due in April.
"Some of the buying was indiscriminate," Graham Muirhead, director of HSBC Asset Management, said about this week's activity. 
"There is an improved economic environment, but slower economic growth means severe problems for companies."
HSBC oversees $200 million in specialized China investment funds.
The earnings reports may not tell the whole story. 
Many state-run enterprises are poorly managed and are routinely late in informing investors of negative news. 
Even well-managed companies can have clients that refuse to pay their bills.
