
For China Airlines, the 1990's were a recurring nightmare: three fiery crashes in six years that resulted in nearly 500 deaths. 
The only cold comfort for Taiwan's flagship carrier is that travelers seem to have developed shorter memories.
When a China Airlines' Airbus crashed near Taipei's airport in February 1998, killing 202 people, it scared away passengers for months and contributed to the airline's first net loss in 12 years. 
But when a China Airlines MD-11 flipped over and burned after landing during a typhoon in Hong Kong last August, killing three people, it depressed the airline's bookings for just two weeks.
"The total casualty rate was lower," said Sandy K. Y. Liu, the president of China Airlines, in an interview this week. 
"And the incident occurred during severe weather conditions. 
So, except for in Taiwan, a lot of people assumed that the weather caused the accident."
In the airline's home country, Mr. Liu acknowledged, many people immediately assumed that the pilots were to blame. 
That skepticism sums up the enormity of the task facing Mr. Liu, a 30-year veteran of China Airlines who is laboring to mend its reputation. 
While Taiwan travelers continue to fly China Airlines, they do so out of necessity and convenience -- not a sense of trust.
"I don't blame people for jumping to the conclusion that it must be China Airlines' fault," Mr. Liu, 51, said. 
"Our responsibility is to bring passengers from A to B and land there safely. 
We did not do that in Hong Kong."
China Airlines is not the only Asian carrier with a poor safety record. 
Korean Air and Garuda Indonesia both rank near the top of the list of major carriers involved in fatal crashes. 
But China Airlines has some unenviable distinctions: it is the only airline to have crashed two Airbus A300-600's, and it is the only carrier to have crashed twice in Hong Kong. 
In 1993, a China Airlines 747 overshot the runway at the old Kai Tak airport and landed in Victoria Harbor.
In some ways, the problems that plague China Airlines are typical of Asian companies generally. 
Founded by retired Taiwan air force officers in 1959, the airline is controlled by the China Aviation Development Foundation, a quasi-government organization. 
Analysts say those ties bind China Airlines, by preventing Mr. Liu from carrying out a much-needed top-to-bottom reorganization.
"The people who control those shares have connections to the pilots, so to some extent, the pilots dictate things at the airline," said Jim Eckes, a consultant at Indoswiss Aviation in Hong Kong. 
"As long as the management can't crack the pilot culture, they can't solve the bigger problems."
After the Taipei crash, the government ordered the aviation foundation to privatize the airline by selling its 71 percent stake. 
China Airlines seemed close to that goal early last year when it entered negotiations to sell an equity stake to Singapore Airlines. 
But the talks foundered after the two carriers could not agree on the size of the stake or on management control.
Last June, China Airlines made another push for the private sector. 
It hired Salomon Smith Barney to find a buyer for half the foundation's stake, or roughly 35 percent of the shares. 
But a self-imposed Dec. 
22 deadline passed without a deal. 
Mr. Liu declined to comment on the status of the search, except to say that the foundation was still determined to sell its holdings.
Analysts say the latest problem is that the airline's shares are trading well below the foundation's asking price. 
Mr. Liu noted that one of the foundation's missions was to "generate a lot of money" from the privatization, which it plans to use to nurture the aviation industry in Taiwan.
Some analysts contend that China Airlines will benefit from the delay. 
In addition to forgetful customers, the waning of the Asian economic crisis has revived traffic. 
"The longer the delay, the better it is, because their position can only improve," said Barry Grindrod, the publisher of Orient Aviation, a trade publication in Hong Kong. 
"Their financial projections are getting stronger."
But that assumes China Airlines will not relive the disasters of the last decade. 
Mr. Eckes and other experts said the airline was still overly reliant on former air force pilots, whose imperious style is poorly suited to the more collegial environment of a commercial airplane cockpit.
The Taipei accident, as well as a crash in Nagoya, Japan, in 1994 which killed 264 people, were both attributed to pilot error. 
China Airlines denies its pilots erred in the last Hong Kong crash, although the Hong Kong Civil Aviation Department said in a report in November that the wind speeds were above the recommended limits when the captain, who was Italian, decided to land.
Mr. Liu said China Airlines had instituted a rigorous retraining and recertification program. 
And he said the airline was recruiting expatriate pilots, as well as new college graduates, to complement its air force pilots.
