
When Jim Rohwer was writing about Asia from the genteel surroundings of the London offices of The Economist, he was convinced he knew what he was doing. 
It turned out, he confesses now, that he did not.
"I realized within three or four months of arriving in Asia that I understood nothing about it at all," he said recently. 
"The same is generally true about Western business people who haven't set foot here."
After four years in Asia, three for The Economist, the weekly news magazine owned by Economist Newspaper Ltd., and the last as the chief economist for the CS First Boston Corporation, Mr. Rohwer now seeks to share his epiphany with Western readers. 
(Asians already pretty much know what he has discovered.) In short, he wants to explain why Asia has become, in his words, "the miracle" of late-20th-century free markets and economic development.
In a new book, "Asia Rising: Why America Will Prosper as Asia's Economies Boom" (Simon & Schuster), Mr. Rohwer explores the fundamental causes of Asia's prodigious growth and suggests how America's economy, and companies, can benefit from the jarring transformation of the global economy.
His analysis and suggestions might trouble Westerners, but that discomfort is essential, he said, if they are to grapple with Asia's complexities.
Indeed, the successful companies here, the ones that are defining how business is done and how economies are shaped, are not the multinationals of the United States and Europe, but the great conglomerates of Asia, like the Charoen Pokphand Group of Bangkok, Thailand, which have been built mostly by a vast diaspora of Chinese-born business families. 
Moreover, his analysis largely diminishes Japan's role in Asia, a view that runs counter to most judgments about growth in the region.
Mr. Rohwer is emphatic that his work is not a prescription for American companies, but he does believe there is one fundamental tenet that emerges from his book. 
"The biggest single thing for companies to do is to figure out how they can plug themselves into local conditions," he said. 
"Mostly that means finding the right partner, someone to guide you through that maze in Asia."
Yet, he cautioned, "this is very much a book of strategy more than a book on how to do it."
In an interview, Mr. Rohwer called Asia's success dependent on "being open, especially in terms of trade, investment and technology transfer. 
Second, it's linked to not providing protection -- social protection, protection from competition, protection from change. 
And third, it is having a very small role for government. 
The family is central and not government institutions in absorbing the shock of change."
Across Asia, government spending accounts for a very small share of gross domestic product, usually less than 20 percent, Mr. Rohwer said, compared with Western economies in which it ranges from 30 percent to 50 percent.
"How did this develop?
These countries were under threats to their survival," he said. 
"Their backs were to the wall and they had choices of fighting or collapsing. 
Secondly, America's role in the cold war of defending them gave them a stable structure. 
There also was a tremendous amount of American generosity. 
But far more important was the willingness to protect these countries and absorb their exports. 
And this was grounded in very strong family-based societies, where learning and hard work were highly valued.
"And last -- and this is the thing Americans have the hardest time understanding -- most places are run by highly authoritarian governments that unlike authoritarians in Africa or the Middle East were actually committed to the national interest."
Economies that have thrived under the apparently paradoxical combination of political and social authoritarianism and market freedoms are apparent: Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia and China. 
In Mr. Rohwer's view, the countries destined to follow these examples are Indonesia, which is well on the road to sustained economic growth, and Vietnam.
The great Asian failure, Mr. Rohwer argues, is India, which has too long practiced oppressive planning and a cloistered approach to economic development. 
As a result, he said, India has been left behind.
Driving the growth, Mr. Rohwer said, have been the multitude of Chinese families that turned small businesses into vibrant conglomerates across Asia. 
Together, the World Bank estimates that this "greater China" had a gross domestic product of $2.5 trillion in 1990, nearly half that of the G.D.P. of the United States in 1990.
"It's one of the most interesting business phenomena in the world," he said. 
"Scattered across Southeast Asia are 50 to 60 million Chinese. 
They have as a group created one of the most successful business empires in the world. 
It's the business equivalent of a neural network and the Chinese have come to dominate business, finance and commerce throughout Asia, outside Japan, even though they are a minority."
For American companies, Mr. Rohwer contends, Asia is the future. 
But protectionist impulses in the United States could damage the possibilities for American companies. 
Indeed, he said, the emergence of a huge Asian middle class augurs both great opportunity for American business -- and great competition.
      
