
Five years after announcing that it would pull out of China because of what it called pervasive human rights violations, Levi Strauss & Company said today that it would expand its manufacturing in the country and start selling its clothing there.
"It's clear to us that the environment is getting better there," said Peter A. Jacobi, the president and chief operating officer of Levi Strauss, which makes its trademark denim pants and shirts in 12 Asian countries. 
"We basically felt that we should untie our hands."
Mr. Jacobi, who disclosed the decision in an interview here, said the company's action was less a judgment of China's overall human rights record and more a belief that its local contractors would adhere to the company's guidelines for labor conditions.
"Levi Strauss is not in the human rights business," he said. 
"But to the degree that human rights affects our business, we care about it."
The action by Levi Strauss, a privately held company based in San Francisco, comes at a time of easier political and commercial relations between the United States and China. 
Several American companies, including Eastman Kodak and Coca-Cola, have announced major new investments in the mainland in recent weeks. 
With President Clinton scheduled to visit Beijing in June, business people here expect a flurry of new ventures.
But the decision may exacerbate concerns about the harsh conditions in Asian factories that churn out goods for American companies. 
Nike Inc. was criticized last fall when an audit found unsafe working conditions at a plant that produced Nike athletic shoes in Vietnam. 
A new report by the National Labor Committee, an advocacy group in Washington, says that factories in China routinely work their employees 60 to 70 hours a week.
When Levi Strauss announced its intention to withdraw in 1993, it was a lone holdout in corporate America's stampede into China. 
Indeed, it never fully withdrew, and no other American company followed suit -- a situation that human rights advocates said demonstrated the difficulty of using corporations to push for social reform.
"Levi's decision to go back into China should not be taken as evidence that the labor situation in China has improved," said Robin Munro, director of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch Asia. 
"It has not."
And while Levi Strauss reduced its production, it still makes 800,000 units of clothing a year in the country, compared with three million units a year before 1993.
When the company decided to stop making jeans in China, it also decided not to sell them there. 
At the time, it was motivated by more than concern for human rights. 
Thousands of counterfeit jeans were being produced with the Levis label. 
Now, Mr. Jacobi said he believed the Chinese Government would play an aggressive role in helping the company track down and root out manufacturers of counterfeit products. 
And since Levi Strauss initially said it would leave China, competitors from around the world, including Lee Apparel, part of the VF Corporation, and Esprit, have established a strong position in the growing Chinese market.
Mr. Jacobi said Levi Strauss decided to withdraw after it found evidence of child labor, forced labor and a military presence at factories that produced Levi Strauss clothing.
The company does not actually own any factories on the mainland, but uses Chinese subcontractors in manufacturing. 
Its guidelines prohibit it from using producers that permit child labor, forced labor or excessive work hours.
"We were concerned that our association with these kinds of things would put our reputation at risk," Mr. Jacobi said.
But he said Levi Strauss temporarily halted its "phased withdrawal" from China two years ago amid signs that labor conditions were improving.
Its current decision to increase production and resume sales came after intense lobbying from its Asian division and after consulting other multinational companies active in the country.
The company now even plans to start a direct-marketing operation on the mainland. 
It already has such an operation in Hong Kong. 
Jim Fraser, the president of Levi Strauss Asia Pacific, said China could become the key manufacturing nation for the company's Japanese and South Korean markets, which generate two-thirds of its $468 million in Asian revenue.
The United States' current relationship with China -- in which disagreements are often muted in public and argued in private -- did not play a part in the company's decision, Mr. Jacobi said. 
But he acknowledged that it was easier to make such a move in this climate. 
In 1993, Levi Strauss's decision to leave put an uncomfortable spotlight on the company when no other company followed suit.
In choosing to expand its China presence, Mr. Jacobi acknowledged that Levi Strauss was balancing its carefully honed reputation for corporate idealism with a bottom-line business calculation about the value of the Chinese market.
"You're nowhere in Asia without being in China," he said.
Mr. Jacobi said Levi Strauss would vigilantly monitor its new Chinese factories to make sure that they complied with the guidelines. 
But some labor advocates said that even well-intended companies found it difficult to police every factory -- in part because the main contractors often dole out such assignments as sewing buttons or stitching trousers to other, smaller factories.
"We can't imagine how you could effectively manage these codes of conduct," said Jennifer Porges, a spokeswoman for the Asia Monitor Resource Center, a human rights group that focuses on labor issues.
A prominent Chinese labor activist, however, gave Levi Strauss the benefit of the doubt. 
Han Dongfang, who formed China's first independent labor union during the Tiananmen Square uprising, said he believed that the company could do more good by providing jobs in China, rather than by shunning the country. 
Mr. Han added that he hoped Levi Strauss would be open to allowing rights groups to monitor factories used by the company.
