
Softening its tone toward foreign lenders, China announced a plan today to overhaul a debt-ridden state company, with the banks and the Government sharing the losses.
The company, Guangdong Enterprises, is staggering under $5.6 billion in debt and other liabilities. 
It stopped making loan payments in January, after its owner, Guangdong province's government, announced that it would overhaul operations with the help of Goldman, Sachs.
China's handling of Guangdong Enterprises is in stark contrast to its treatment of another troubled state company, Guangdong International Trust and Investment, known as Gitic. 
When Gitic capsized under $4.3 billion in debt last October, Beijing forced it into bankruptcy and told banks that they would lose most of their loans.
As the next-most-prominent corporate casualty, Guangdong Enterprises has been scrutinized by foreign banks as a test of how unforgiving the Government will be in cleaning up troubled state businesses.
"If this one went badly, it would have spelled trouble for creditors generally in China," said Gordon G. Chang, a bankruptcy lawyer in the Beijing office of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
Today, officials of Goldman, Sachs and of Guangdong outlined a plan for Guangdong Enterprises. 
It would recapitalize the company's main Hong Kong subsidiary by selling the subsidiary a profitable water business. 
The plan would also swap equity for a portion of the parent company's debt and would carve out $238 million of bad loans and place them in an asset management company.
In what amounts to a grand exercise in financial triage, the Chinese Government would revive the healthiest parts of Guangdong Enterprises while asking the banks to accept losses on the hopelessly sick parts.
"There should be a mutual sharing of loss," said Wang Qishan, the executive vice governor of Guangdong province, at a news conference after he presented the plan to several hundred creditors in Hong Kong.
While Guangdong Enterprises' creditors said in a statement that the plan was "not satisfactory on initial inspection," their relief seemed palpable. 
"It's definitely an O.K. place to start negotiating," said Ted Osborn, a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers, which is advising the creditors. 
"The Guangdong government didn't have to give anything; these companies are bankrupt."
Mr. Osborn said the creditors would certainly negotiate on the finer points of the proposal, such as how to value the debt-for-equity swaps and the water plant that the Guangdong government would contribute to Guangdong Enterprises' publicly listed Hong Kong flagship, Guangdong Investments Ltd. 
But he added: "The Guangdong government has put down its marker. 
Now at least the banks know where they stand."
Goldman, Sachs, which has labored since January to make sense of Guangdong Enterprises' tangled finances, said that if the new stock issued to the creditors performed well, some of them could wind up with no losses over the long term.
"There is no forced loss for any of the creditors -- none," said Steven M. Shafran, a Goldman managing director in Hong Kong.
Mr. Shafran was particularly enthusiastic about China's contribution of the Dongshen Water Supply Company, which supplies 75 percent of Hong Kong's water and which he said was worth more than $2 billion.
Still, creditors are skeptical about Guangdong Enterprises, given that many of its assets are in sad shape and some former executives are suspected of corruption. 
One executive who advises the creditors estimated that the plan would result in 20 percent to 40 percent losses to the banks on their loans.
In the case of Gitic, the banks are likely to recover less than 20 percent of their loans. 
Mr. Wang said that if the Government had chosen to liquidate Guangdong Enterprises, its banks would have received a similarly paltry return.
As with Gitic, Guangdong Enterprises' creditors are a who's who of global institutions, including Sumitomo Bank, Citigroup and Deutsche Bank. 
Chinese, Japanese and French banks have greater exposure than American banks.
Although Gitic and Guangdong Enterprises bear similarities, there are crucial differences. 
Gitic is an investment trust company, while Guangdong Enterprises is a state-owned enterprise whose main subsidiary is a "red chip" company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 
The Chinese Prime Minister, Zhu Rongji, has expressed his distaste for investment trusts, which he contends are outmoded vehicles to raise capital.
Red chips, on the other hand, remain China's most dependable way to tap global capital markets. 
Mr. Wang said he took special care with Guangdong Enterprises because he did not want to throw Hong Kong's red-chip market into turmoil. 
Shares in Hong Kong eased today, as investors waited for the Guangdong Enterprises proposal to be announced, after having risen Monday as initial details of the plan leaked out.
"Regardless of the province," Mr. Wang said, "we feel we should make a contribution to the stabilityI of Hong Kong."
Mr. Wang, who was appointed last year by Prime Minister Zhu to rein in the freewheeling financial practices in Guangdong province, gave a freewheeling performance of his own today. 
By turns playful and scolding, he reiterated Mr. Zhu's campaign to reform China's economy and banks.
And he switched seamlessly between free-market evangelist and dutiful party functionary.
Asked whether China would suffer more corporate failures, Mr. Wang said, "The fundamental principle of a market economy is that the winners win and the losers lose."
