
For nearly three years, Caterpillar Inc. has been banging its head against the Clinton Administration door, trying to get Government-sponsored loans for the sale of its big earthmovers to China. 
Beijing is buying them by the dozens to build the giant Three Gorges Dam, which the Administration considers damaging to the environment.
So the Chinese have turned to suppliers in Japan and Europe, where governments are less concerned about the environment and more forthcoming with credit. 
"We've only managed to sell the Chinese a few off-highway trucks," a Caterpillar official said.
That is hardly the description of a giant multinational ranging unfettered across the world. 
For all the talk of economic globalization, the process is still in an early stage.
A few multinationals, such as I.B.M., Royal Dutch/Shell or Imperial Chemical Industries, are ahead of the pack in spreading their revenues, research, financing, stockholders and management over many countries. 
But the majority are more like Caterpillar in America, the Mitsubishi Corporation in Japan or Volkswagen in Germany. 
For all their involvement in overseas sales and investment, nationality still binds them to home.
"What we have is United States, European and Japanese corporations trying to dress in global clothing," said William W. Keller, executive director of the Center for International Studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"But if you conceive of globalization as being the rootlessness of corporations, that is a paradox. 
You don't have corporations without states attached to them. 
When they need help, you find out who they really belong to."
Many corporations have invoked the competitive pressures of an increasingly borderless global economy as the reason for moving operations and jobs abroad and to press for other concessions.
But a proliferation of treaty negotiations in recent months, aimed at setting rules for the global economy -- most of them favorable so far to business -- has raised a fresh question: just how untethered are these companies and who, therefore, should have a voice in the rule-making?
"We have to keep separate that the mobility of corporations has increased from the notion that we are living in a completely seamless integrated world market that gives national government no bargaining power to set standards," said Dani Rodrik, an economist at Harvard. 
"The latter has not happened."
Some want to stop the process of globalization. 
But others, including a re-energized American labor movement, are more interested in setting international rules of the road. 
Indeed, 12 different rule-making negotiations are currently under way.
Most are inspired by the North American Free Trade Agreement and the treaty that set up the World Trade Organization, in which the United States and 116 other nations agreed essentially to recognize W.T.O. rulings as having the power of national law. 
Several of the agreements now being discussed would require Senate ratification and would be similarly binding. 
That would push the setting of global rules beyond the voluntary guidelines that have characterized most such agreements since World War II.
"Thus far, the corporations, more than any other group, are shaping the new global regulations," said Raymond Vernon, an economist at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. 
"It is not that they are abandoning their countries for a global identity. 
They are simply pushing abroad and arguing that if the obstacles are cleared away, they will produce enough for everyone and raise all boats."
The recent surge in rule-making brings out strange bedfellows. 
Corporate America and the A.F.L.-C.I.O. find themselves on one side, favoring an international stage, while the most visible advocates of those who want the rules made in America include Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator and politician, and Ralph Nader, the liberal consumer advocate.
"Rather than international negotiations, the rules should be written through Congress, where you can have discussion and debate," Mr. Nader said. 
As an example, he argued, Congress can no longer effectively ban imports of products made with child labor. 
Because the W.T.O. does not specifically prohibit such trade, such a law could be challenged before the organization, which could then fine the United States.
American corporate executives see in the new wave of rule-making not only the elimination of remaining trade barriers but also the removal of restrictions on investment abroad and greater freedom to purchase foreign companies. 
For Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan, however, these are hidden tools to make the shifting of jobs abroad that much easier. 
Mr. Buchanan advocates protective tariffs to keep companies at home, while Mr. Nader would discourage job-shifting by canceling tax breaks, imposing a "social tariff" and prohibiting Export-Import Bank loans for exports that contain too many foreign parts.
The bank once financed only those exports manufactured entirely in the United States. 
But it has relaxed that rule in recent years and now, for example, provides credits to customers of the Boeing Company to purchase aircraft that have as much as 15 percent "foreign content," and sometimes more.
Bucking such trends is futile, says John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. 
He calls the Nader-Buchanan approach simplistic. 
"It is a very good feeling to tell the workers we are going to bring all the jobs back," he said, "but it is not realistic."
With that in mind, the American labor movement has joined corporate America in embracing global rule-making. 
Instead of waging a losing battle to keep jobs at home, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is demanding a seat at the rule-making table, with only limited success so far. 
The intention is to preserve labor standards at home by raising them abroad.
That would be done by writing into every agreement a ban against child and prison labor, as well as guarantees that foreign workers can assemble freely and engage in collective bargaining. 
"If you can get rid of repression, workers can negotiate their own conditions," Mr. Sweeney said. 
The Administration included the A.F.L.-C.I.O. prescription in a bill now before Congress asking for $18 billion in new American financing for the International Monetary Fund. 
The language has survived so far in the House and Senate.
The treaty talks draw little public attention. 
They range from negotiations to eliminate tariffs on products such as cellular phones and computers to high-level talks between European and American business executives to develop common product standards that would then be incorporated into binding treaties.
The World Trade Organization, born in the tariff-cutting Uruguay Round agreement, plays a big role in this process, setting new standards, reducing more tariffs and eliminating other barriers to trade and investment.
"This is about international commerce," said Diane Sullivan, director of international trade at the National Association of Manufacturers. 
"Labor and the environment are not excluded, but they are not at the center of the W.T.O's concerns."
These outsiders are clamoring to make their views known in the negotiations for a treaty that is to be called the Multilateral Agreement on Investment.
The agreement is being negotiated under the umbrella of the 29-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
Government negotiators, most representing major industrial powers, have met periodically at the organization's headquarters in Paris. 
The last session took place in mid-April. 
The group's main goal is to produce a binding treaty that would give foreign corporations a legal status equal to that of domestic companies, establish rules for prompt and sufficient payment in cases of expropriation and give foreign companies equal bidding rights in privatizations of state enterprises.
The United States already has a number of similar, bilateral agreements, but this would be the first multilateral treaty. 
And it is drawing fire from Mr. Nader and others, including labor, which is pressing for a greater say in the talks. 
As a result, the early May target date for completing an agreement has been postponed at least six months to allow for "consultation and assessment," the organization said this week.
Acknowledging the pressure, Alan Larson, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs, who represents the United States in the negotiations, said: "There is strong support for measures in the treaty that would advance this country's environmental goals and our agenda on international labor standards. 
This treaty will not interfere with the ability of the United States to regulate in a normal and nondiscriminatory fashion to protect the environment or worker safety or health."
Faced with such regulation, Mr. Rodrik of Harvard argues, corporations will not decamp. 
"We exaggerate how effectively corporations can evade national rules," he said.
Indeed, many top executives of United States multinationals see their companies as essentially American in identity. 
That was evident in interviews with a half-dozen of them, and in the replies of others to a letter from Mr. Nader, who has been campaigning for companies to recite the Pledge of Allegiance, in the company's name, at each annual meeting of shareholders. 
The pledge would be a gesture of corporate loyalty to the United States in return for the tax breaks and other advantages that companies receive.
None of the 45 corporations that replied to Mr. Nader have agreed to such a proposal. 
Many argue that it would interfere with efforts to be good corporate citizens elsewhere in the world. 
Yet most spoke of their companies as essentially American in their management, headquarters, ownership and workers.
"It would be difficult to disassociate ourselves from America, even if we wanted to do so," Steve Burrow, president of the Anheuser-Busch Companies' international operation, said in an interview. 
"Our packaging is even red, white and blue, and the American eagle is part of our image. 
But our obligation is to our shareholders, and our international operation is an important part of increasing share value."
All these themes run through Caterpillar's effort to get low-interest credit. 
The company has moved about 25 percent of its production abroad; the rest is concentrated in the Midwest, where management and research are also centered. 
But overseas sales are rising rapidly, and the corporate goal is to have 75 percent of sales from abroad by 2010, up from 50 percent today.
The Export-Import Bank plays a significant role in this strategy, already providing low-interest credits for $300 million of Caterpillar's $19 billion in annual revenue. 
If sales for the Three Gorges project on the Yangtze River in China were to be similarly financed, the total would be $350 million or more.
Capital, of course, now flows relatively easily around the world, making loans available practically everywhere. 
But when Caterpillar is competing to sell diesel engines to Zambia, gold mining equipment to Russia and earthmovers to China, the global lenders are not so quick to offer low-interest loans.
So Caterpillar and other multinationals continue to turn to their home governments. 
"In really tough, high-risk, high-opportunity markets, a government will always have greater leverage for repayment than a bank," said William C. Lane, a Caterpillar executive in Washington. 
"You really have to have someone in your corner."
