
Ask Stan Shih about personal computers, the Internet or his native Taiwan, and he holds forth enthusiastically. 
Not for nothing is Mr. Shih, the voluble founder of the computer maker Acer, regarded as the head cheerleader and unofficial spokesman for corporate Taiwan.
But ask Mr. Shih whether he favors an independent Taiwan, and he turns monosyllabic. 
"No," he says, as his Cheshire-cat smile tightens.
Mr. Shih, 56, has good reason to be wary. 
As the chairman of one of Taiwan's biggest multinational corporations, he has major investments in mainland China. 
Since Taiwan elected Chen Shui-bian, a onetime supporter of independence, as president in March, being identified as a person who favors independence -- or who even seems to -- has become a sure way to derail one's prospects in China.
"I am always neutral in election campaigns," Mr. Shih said. 
"The fact is, President Chen appointed me as one of his advisers. 
I couldn't say no."
Mr. Shih says he did not even vote this year. 
Yet his advisory role looked awfully close to a vote of confidence. 
And worse, he appeared to be endorsing a man whose party espouses independence for Taiwan, which Beijing considers an inseparable part of Chinese territory.
The reaction of the Chinese government was swift and angry: it put out the word that Taiwan businessmen with ties to the new president or who favored independence for Taiwan were putting their China operations at risk. 
The statement was widely interpreted as a warning to Acer and Mr. Shih.
Stan Shih is one of several captains of industry here who have been caught in the treacherous political waters between Taipei and Beijing. 
Some, like the plastics tycoon Hsu Wen-lung, have been frank advocates of independence. 
Others, like Chang Yung-fa, a shipping magnate, are longtime supporters of Mr. Chen. Still others, like Mr. Shih, simply like to oblige future leaders.
For the first time, Beijing is scrutinizing the political beliefs of Taiwan's business leaders and warning those who stray from the official line that there is only one China. 
Political analysts say the crackdown could undermine the historic role of commerce as a bridge between Taiwan and China, binding the countries closer even when they diverge politically.
"In the last election, China came to realize that businessmen can play a very strong role in Taiwanese politics," Tien Hung-mao, Taiwan's foreign minister, said in an interview last month. 
"So China has begun politicizing the economic relationship between the two countries."
Mr. Tien worries that Taiwan business executives may be forced to take a loyalty oath to protect their investments in China. 
Those who refuse may become the targets of tax audits, surprise inspections and other forms of harassment by the Chinese government. 
In the worst case, some companies may be forced to leave China and take their capital and skills with them.
Since China opened its doors to Taiwan two decades ago, trade between the two has proved to be remarkably resistant to politics. 
In the first quarter of this year, while Beijing was threatening military action if Taiwan elected Mr. Chen, Taiwan exported $6.2 billion of goods to China, a 16 percent increase over 1999. 
It imported $1.3 billion, a 33 percent jump.
But Taiwan's investment in China is showing signs of weakness. 
While the amount of investment contracts rose 46 percent the first quarter, the actual volume of Taiwan money flowing into China declined 9.5 percent, to $420 million, according to China's Foreign Trade Ministry.
Experts say that could be an early barometer of trouble. 
Even investors like Mr. Shih, who were once wooed by Beijing to build factories with promises of tax breaks and reduced import duties, acknowledge they can no longer plow money into China without thinking twice.
"I have to be concerned," Mr. Shih said. 
"But I cannot control their opinion. 
If they welcome me, I will contribute to their country. 
If they don't welcome me, I have so many other things to do."
Mr. Shih is not as passive as he sounds. 
He traveled to a technology conference in Beijing in April, enduring a snub when high-level officials did not meet with him. 
And he plans to return in August to promote a new Web site, which features a series of lectures by him. 
By sharing his insights on entrepreneurialism with mainland students, Mr. Shih clearly hopes to mend fences.
Acer has a lot riding on Mr. Shih's charm offensive. 
Earlier this year, the company opened a $50 million factory in the province of Guangdong to make personal computers. 
Five more plants are on the drawing board. 
The company is also testing an Internet service in Shanghai. 
It hopes to roll out the service commercially, which would make it a pioneer in China's interactive communications business.
For Acer, China is the linchpin in its plans to become a global leader in the technology industry. 
Mr. Shih said that Taiwan, with 23 million people, was simply too small to supply it with enough workers or customers to compete with giant overseas rivals like Dell or I.B.M.
Acer is also struggling in the fiercely competitive American PC market. 
The company is counting on rapid growth in China to offset its tribulations in the United States. 
Mr. Shih believes that despite the political uncertainty, companies in Taiwan are still the best positioned to dominate the mainland market. 
Someday, he predicted, Taiwan and China will be parts of the same greater China.
"I don't know how long it will take," he said, "but sooner or later, after China becomes more competitive and self-confident, we will treat China as our home market."
Not everybody shares Mr. Shih's optimism. 
Dennis Chao, managing director of a Taiwan sportswear manufacturer, opened a plant in the southern city of Guangzhou in 1987. 
He said he was drawn by the Chinese government's promise of favorable treatment for Taiwan companies.
Seven years ago, however, Beijing stopped treating investors from Taiwan differently from other foreign investors. 
Mr. Chao, 48, said that losing breaks on import duties on machinery and raw materials has made it uneconomical for him to install new equipment or otherwise expand his factory, which employs 1,200 people.
Then, in the last month, the Chinese government warned Taiwan investors in the provinces of Guangdong and Fujian that they would be subject to unspecified sanctions if they advocated independence for Taiwan. 
Mr. Chao says he has studiously steered clear of politics. 
But he said such threats only added to China's reputation as an impossible place to do business.
"We're not enemies; we're all Chinese," Mr. Chao said. 
"It's enough to drive you crazy."
Some analysts said China's crackdown had been fueled by its irritation with a few high-profile personalities in Taiwan rather than any overall objection to where most business leaders stand on the issue. 
In particular, Beijing is angry with Hsu Wen-lung, the chairman of Chi Mei Industry, a petrochemical giant.
Mr. Hsu, whose company has six plants in China, staunchly supports Mr. Chen and has proclaimed his desire for an independent Taiwan. 
The Chinese government has subjected Chi Mei to numerous inspections and ordered state companies not to do business with it. 
It is the only known case of retaliation so far.
Experts said Beijing could play hardball with Mr. Hsu because it had a large and competitive domestic petrochemical industry.
"This is a policy of selective sanctions," said Andrew Yang, secretary general of the Chinese Council of Advanced Policy Studies, a research organization. 
"It is not a unified policy toward Taiwan companies."
For example, Mr. Yang said China would be unlikely to take Draconian steps against Acer, which, as a high-technology company, provides expertise and thousands of skilled jobs. 
Despite the contretemps with its founder, Acer has not lost its license to test Internet services in Shanghai.
Moreover, Mr. Shih is going out of his way to protest his political innocence. 
He says he hopes for the eventual reunification of Taiwan and China. 
In case there is any misunderstanding, he adds, "I also agree with the Chinese government's position that businessmen shouldn't support independence."
Analysts here say that Mr. Shih, who learned business by helping his mother sell duck eggs and stationery, was probably turned into more of a symbol than he ever wished during the election campaign.
"Stan Shih has been very conservative his whole life," said Antonio Chiang, the editor of The Taipei Times, an English-language newspaper that supports Mr. Chen. "But he is sympathetic to the cause of reform. 
Chen Shui-bian is the only one who can reform Taiwanese politics."
Other experts say Beijing does not pay attention to such subtleties. 
They believe the Chinese government is using commercial ties as a lever to subdue Taiwan. 
Beijing pursued a similar campaign with Hong Kong investors before the British colony reverted to Chinese rule in 1997.
In Hong Kong, even tycoons who had been knighted by Queen Elizabeth swore fealty to Beijing. 
Some experts say the mainland market's lure is so strong it will get similar allegiance from Taiwan's tycoons.
"In the early days, China relied heavily on Taiwanese investment, but now foreign investors from many countries are in China," said Liang Su-Yung, head of the Strait Peaceful Reunification Association, a pro-China lobbying group. 
"Taiwanese companies need China more than it needs them."
