
In the downtown area of almost every major Chinese city, the signs are now prominently displayed on store windows: open advertisements for pirated video compact disks of Hollywood movies that sell for less than $2 each.
In recent months, even new releases have become available all over China, as copyright pirates distribute their wares unchecked. 
"Titanic," as popular here as everywhere else, has been sold in Shanghai since late November, a month before its theatrical release in the United States.
After three years of cat-and-mouse enforcement of anti-piracy regulations, Chinese authorities have essentially given up efforts to prevent the sale of illegally copied videodisks, a new technology that has swept this country with remarkable speed.
The open sale of pirated movies signals a failure of the intellectual property rights agreement that China reached with the United States in 1995, pledging vigorous enforcement. 
Yet American officials, apparently slow to pick up on the change, have let the protection of intellectual property drift off their list of priorities as they prepare for President Clinton's visit to China in June.
Chinese authorities concede that enforcement has fallen off, but say there is little they can do about it, and American officials, when asked, acknowledge that they did not even know the problem had become so serious. 
The United States-China agreement remains in force on paper, though the effectiveness of other joint pacts could suffer if this one remains so badly neglected.
Paradoxically, industry executives say that the principal cause of the current boom in video compact disks stems from China's success in cracking down on copyright piracy a year ago, chasing pirates into Macau, the tiny Portuguese colony near Hong Kong. 
There is no copyright law in Macao, where it is easy to mass-produce movies, some copied from master tapes and others simply videotaped with a hand-held recorder in a screening room.
Roughly 500,000 pirated disks are now smuggled into China from Macao each day, estimates Cheng Ching-ming, who monitors piracy in China for the International Federation of Phonographic Industries, an organization representing the world's major music companies.
"The situation is out of control," Mr. Cheng said. 
"For movies, there has been a complete breakdown in enforcement. 
The authorities seem to have lost all interest in trying to prevent sales."
Mr. Cheng said China's customs officials pose little threat to copyright pirates, who easily bribed or sneaked past them. 
In Macao, where piracy is believed to be controlled by organized crime, no effort is being made to quell the booming industry.
Although industry executives estimate that American businesses lose more than $2 billion a year to piracy in China, it is impossible to accurately estimate how many Chinese customers would actually purchase nonpirated movies or music at a higher, legal price.
Yet the fast growth of pirated movies on such a vast scale is a reminder of the risks and unpredictable nature of business operations in China, where law enforcement remains highly political and combating wrongdoing requires both diplomatic pressure and creative solutions.
Piracy of musical compact disks is now not as rampant as that of movies, for instance, in part because Mr. Cheng's organization aggressively pursues violators in Chinese courts and in private negotiations, while the international film industry has been relatively passive.
Chinese authorities, while still officially committed to protecting copyrights, seem resigned to accepting piracy as a fact of life. 
Arguing that it makes little sense to go after retailers when producers of pirated movies are the real culprits, officials say there is now little they can do.
"We used to be able to locate the production, but now we can't," said Shen Wenping, a senior official at Shanghai's Industrial and Commercial Administration, responsible for anti-piracy efforts here. 
"It's very hard to control."
Joe Papovich, assistant United States trade representative in Washington, said he was unaware of the wide availability of pirated movies in China, but insisted that fighting piracy in China remained a long-term goal. 
He added that he knew that the center of production had moved to Macao and, to a lesser extent, to Hong Kong.
"We're trying to make contact with someone in Macao about this," Mr. Papovich said. 
"We're banging hard on Hong Kong."
The United States trade representative office, he said, depends on industry sources for information, and the Motion Picture Association, which is supposed to track movie piracy on behalf of Hollywood's major studios, has not made any complaints about it.
Michael Connors, the Motion Picture Association's chief representative in Asia, said he had not complained because he was unaware that the availability of pirated films had become so open. 
The Motion Picture Association, Mr. Connors said, has recently focused its efforts on helping Chinese customs officials detect smugglers, even though recent seizures of millions of disks represent a small fraction of what is smuggled into China each month.
"We don't have any complaints," said Mr. Connors, who is based in Singapore but spoke from Beijing, which he visits regularly. 
The Motion Picture Association says that pirated movies are a problem throughout the world and it recently set up a team of investigators in New York City to crack down on the problem there.
The boom in video compact disks, or VCD's, has transformed China's electronics industry with remarkable speed, shifting to embrace a technology that remains largely unknown to consumers in the United States. 
While VCD's were introduced at trade shows several years ago, they have not caught on, and appear likely to be bypassed by another format, digital videodisks, known as DVD's.
Video compact disks, the same size as music compact disks, typically contain up to 70 minutes of a movie on each disk, using two disks for a Hollywood feature. 
DVD's can capture far more information, covering more than one entire film per disk. 
In China, video cassettes are rapidly being replaced in the typical urban home by a video compact disk player, even faster than CD players replaced cassettes in the United States, both because it is a superior technology and because pirated movies are widely available at such a low price.
The boom in pirated movies also supports a home-grown industry of video compact disk makers, already so popular that domestic producers are expected to manufacture 50 million VCD players this year, up from about 30 million in 1997.
Although legitimate VCD's are sold in Chinese department stores for $5 to 10 each, smaller stores openly sell pirated movies for $2 or less in almost every Chinese city outside Beijing, Mr. Cheng said. 
His view is borne out by random visits to cities in northern and southern China.
On Nanchang Road in downtown Shanghai, a store called the Music Box has a sign on its window advertising VCD's for under $2, a price that store retailers readily acknowledge can only mean they were copied illegally.
"Of course they're pirated," said a middle-aged proprietor behind the counter at the Music Box, "Otherwise how could we sell them so cheap?"
The proprietor, who declined to give her name, said she used to keep pirated VCD's under the counter, taking them out only when a customer asked. 
But since last autumn, she said, Shanghai's copyright police had stopped coming around to check, so she has felt no fear.
"There's nothing wrong with selling pirated VCD's," she said. 
"My son loves watching them."
"Titanic" has been one of the best- selling VCD's at the Music Box, long before it is available for home viewing in the United States, and it is anyone's guess if "Titanic" will remain as popular after it appears in movie theaters in China on April 1.
When the United States trade representative, Charlene Barshefsky, signed a landmark intellectual property rights agreement with China in 1995, both sides promised to enforce anti-piracy provisions strictly with regular progress reports.
Yet trade talks between the United States and China have inevitably been an extension of diplomatic politics. 
When United States-China relations were strained in 1996, the Clinton Administration wanted to appear tough on China, and copyright piracy was an obvious lever to pull.
This year, as President Clinton prepares to come to China for a summit meeting in June, pressuring China on trade disputes has receded as a political priority, as has enforcing the intellectual property rights agreement. 
Mr. Papovich, the assistant trade representative, maintains that long after President Clinton departs, anti-piracy efforts will continue.
Yet without constant pressure, lawyers and industry executives agree, Chinese authorities are unlikely to exert much effort.
Only under the threat of billions of dollars of trade sanctions did Chinese officials begin to take the protection of intellectual property rights seriously, even though Chinese producers suffer from widespread piracy as much as Americans do.
Last year, local authorities in Guangdong, the southern province that had become a center of illegal copying, finally got tough on copyright pirates, closing down dozens of underground producers, as well as legal producers who were pirating movies and music during off hours.
Ever resourceful, pirates simply moved their operations across the border to Macao and Hong Kong.
Xu Guoji, a senior official in Shanghai's Industrial and Commercial Administration, said that Chinese authorities had been overwhelmed by the pirates' relentless efforts to take advantage of China's enormous market.
"The profits are so great, they will take any risk," Mr. Xu said. 
"They're like drug dealers. 
It is very difficult to arrange a crackdown. 
You have to coordinate all these different departments, the copyright publication department, the police, the Industrial and Commercial Administration.
"We take copyright violations very seriously," he went on. 
"But when it comes to copying a disk, most Chinese people don't see what's wrong."
