
China has replaced its top securities regulator, stock exchange officials and traders said today, prompting speculation that the Government will crack down further on the country's surging stock markets.
The regulator, Zhou Daojiong, was asked to resign as chairman of the Securities Regulatory Commission and will be succeeded temporarily by Zhou Zhengqing, now chairman of the Cabinet's securities committee, a senior official in the Stock Exchange Executive Council, who asked not to be identified, said. 
The securities committee oversees the regulatory commission.
Stock prices fell sharply in response to the change. 
Shanghai's index of class B shares, which foreigners are eligible to buy, tumbled 6.2 percent, its biggest decline in two months. 
In Shenzhen, the B-share index fell 4.3 percent.
The Shanghai and Shenzhen markets have been among the world's hottest this year, with class A shares, which domestic investors can buy, gaining more than 50 percent.
Since December, the authorities have tried to talk prices lower by warning investors of risks. 
This month, officials raised a tax on stock trading and increased the number of shares to be sold by state companies during 1997. 
Prices still rose.
Mr. Zhou was moved to the regulatory commission from the State Development Bank two years ago to help stabilize the securities markets. 
The securities industry was suffering from several scandals, including violations of trading rules by what was then the country's biggest brokerage firm, the Shanghai International Securities Company.
"He was brought in to bring stabilityI and calm, and he has brought a lot more order," said John Crossman, chief of Jardine Fleming Securities in Shanghai.
Nevertheless, with the Government still trying to rein in share prices, analysts had expected a change at the top of the regulatory commission.
Cao Hai, who works in the research and development department of Huaxia Securities, said the commission's work "has not been satisfactory," adding that "the State Council's Securities Committee wants to strengthen control over the stock market and securities industry."
Mr. Cao speculated that Mr. Zhou's departure would cause other changes, with the heads of the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets likely to be replaced.      
