
WARREN B. BAILEY is no J. Mark Mobius, the guru of emerging markets at the Franklin Templeton mutual funds.
But for the last seven years Mr. Bailey, an assistant professor of finance at the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell, has taken his own money to the front lines in Asian emerging markets. 
While most Americans who dare to invest in these places do so by popping a check into the corner mailbox, Mr. Bailey, 38, is often in Asia -- checking out a fast-food company's wares in Manila, for example, or buying stock in Tsingtao, the Chinese brewer, on its first day of trading in Hong Kong.
In this interview, Mr. Bailey maps out his approach to Asian emerging markets, appraises the recent turbulence there and describes some of his successes and failures. 
His basic advice to wannabe emerging-markets investors: "Have a strong stomach and no ego."
Mr. Bailey had an initial stake of $24,000 in the market, added a few thousand dollars each year and says the holdings are now worth $70,000 to $80,000.
But now he gets a chance to start anew: for personal reasons that have nothing to do with the recent tumult in Asia, he plans to liquidate the portfolio shortly. 
However, he will resume his do-it-yourself investing style in Asia's developing lands soon.
Q. Tell us a little about yourself and your experience in investing.
A. I was born in Brooklyn, went to Cornell, got an M.B.A. at McGill and a doctorate at U.C.L.A. 
My first teaching job was at Ohio State in 1986. 
I've been at Cornell since 1991, and was tenured three years ago.
I collected and dealt in coins as a kid, but I didn't buy my first stock until after the 1987 crash and after I had read Peter Lynch's book, "One Up on Wall Street."
Then I invested in a few domestic stocks.
Q. Do you own any American stocks now?
A. I have about $40,000 to $50,000 in consumer stocks like McDonald's and Pepsi and a strong interest in oil companies, particularly those that produce in secure areas.
Q. How did you get interested in Asia?
A. I made my first trip to Thailand in 1984 when I was a grad student, and I was amazed at how industrious the people were. 
And then, about seven years ago, I recognized that certain academic problems, like political and currency risk, were best studied with data from nontraditional markets.
At about the same time, I left Ohio State and found myself with about $24,000 in pension money. 
I could have rolled it over into another pension fund or taken it out and started a brokerage account.
I chose to be adventurous instead. 
Most of these Asian countries have laid the groundwork for good, safe, long-term investing, while also offering the opportunities that exist in places that are not fully developed.
The timing of the move was great, because Saddam Hussein was getting comfortable in Kuwait about then. 
It was a time of great pessimistic sentiment, and I bought four blue-chip stocks in Singapore, one in Malaysia and one in Hong Kong and said let's start with this.
Since then my teaching and investing activities in Asia have proceeded in parallel.
Q. Do you use an American broker?
A. No, I use a foreign broker, except for the Asian stocks that trade here as A.D.R.'s. 
But anyone with a sizable portfolio, say $500,000 or more, can get their American broker to do it, and some American firms will do these trades for smaller accounts.
When I first decided to invest the money myself, I sent faxes to brokerages in Singapore and Jakarta, asking them what I needed to do. 
I got a lot of funny, handwritten notes and unintelligible responses. 
I got one from a brokerage in Jakarta that said to wire them the money and they will fill out the forms later. 
Yeah, right.
Some time later I was at a conference talking about my situation with an Indonesian official involved in securities regulation. 
He pulled out a card and said: "This is my uncle's business card. 
He is a broker -- why don't you call him?"
I took the card, said thank you and walked away real fast.
Anyway, I ended up going with a Singaporean broker attached to a respected bank as my main broker in the region.
Q. Have you had a problem getting orders filled at the prices you wanted?
A. Brokers in former British colonies operate under strict rules, and you are not likely to get ripped off. 
The only place I ever had a problem was in Jakarta, when I was trading very thinly traded stocks in very small amounts. 
But it wasn't clear if I was being ripped off or if I was merely paying for the liquidity that was being supplied.
Q. What is your investment strategy?
A. It is based on two principles. 
The first, my Peter Lynch principle, is to find a company that seems to have a sensible product, seems to do a good job and could benefit from economic growth.
Second, most professional managers have built-in impatience. 
If you ask a fund manager today if he thinks Thailand is going to stink forever, he will say "of course not," but he is going to be evaluated on performance three months from now.
I try to combine those principles: find things that make sense and buy them when others will not or cannot. 
And I have had some successes and some failures.
I found a good company when I went to Manila in 1995. 
I was told that Jollibee Foods, a Philippine fast-food company, is even more popular than McDonald's with the locals. 
It is a combination of McDonald's and Kentucky Fried Chicken and it follows an aggressive "value pricing" strategy.
I took a look at the restaurants and bought some shares in nominee or street name, because foreigners can't buy Philippine shares. 
That is a big game in Asia. 
You can pretty much avoid ownership restrictions if you are willing to trust your broker.
Q. What about failures?
A. So far my approach has not worked well in China. 
In 1993 I bought shares in Tsingtao, the beer company, on the first day it was offered on the Hong Kong exchange. 
I read the prospectus and it did not seem grossly overpriced. 
But I did not find out until later that even though they have a good product, the company hasn't built good distribution networks. 
The stock has been on a roller-coaster ride ever since I bought it.
Lack of information has also hurt me with Brilliance China Automotive, a mini-bus maker and the first Chinese company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock did well to begin with, because people were looking at the vehicle market in China. 
But the vehicles they turn out are not any good, and no one is pressuring them to do better. 
The stock went public at $16 and went as high as about $34. 
I bought at $26, thinking I was clever. 
The stock fell as low as $5, and is now $9.75.
When people ask me what I like in China, I tell them I would like to buy a 30-year call option -- something that pays off if the underlying instrument goes up -- on China's gross national product. 
At the moment, there is no equivalent of 3M, Intel or McDonald's to buy there that represents an honest piece of that economy.
Q. How do you get your ideas?
A. I spend two to four weeks in Asia every six to nine months. 
I do research and am surrounded by students who want to hear about it. 
I get phone calls and E-mails from former students who are living in the region. 
And I read The Economist and The Far Eastern Economic Review every week.
Q. What are your thoughts about the recent turbulence in Asian emerging markets?
A. These are not situations where whole societies and economies are collapsing. 
In Asia there are a lot of very solid economies with basically well-run governments that are just screwing up right now.
There has been an unfortunate spillover, too, with Malaysia getting painted with the Thai brush, but that is how markets work. 
People who are imperfectly informed rationally overreact to protect themselves. 
It is almost ridiculous for the Malaysian ringgit to be so cheap, because it implies so many bargains in stocks, real estate, vacations. 
I am going to be spending a lot of money next summer, or perhaps over the winter, in the region.
Q. Any tips for neophytes on picking stocks?
A. I would ask which industry typifies the country's promise. 
And then I would try and identify a solid company in that industry. 
In Singapore, look for financial services and shipping companies, for example. 
In Indonesia, look for natural resources companies.
Q. What advice would you give to people who are thinking about investing on their own in Asia, or in emerging markets generally?
A. Have patience, a sense of humor and a trustworthy broker. 
Buy safe, big companies that make sense, hold them for a long time and buy them when everyone else is afraid. 
Have a strong stomach, and no ego.
And travel to the region. 
When I went to China for the first time in 1992, I crossed by land from Hong Kong, and found that it was like going into Mexico from Tijuana. 
There were no threatening soldiers; if anything, it was extremely friendly. 
And it punctured any notion I had of a highly authoritarian state. 
Had I not done that in person I would not be comfortable investing there.
