
China said today that it would not respond to international appeals for the release of the country's most famous political prisoner, Wei Jingsheng, who has been detained without charges for a year.
Chen Jian, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said at a news conference that the arrest of Mr. Wei on April 1, 1994, was a matter of "China's internal affairs."
He refused to say whether Mr. Wei was alive.
"If I answer you," Mr. Chen said, "you might quickly follow up with a question on his health."
Mr. Wei, 45, was released in September 1993 after 14 1/2 years in prison and has become the symbol of China's repressed democracy movement. 
During his six months of freedom, Mr. Wei spoke frequently and publicly about the need for political reform in China and called on the Government to free thousands of political prisoners.
His activities captured the attention of the Clinton Administration. 
In February 1994, the State Department's top human rights official, John H. F. Shattuck, met privately with Mr. Wei, angering Chinese officials, who detained Mr. Wei again a little more than a month later.
China also has indefinitely postponed discussions on allowing officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross access to Chinese prisons and political prisoners. 
In January, Chinese officials had told Mr. Shattuck that detailed talks would resume at the end of March.
"There's nothing," a Red Cross official said. 
"The Chinese find themselves unavailable even though these dates have been suggested by them."
Beginning in November 1993, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said China was willing to undertake serious discussions with the Red Cross over access to political prisoners. 
But the talks have suffered from frequent delays.
A senior Chinese prison official said recently that he considered it "impossible" that China would allow Red Cross investigators unfettered access to its prisons.
The statement on Mr. Wei and the postponement of the Red Cross talks is part of China's overall retrenchment on rights since May, when President Clinton decided no longer to use the threat of trade sanctions to pressure China to improve its human rights record. 
Previously, the United States had been able to warn China that without some progress, Washington would withdraw "most favored nation" trade privileges, which amount to minimal tariffs on Chinese exports to the United States.
Since reversing that policy, Clinton Administration officials have expressed frequent disappointment over China's failure to respond to Mr. Clinton's gesture.
Western diplomats and rights organizations believe Mr. Wei is being held in a guesthouse by the Chinese security services. 
He is not allowed to communicate with his family.
