
This week at the Great Hall of the People, Chinese leaders threatened military action against Taiwan, warning that China "would not sit idly by" if the island it claims as its own moved toward formal independence.
But it was business as usual here at the Purple Vine, an elegant Taiwan-style teahouse run by a businessman from Taipei that is snuggled between the Great Hall and China's leadership compound -- and counts many mainland officials as loyal customers.
"The political tension hasn't had the slightest impact on me," said Zha Fuhua, the owner, as he carefully choreographed the preparation of oolong tea, a Taiwanese favorite.
"Sure there's been lots of angry talk," he said, "but I think it's just mouthing off. 
I'm not the least bit worried. 
I don't think war is possible, because there's too much to lose. 
The essence of the relationship between China and Taiwan is economic development, not battle."
It might be easy to imagine that Beijing's tens of thousands of residents from Taiwan live a bizarre existence, members of a divided family in the heart of the enemy camp. 
There are occasional vexations: enduring an occasional cabbie's harangue about the need to bomb Taiwan into submission, and wondering how to respond when a teenage son is invited to join the Communist Youth League.
But most Taiwanese here say they are happy and feel at home in China, living with a language and culture that they for the most part understand. 
They are mostly small-business people, and they blend in well with Beijing's increasingly affluent middle class. 
They have Chinese neighbors and Chinese business partners, and they often send their children to Chinese schools.
And so with only days to go before the Taiwan presidential election, which has prompted Beijing's most recent saber rattling, Taiwanese here seem largely oblivious to the arrows flying above them in political space, convinced that business interests and brotherhood will somehow ensure the peace.
"We're all used to this kind of talk by now, and it's not something that impacts us greatly," said Lin Yen-hung, the manager of a cooking oil company on the outskirts of Beijing, who has lived here for eight years.
Taiwan's government relaxed its ban on citizens' contacts with the mainland in 1987, and an estimated 60,000 Taiwan companies now operate directly or indirectly in China, according to the Beijing Association of Taiwanese Entrepreneurs.
At least several hundred thousand people from Taiwan now live in the People's Republic, the overwhelming number of them business people drawn by the opportunities of its fast-growing market.
In Beijing they are sprinkled throughout the city and integrated into the community.
"We express our views in an appropriate way, but in general we avoid the topic of reunification," said Chen Kuo-yuen, who owns a cafe and a leather goods factory. 
"Business is business and politics is politics. 
But our relationship with the mainland community is extremely close."
He pointed to his cafe, filled with Chinese business people having power lunches on glass-topped tables enclosing seaside dioramas evocative of Taiwan. 
"My customers are Beijingers," he said. 
"My partner's from here too. 
If I tried to do it myself I'd be quickly shut down."
The many business relationships that have evolved in recent years have various roots. 
Taiwan business people want to make money. 
The Chinese partners have benefited from the managerial and technical skills the Taiwanese bring. 
And the Chinese government, which has established special concessions for Taiwanese businesses, believes that such ties will help reel the island, separated from the mainland since 1949, into the fold.
Although Taiwan and mainland figures differ, by both accounts Taiwanese trade and investment here are growing fast. 
Bilateral trade amounted to $14.045 billion in the first seven months of 1999, a 9 percent increase over the comparable period in 1998, according to Taiwan's figures. 
In 1998 there was nearly $3 billion in direct investment from Taiwan to the mainland, according to the China Statistical Yearbook.
But that probably vastly underestimates the magnitude of Taiwanese involvement, Mr. Chen said, since many Taiwanese invest in China through a third region, like Hong Kong. 
And he said there was also a good deal of "invisible" investment, including his own cafe, in which money is invested in the name of a mainland partner, since, strictly speaking, it is illegal for a foreigner to own that type of business in China.
Taiwanese here say the advantages of doing business in a familiar culture and language far outweigh the somewhat daunting prospect of dealing with a Communist bureaucracy, one that spends vast amounts of time and effort maligning the leaders of their island home.
"When I first came to the mainland in 1992, I felt some terror toward the Communist Party," said Mr. Lin, of the Tongyi Edible Oil Company. 
"But I easily became accustomed to how things work here, and I think it's because we share many habits and customs."
And so in the last few years, Taiwanese have continued to rush in.
People were far more nervous in 1996, when China fired missiles near Taiwan during the last presidential election campaign, the Taiwanese here say. 
Then, tens of billions of dollars left Taiwan in one week and many Taiwanese, including Mr. Zha, the teahouse owner, started making preparations for their families to emigrate to the West.
But today the atmosphere is far more relaxed, they say, in part because of increasing communication and familiarity between the two sides. 
Last year tourists from Taiwan made more than 2.5 million visits to the mainland, up from about 500,000 a decade before.
"Three years ago if you got in a taxi and revealed you were from Taiwan, the driver would start ranting," said Mr. Zha, who moved to coastal China to start a seaweed business in 1987. 
"But there are so many Taiwanese here now that there's more contact and communication, so there's also more understanding."
"Generally people don't bring it up," he said. 
"And anyway, if people ask, 'Where are you from?'
I say, 'Jiangxi,' " the southern Chinese province where his ancestors lived.
In general it is easy for Taiwanese to live a life of "strategic ambiguity" by avoiding political discussions -- an easy maneuver in a country where the ruling Communist Party now has little obvious direct influence on everyday life. 
Still, there are times when they feel forced to show their colors. 
Mr. Lin said his teenage son grappled this year with whether to accept an invitation to join the Communist Youth League, a group that most teenagers join as much for its social as its political function. 
(He didn't.)
And on the first day of school, Mr. Lin's 6-year-old son found himself onstage being introduced by the principal, who proceeded to lecture the students about the inevitability of Taiwan's return to the motherland.
Mr. Zha said his in-laws visiting from Taiwan in the mid-1990's were horrified when his son, then 5 years old, spoke fondly of Mao Zedong, referring to him as "Uncle Mao."
The boy now lives in Taiwan with his mother, but mostly because life in Beijing is "too hard" compared with Taiwan, Mr. Zha said.
Taiwanese cannot cast ballots from the mainland, but those in Beijing appear split among the three leading presidential candidates, just like Taiwanese voters at home.
And on the question of Taiwan independence, most seem to favor the status quo, something resembling independence without a formal declaration. 
Some predict reunification with the mainland at some point in the distant future, and all reject a quick bid for independence as too damaging for business.
The Chinese government, "from top to bottom," has guaranteed Taiwan businessmen here that "Taiwanese business wouldn't be affected by political tension, that there can be no threats or personal threats to business people here," said Mr. Chen, the cafe owner and general secretary of the Beijing Association of Taiwanese Entrepreneurs, which frequently meets with local and national leaders.
Still, he said, the question of reunification is difficult for people like him, whose loyalties are split.
"The vast majority of business people here would oppose any move to independence," he said, "because it would immediately bring threats from the mainland. 
But at the same time, they also oppose pressure from the mainland."
Then he added, with an apologetic look, "I know that's a cautious answer, but under the circumstances it's the best I can give."
