
When Japan fired warning shots at suspicious boats that ventured into its territorial waters last month, it was the clearest signal to date that this staunchly pacifist country is taking its gloves off.
There is a new willingness to assume a public role in regional defense that Japan has long shunned because of its militarist past and the fears of neighbors it once threatened.
Japanese legislators are openly talking about once-taboo possibilities such as building first-strike capabilities and putting Japanese troops in peacekeeping operations that would expose them to combat. 
There are plans to buy new weapons, and there is a heated debate about loosening restrictions on Japan's military support for the United States in the region. 
There is a renewed sense of vulnerability, too, about threats from North Korea and even China.
"The Government has gained the confidence and courage to speak out about the need for a strong defense, and that's a very big change," said Kenzo Yoneda, a legislator from the governing Liberal Democratic Party who has taken a leading role in pushing for Japanese forces to gain first-strike capability. 
"The taboo on the discussion of defense is fading."
The issues of defense and, more broadly, what defines the Japanese nation, are now being debated broadly and heatedly. 
"We are increasingly concerned as a nation that our basic defense system is inadequate," Mr. Yoneda said.
The Government has authorized the purchase of four sophisticated reconnaissance satellites for deployment by 2002, and despite China's strenuous objections, it has agreed to pay a significant part of the research and development expenses related to building a missile defense system for the region.
Discussions are under way about plans to buy aircraft able to refuel planes in midflight and to outfit assault ships with decks that would allow helicopters and Harrier-type aircraft to land in mid-sea.
The opposition Democratic Party, normally somewhat dovish, has established a study group to come up with a policy on North Korea that is likely to include proposals for strengthening Japan's defense.
For most of Japan's postwar years, Article 9 of the Constitution, which forbids all military activity except self-defense, was sacrosanct. 
Now talk about changing it has evolved from the demands of a handful of right-wing legislators to a serious give-and-take that many feel may eventually lead to amendment.
"There's been a real move away from what might be considered a pure hedgehog defense," said Richard J. Samuels, an expert on Japanese defense matters and head of the Japan program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"In full public view, there's this whole set of measures that the Japanese Government is taking -- sometimes with America's support, sometimes at its request and sometimes despite its consternation -- to shift away from a strictly defensive defense."
To be sure, there is still a great deal of traditional ambivalence surrounding the subject of the military here, where many still harbor memories of the imperialistic militarism that brought Japan into World War II and made it the scourge of its neighbors. 
That ambivalence is reflected in the debate under way in Parliament over revisions to the military guidelines that govern cooperation between Japanese and American forces in the region, forcing Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi and others to hint that they may have to water down the proposed changes to get them passed.
As they stand, the revisions would enable the Self-Defense Forces, Japan's army, to support American troops in "areas surrounding Japan," as well as offer logistical support, search-and-rescue operations and inspections of suspect ships. 
In other words, if sparks fly in the Taiwan Strait or between North and South Korea, Japanese forces would be required to play a substantial supporting role.
More than 45,000 American troops are stationed in Japan, including an aircraft carrier and a Marine division, but the old guidelines are sketchy on Japan's obligations to support those troops in the event of a military crisis in the region.
Americans regard the changes as long overdue, an effort to make Japan shoulder responsibility for its own defense.
But many Japanese consider the changes a sign of the waning American interest in attending to Japan's defense concerns now that the cold war is over. 
If Japan becomes more militarily powerful, the argument goes, it will force the United States to stay involved in the region, if only to keep an eye on what the Japanese are doing.
"China and North Korea are not really the direct cause of the increased interest in enhancing defense capabilities," said Masanori Nishi, an official at the Defense Facilities Administration Agency. 
"They're a type of reasonable excuse."
"The real worry is that the American commitment or the logic behind the American participation in the maintaining regional stability is shaky, that it's necessary to encourage and support American interest in the Far East," he said.
North Korea is helping in that effort. 
The two ships the Japanese chased this week are believed to have been sent by North Korea, which has become increasingly bellicose.
In August, North Korea sent a projectile known as the Taepodong soaring toward Tokyo. 
It ultimately landed in the Pacific Ocean, but it riveted the attention of the Japanese public on the issue of defense in a way that little else has.
In that sense, the Taepodong was the biggest boon that proponents of a stronger Japanese military policy have had in years. 
Former Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, regarded as one of the more hawkish members of Japan's political elite, has even joked privately that he is so grateful for that incident that he half considered sending Kim Jong Il, the North Korean leader, a present for his birthday this year.
How much of a threat the Taepodong posed to Japan remains in question. 
The North Koreans contend that it involved a satellite launching, a contention supported by American intelligence but countered by Japan.
Some of Japan's moves, though, have alarmed its neighbors. 
The Chinese Government strenuously objects to Japan's planned investment in a missile defense system, which is likely to cast its umbrella over Taiwan, and was angry about recent remarks by a senior Japanese politicians suggesting that the revised guidelines would include China and Taiwan.
South Korea, too, has misgivings, although it also shares with Japan concerns about North Korea.
Some Japanese are also concerned, pointing to the similarities between Japan's current economic woes and a depression in the early 1930's, which was brought to an end in 1935 by a rise of militarism that pulled the economy out of its slump, fueled a brutal, regional imperialism and ultimately led Japan into World War II.
The parallels are immediately dismissed by those who note that the Government would have to invest vast sums of money and overcome overwhelmingly negative public sentiment to achieve a buildup even remotely similar to that of the early Showa era.
"That's nonsense," Motoo Shina, a legislator known for his interest in defense matters, said of the comparison of eras. 
He said Japanese business and financial interests were too widespread now to allow the country to embark on a military adventure on anything like the scale it did in the past. 
"Look at our current army," he said. 
"Probably we'd even have trouble occupying Guam."
Nonetheless, the Government recently said the four reconnaissance satellites it intends to have in place by 2002 would be made by Japanese manufacturers from Japanese components, which suggests that there might be at least a bit of an economic element to the current hawkish noises emanating from Japan. 
American defense manufacturers often rely on components made abroad.
Others say Japan's military abilities are already more substantial xthan many people realize. 
Even though Japan has officially spent no more than 1 percent of its gross domestic product on defense since the 1960's, the sheer size of its economy means that it is the second- or third-biggest spender after the United States. 
Most experts contend that its real spending levels are obscured by the practice of deferring payments for weapons systems, shifts in exchange rates and the difficulty in assessing how much the private sector is investing in de facto defense production.
"If you look at Japanese defense issues from year to year, it doesn't change much; it's pretty boring," said Masashi Nishihara, a professor at the National Defense Academy. 
"But if you look at it over a five-year period, there's a big difference. 
No one has paid much attention to it until last summer, but now that people are looking, they've found out a lot has changed."
