
In a diplomatically sensitive case, the Justice Department is nearing a decision on whether to indict one of China's most powerful state-owned corporations, law-enforcement officials and lawyers say.
Some career prosecutors in the department have recommended the indictment of the corporation, Catic, an aerospace giant, on charges of buying American machining equipment for civilian use in 1994 and diverting some of it to a military plant, the officials and lawyers said.
The equipment was sold to the Chinese by McDonnell Douglas, now part of The Boeing Company, which has also been under criminal investigation for possible violations of American export laws.
But the current chill in relations between Beijing and Washington and Congressional scrutiny of the case has complicated the decision. 
Law-enforcement officials said they were unaware of any previous case in which the United States had indicted a Chinese government entity on the scale of Catic, the China National Aero-Technology Import Export Corporation.
Catic agreed with the Justice Department last month to extend the deadline for filing charges, the officials and lawyers said. 
It was five years ago that McDonnell Douglas applied for a Commerce Department license to sell the machining equipment to Catic, which buys and sells civilian aerospace technology.
Since the extension, the parties have been in a "continuing dialogue," and Catic has discussed the possibility of paying a civil penalty to resolve the case, one lawyer said.
Barbara Van Gelder, Catic's lawyer in Washington, said today that "we are exploring a settlement with the Justice Department and the Commerce Department."
The Commerce Department can impose civil penalties for violations of export control laws and could bar Catic and its affiliates from future export licenses if the company was criminally convicted of export control violations.
Larry McCracken, a spokesman for Boeing, which bought McDonnell Douglas in 1997, said, "We're cooperating but we don't want to get into the details at this point."
A Justice Department spokesman had no comment on the investigation.
Catic has ample incentive to resolve the case without risking its fate with an American jury at a time of strained Chinese-American relations.
The sale of machining equipment was part of a billion-dollar jetliner deal in 1994 in which McDonnell Douglas was to build aircraft in China. 
At the time, the aircraft deal was promoted by President Clinton and Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown as a centerpiece of the Administration's commercial diplomacy, the policy of using economic engagement to broaden ties with Beijing and promote exports.
But within a few months of the announcement of the deal, McDonnell Douglas discovered that some of the equipment it sold to China had been sent 800 miles from Beijing to a military facility in Nanchang that makes missiles and fighter aircraft. 
And though the 1994 deal announced by President Clinton called for the building of 20 planes, a Boeing spokesman said today that China would build only 1 or 2 planes with the company.
A conviction of Catic could further strain relations between the countries and curb other American exports to China, officials said.
Moreover, the Administration's policy of promoting exports to China now faces serious challenge in Congress. 
Last week a select Congressional committee's report on transfers of sensitive American technology to China concluded that American export control policies had tilted too much toward commerce at the expense of national security.
The committee, headed by Representative Christopher Cox, Republican of California, said the machining equipment deal was a case study in how China "will attempt diversions when it suits its interests."
The committee's unanimous report also found that Catic had played a central role in China's drive to acquire technology with civilian and military uses and that on several occasions Catic had "misrepresented the proposed uses of military useful U.S. technology."
The Clinton Administration prevented the committee from disclosing further details.
In addition, Justice Department officials blocked the committee from disclosing 1994 cables that showed how Administration officials delayed seeking timely assurances from Catic on how it planned to use the machining equipment so as not to disrupt Mr. Brown's announcement in China of the McDonnell Douglas aircraft deal, officials familiar with the report said.
The Commerce Department received an assurance from Catic after Mr. Brown left China but it left unanswered the question of exactly where the machining equipment would be located, according to excerpts from a Sept. 
13, 1994, cable included in the Cox committee report.
On Sept. 
14 the department approved the export of the machining equipment -- some of it more than a decade old, including machine tools to shape and bend large aircraft parts -- for use in Beijing as part of the McDonnell Douglas project to build aircraft in China.
The license included some last-minute additions to allay concerns raised by the Pentagon. 
In August, the Defense Intelligence Agency warned that the Chinese did not really need the equipment for the civilian aircraft deal but that "an advanced machine tool facility presents a unique opportunity for Chinese military aerospace facilities to access advanced equipment which otherwise might be denied," the Cox report said.
Commerce Department officials said the licensing conditions that were added led to a discovery by McDonnell Douglas in 1995 that some of the equipment had wound up at the Nanchang military complex. 
The equipment was eventually moved to a civilian location in China.
The Commerce Department began an investigation seven months after the discovery of the diversion. 
The discovery and recovery illustrate, Commerce officials say, that their enforcement system works.
The case was also referred to the Customs Service and the Justice Department. 
In 1996, a Federal grand jury began examining whether Catic and McDonnell Douglas had complied with export control laws.
By last September, prosecutors in the office of the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia had completed a lengthy memorandum recommending charges against both Catic and McDonnell Douglas, according to law-enforcement officials.
But then the lead prosecutor in the case left the Government. 
Over the next several months other prosecutors reviewed the case and asked the Customs Service to continue its investigation, officials said.
During the subsequent review, some lawyers basically concurred with the original memorandum while others raised questions, including some reservations about the strength of the case against McDonnell Douglas, which is said to rely more on circumstantial evidence, officials and lawyers said.
It is not known whether the Justice Department has given final approval to seek any indictments from the grand jury.
 
      
