
An influential senior House Democrat from New York signaled today that he is leaning in favor of a decisive China trade bill, as the measure's supporters and opponents geared up for a furious week of lobbying before next week's scheduled vote.
Representative Charles B. Rangel, the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a telephone interview that he is still officially undecided on a measure to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.
But then Mr. Rangel challenged several of the opponents' main arguments. 
"I don't understand why labor would make this their litmus test on human rights or give a priority to human rights in China when there are so many problems in the U.S.," he said.
On the question of whether the World Trade Organization could adequately police Chinese trade violations once Beijing joined the international body, as is expected, Mr. Rangel said, "If we have no leverage in the W.T.O., what do we do?"
Organized labor and the Clinton administration have heavily courted Mr. Rangel, in part because they believe he may influence the votes of at least two other members of the Congressional Black Caucus, Gregory W. Meeks of New York and Eva M. Clayton of North Carolina.
Mr. Rangel said he still wanted to discuss the measure with fellow Democrats on the Ways and Means Committee before the panel meets on Wednesday to vote on the measure. 
Approval by the pro-trade committee is considered all but certain.
One factor Mr. Rangel said he is weighing is how the China vote will affect labor's support for Democrats in the November elections. 
If Democrats reclaim the House, Mr. Rangel would become the committee's first black chairman. 
"We need labor's enthusiastic support," Mr. Rangel said.
And in a significant lift for the Clinton administration today, the United States International Trade Commission voted to levy punitive anti-dumping duties on apple juice concentrate imports from China. 
The administration is trying to convince lawmakers that it can regulate trade with China to make sure that American producers are not swamped by Chinese imports produced at prices deemed below cost.
The 5-0 ruling by the trade commission imposes a 52 percent duty on Chinese apple juice concentrate. 
It backs up a ruling by the Commerce Department, which determined last month that China was selling the juice concentrate in the American market for about half of what it cost to produce.
At the White House today, the spokesman Joe Lockhart said President Clinton will hold individual meetings this week with many of the undecided lawmakers -- about 25 to 30 in both the Democratic and Republican camps -- and step up a campaign that has involved Mr. Clinton, Vice President Gore and Cabinet members who are calling wavering legislators.
Mr. Meeks has already felt the brunt of the lobbying onslaught. 
The freshman Democrat said he heard Mr. Clinton's most persuasive arguments while he and a handful of other uncommitted lawmakers flew aboard Air Force One last week after the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor. 
But labor leaders have also buttonholed Mr. Meeks, whose district includes Kennedy International Airport.
"It's been intense," Mr. Meeks told Reuters. 
"Any number of labor leaders have called and continue to call, even when I was at Cardinal O'Connor's funeral. 
There were a few labors who came up to me and said, 'We need your vote. 
We want to talk to you some more.'
"
Many state governors are also turning up the pressure, including the Republican governor of Massachusetts, Paul Cellucci, who is lobbying three undecided House Democrats from his state: Martin T. Meehan, Richard E. Neal and Edward J. Markey.
Ratcheting up pressure from business groups, the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday will launch a new radio campaign targeting about 10 undecided and opposed lawmakers.
Opponents also planned a week of rallies and counter-advertising campaigns. 
Representative John Baldacci, a Maine Democrat, said today he would vote against the measure "absent serious and substantive" parallel legislation that permits Congressional oversight of China's compliance with trade and other international agreements.      
