
When Lee Young Sun was pregnant for the second time, she secretly paid a doctor to learn the sex of the fetus. 
He told her she would have a girl, and she took off with her family on a vacation in misery.
She and her husband already had a daughter, and after considering the issue very carefully, they reached their decision. 
Mrs. Lee went to the doctor and had an abortion.
"I suggested it to my husband, and now I feel differently, but at that time, I felt driven to think that an abortion was necessary," said Mrs. Lee, 35. 
"My husband says that he doesn't need a son. 
But when I ask him, 'Will it be good to have a son?' he keeps silent. 
In that case, I assume his answer is yes."
Echoing the contradictions of her generation, Mrs. Lee was torn between the demands of tradition and a growing appreciation for females in Korean society. 
She happily had another daughter later, but even as greater numbers of women like her stand by their baby girls, they also feel an age-old obligation to bear sons.
So they secretly abort fetuses of females, and try again.
South Korea has 30,000 fewer girls born each year than would be the case if there were no such abortions. 
That compares with 330,000 girls born each year, suggesting that about one female fetus in 12 is aborted because of its sex. 
China, India and other countries have also discovered that expectant mothers are aborting female fetuses, resulting in shortages of women and girls in society.
In this country of 45 million people, there are nearly 116 boys born for every 100 girls, one of the highest such ratios of any country in the world. 
The only comparable figure is in China, where 118.5 boys are born for every 100 girls, according to a nationwide survey by the Chinese Government in 1992. 
The survey so shocked officials in Beijing that they never formally released the results.
In other countries of all races and income levels where data are reliable, the ratio is 105 or 106 boys born for every 100 girls. 
As boys tend to die earlier, that ratio becomes one to one when the boys and girls grow up. 
But in some regions of South Korea, the figure has soared to as high as 125.
Except in rare cases, abortions are illegal in South Korea, and disclosing the sex of a fetus is also against the law. 
But that is very hard to police, and doctors are said to often disclose the sex of a fetus in exchange for a bribe.
In South Korea, the pressure to have sons often comes from women themselves, particular mothers-in-law, and some women feel that they have failed their husbands if they have not produced a male heir.
When Lee Tae Rim, 29, gave birth to her daughter, everyone in the family seemed happy. 
But soon after, her mother-in-law began to mutter that it was a shame the child was not a boy. 
Then Mrs. Lee became pregnant again and had a son.
"My mother-in-law called up my sister-in-law three times to tell her it was a boy!" exclaimed Mrs. Lee, who stays at home to care for her two children. 
"Soon after I delivered my son, my parents-in-law moved us into a larger apartment. 
They figured that we needed an extra room for the baby boy."
Since 1994, aborting female fetuses has been a criminal act, but it has also been a common one. 
The Government has been trying to crack down on underground abortion doctors, and it arrested several doctors in October for disclosing the sex of fetuses.
That adds to the pressure on expectant mothers, whose fears are sometimes groundless.
"It makes women very nervous, especially if they are married to the first son in a line of first sons, and if she doesn't have a boy, she may fear she will be divorced," said Kwak Bae Hee, who helps run the Korea Legal Aid Center for Family Relations. 
"Say a family has no son and only a daughter, who gets married. 
Then from the family's point of view, when the father dies, the family dies with him."
Traditional pressures were spinning around in the head of Park Un Hee, a 28-year-old pregnant woman who appeared distraught as she waited for her doctor's appointment at a Seoul hospital.
"The doctor won't say, but I hope it is a son," said Mrs. Park, who has a 2-year-old daughter and during her pregnancy has seen rising expectations from her in-laws. 
"They don't say it openly, but I know they want a son."
"Sometimes they tell me that the way I walk reveals the sex of the fetus, and sometimes they comment on the shape of my body," Mrs. Park added, a bit dejectedly. 
"From all the comments, I think it's another daughter."
Mrs. Park says she is already planning to have another child if this one is a girl.
"This country is a male-dominated country," said Lee Sea Baick, a demographer at Seoul National University. 
"We look down on women. 
This concept comes from Confucianism. 
And we can't develop women's status without destroying some traditional Confucianism."
Most Korean women do not pursue careers, and professional opportunities for them are very limited.
In the 1970's, according to Mr. Lee, survey data showed that 27 percent of Korean women allowed their husbands to have concubines if they could not bear sons themselves. 
That is no longer true, and concubines have disappeared.
In 1990, the Government legally removed discrimination against women in property inheritance, and it has banned companies from recruiting employees with "males only" advertisements.
Still, favoritism toward sons persists, particularly in marriage. 
Though mores are modernizing, Korean sons have traditionally brought their wives into the nuclear family, while daughters have married out, giving rise to the old Korean saying that sons-in-law never become family members.
"We'll have a shortage of girls," said Cho Nam Hoon, a population scholar who heads the Korea Institute for Health and Social Affairs. 
"And we'll have to import from abroad."
Already there is a shortage of girls in the elementary schools. 
Lee Yon Ha, a 7-year-old first grader, and her 13 girlfriends in the coed classroom at the Segomjong Elementary School are surrounded by 23 boys.
"I don't like all these boys around," said Yon Ha, speaking shyly as a few boy pupils were leaping on their desks. 
"They are always fighting."
But the boys are already sensing the lack: During folk dances at traditional festivals in the fall, several boys had to dance together because of the shortage of girls.
When Mrs. Lee, the woman who had an abortion, subsequently had another daughter five years ago, her father-in-law came to her during her recovery to ask her when she could get pregnant again. 
Then one day, he handed her a newspaper advertisement on how to give birth to sons. 
Mrs. Lee obediently took the advertisement, stuffed it in her wallet and never followed up.
"My mother-in-law never said a word before, but lately she's been suggesting: Why don't you have another child, before it gets too late?"Mrs. 
Lee said. 
"My father-in-law doesn't put pressure on his own son, but at the family ancestral worship ritual, he wishes that the ancestors bless my husband with a son."
Mrs. Lee says she loves her daughters and does not want a son, but there are moments of indecision. 
When she rides the bus or the subway with her two daughters, elderly women often come up to her with faces full of pity.
"They ask me, 'Have you no son?'
And I say, no," Mrs. Lee said. 
"Then they say, 'Oh, you must bear a son.'
That kind of remark makes me wonder for a few seconds: Am I doing the right thing by not having a son?
That kind of remark makes me angry and embarrassed."
      
