
"PEE-OW Liang!"
So the TV announcers say in China when Michael Jordan does his thing on the basketball court. 
And he is doing it, and they are saying it, to a growing audience of excited viewers all over China. 
("Pee-ow Liang!" means "Pretty!")
China's hottest American import is professional basketball, and Jordan and his Chicago Bulls are the flavor of the moment. 
Even if the television commentary by announcers is still rudimentary -- they don't yet have an equivalent for "nothing but net," and repeat "pee-ow liang!" all game long -- fan enthusiasm more than makes up for it.
"We're all hoping the Bulls can win 70 games this year," said Xing Tian, 17, who is the captain of her high school basketball team. 
"We want to see them break the record."
As Miss Xing knows, the Bulls need 19 more wins to be the first team in the National Basketball Association to win 70 games in a season. 
The team won Friday, although Jordan bruised his knee and elbow but vowed in last night's game.
Jackets emblazoned with "Chicago Bulls" have become fashionable here, and counterfeiters are churning out imitations. 
Sporting goods stores display posters of N.B.A. stars like Shaquille O'Neal and Charles Barkley rather than any of China's few basketball stars, who aren't that bad. 
The national men's basketball team has won 10 of the last 11 Asian championships.
State television is driving the craze. 
Miss Xing said she and her friends watch the weekly games -- two on weeknights and one on Saturday morning. 
"It's by far the most exciting thing on television," she said.
But the fervor isn't limited to children, many of whom grow up playing basketball in the schoolyard. 
A mention of "Chee-ow Dan," as Jordan is known in China, brings out smiles on adults as well.
"Everyone knows Jordan. 
He and Pippen make a great pair," volunteered Sun Yige, a 38-year-old museum employee, showing off his knowledge of the Bulls and their forward Scottie Pippen. 
"To have a player as good as Kukoc on the bench, that shows you what a great team they are."
Toni Kukoc, a guard, rained down 3-pointers in the fourth quarter of a game last week to defeat the Orlando Magic.
 
 
 
Bullish on the Chinese
 
Even N.B.A. executives, who have been promoting the sport overseas in recent years, have been surprised by the game's sudden popularity in China. 
They are teaming up with Nike and Reebok -- which manufacture tens of millions of sneakers in China for world export -- to promote both the game and sell a bonanza of endorsed merchandise.
"We are really bullish -- if you'll excuse the term -- on basketball in China," said Tom Fox, the association's managing director in Hong Kong, who is a Chicago native and an unrepentant Bulls fan. 
"Our goal is to make basketball the number-one participation sport in China by the year 2000, or whenever."
Soccer is the most popular sport in China.
Measured by TV viewing alone, the games are what the Chinese call "kou qiu" -- a slam dunk.
"They're getting tens of millions of viewers," said Ren Jiangzhou, who supervises N.B.A. coverage at China Central Television. 
The American sports network, ESPN, feeds games to China via satellite.
If one reason for the basketball craze is the dearth of quality alternatives on Chinese television, another is the supplementary coverage by the Chinese press. 
Television shows explain the basics as well as nuances of the game, while newspapers and magazines report on the personalities and provide team analyses. 
A recent issue of Sport magazine featured an article called "The N.B.A.'s Strange One," about the Bulls' king rebounder, Dennis Rodman, describing his neon hair colors and his courtside antics.
"People like the game because it's fast, it requires great ability and it's beautiful," said Lou Yichen, a basketball announcer at Shanghai Cable TV, who can "pee-ow liang" with the best of them. 
"Everyone can see that the N.B.A. is the best basketball in the world."
China's own professional basketball, fragmented and disorganized for years, has played in relative obscurity. 
No players are believed to earn more than a few thousand dollars a year, a tiny fraction of what Michael Jordan earns.
That may change. 
A new league began last year, modeled on the N.B.A. 
With advice from an American company on how to go commercial, the league of 12 teams has planned playoffs (every team qualifies).
"I've gotten used to seeing Jordan, so when the Bulls aren't playing, I'm not as interested," said Wang Qi, 16. 
"But I still watch anyway."
