
In a dramatic shift in their choice of foreign languages to study, more and more American college students are taking Chinese and Arabic at the expense of French, German and Russian, according to a new study by the Modern Language Association of America.
"The foreign languages chosen for study by students have always fluctuated, and they have always reflected international developments," said Phyllis Franklin, executive director of the association. 
"During World Wars I and II, there was a definite movement away from the study of German. 
More recently, when postwar Japan seemed the model of efficiency and economic success, students began studying Japanese in great numbers, thinking that would be the ticket to a successful career."
The organization, which surveyed 2,700 two- and four-year colleges and universities, found that registrations in Chinese and Arabic were up 36 percent and 28 percent, respectively, over what they were five years ago, while those in Spanish had climbed by more than 13 percent.
Meanwhile, French, German and especially Russian have fallen off sharply, while registrations in Italian and Latin declined less dramatically. 
French and German are both down by 28 percent and Russian is down by 45 percent.
Largely unchanged are registrations in ancient Greek, Hebrew and Japanese, although Japanese is now the fourth most-studied language, up from fifth in 1990. 
Chinese became the sixth most-studied language, up from eighth.
Spanish continues to be the most popular foreign language among American students, with an enrollment of 606,286, nearly half of the nation's language enrollment of 1.1 million.
The survey found a substantially higher registration over the last five years among the less commonly studied languages. 
Three-quarters of this increase was accounted for by enrollments in Korean, Vietnamese and Hawaiian, plus American Sign Language, which the association included in its survey.
Although down since 1990 despite an overall rise in college enrollments, foreign language enrollments are still at higher levels than at any time in the 1960's, 1970's or 1980's.
Colleges and universities are struggling to cope with these changes in a variety of ways. 
At one extreme, officials at the State University of New York at Albany recently announced the elimination of its German program and its four tenured professors. 
Two years ago, Bennington College created a stir when it abolished its traditional language departments and replaced them with a language center that serves both the college and neighboring communities and is staffed by non-tenure-track teachers.
More commonly, educational administrators are allowing French, German and Russian departments to shrink by attrition. 
And, wary of building inflexible departments with tenured professors teaching languages that few want to learn, they are employing adjunct professors in non-tenure-track positions.
Asked whether American students could be expected to become fluent in unfamiliar languages, like Chinese and Arabic, Yuann-Yuann Meng, an instructor in Chinese at Columbia University, insisted that a hard-working student who studied Chinese over a period of three years "could become just as proficient as if he or she had studied Spanish for that many years."
"Chinese grammar is very simple," she said.
An Arabic scholar, Prof. Dilworth Parkinson of Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, said that Arabic was not nearly so easy for Americans who do not come from Arabic-speaking families. 
"Arabic is so strange and difficult to many American students -- nothing looks familiar and there's an elaborate vocabulary -- that unless they can travel and find a way to become fluent, just enrolling in a university program will not be enough."
Ms. Franklin said some language choices had obvious explanations. 
"The changing demographics of the United States figure into this," she said. 
"We have an influx of immigrants who speak Chinese, Arabic or Spanish and so their children want to learn or improve their ability in the family language. 
We call these the heritage learners.
"Another explanation has to do with economics," she said. 
"Students see the increasing number of people who speak Spanish in the country and that attracts them to study Spanish as a way of getting a job or doing business with the Spanish-speaking population. 
These students see that they won't have to travel outside the United States to use their language skill."
Ms. Franklin also cautioned against "simplistic" interpretations of the survey findings.
"People don't sit around deciding which countries are likely to succeed in the years ahead and then study their languages," she said. 
"That's too much cause-and-effect. 
In actual practice, the choice of a language to study is less formal."
She said she was gratified by the finding that Americans are still actively interested in studying foreign languages.
"Only a few years ago," she said, "many people thought that English would become the international language and that Americans would not have to learn languages other than English. 
Well, English has become an international language, but even so there's a general awareness today that we are in a global economy and that that necessitates the study of foreign languages. 
We see that as a good thing."
