
Earlier this week, the House overwhelmingly agreed to ban the export of American satellites to China, fearing that Beijing could glean technical expertise from the technology to improve the accuracy of its nuclear-tipped missiles.
But nearly five years ago, 15 of the same lawmakers assured then-Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher that China could never divine any secret information from the satellites. 
The lawmakers lobbied him to lift a temporary ban on the launching from China of satellites made by Hughes Electronics, based in Los Angeles.
The 15 House members, mostly California Republicans, assured Mr. Christopher that "no technology transfer is possible at any time."
"You will find that Hughes satellites are guarded around the clock by U.S. 
Government and Hughes personnel during their time in China," the lawmakers said in a letter dated Oct. 
27, 1993.
That was not the tone Republicans took on Wednesday, when they all but accused President Clinton of treason for his decision in 1996 to relax export controls on satellites to China.
"Something terrible has happened," Representative Dana Rohrabacher, a California Republican who signed the letter, intoned on the House floor. 
"Every man, woman and child may well have been jeopardized."
But five years ago, Mr. Rohrabacher and many of the other California Republicans who signed the letter, like Representative Randy Cunningham, were equally concerned about keeping the American satellite industry healthy.
"We fully support the objective of controlling missile proliferation," the lawmakers wrote. 
"However, we are concerned that an interpretation of the law that does not allow communications satellites to be launched from China neither impedes such proliferation nor punishes exporters of missile technology.
"Since foreign companies stand willing to sell these satellites to China, the only people actually affected are those employed by U.S. satellite manufacturers."
A spokeswoman for Mr. Rohrabacher, Natasha Clerihue, said her boss had not switched his position. 
Ms. Clerihue said the once-tight security over American satellites in China had been compromised by Mr. Clinton.
"What went wrong was that the watchdogs didn't do their job and technology was transferred," Ms. Clerihue said. 
"We were given credible assurances this would never happen."
The 15 California lawmakers are: George E. Brown Jr, Democrat; Ken Calvert, Republican; Randy Cunningham, Republican; John T. Doolittle, Republican; Bob Filner, Democrat; Elton Gallegly, Republican; Steve Horn, Republican; Jay Kim, Republican; Jerry Lewis, Republican; Howard P. McKeon, Republican; Matthew G. Martinez, Democrat; Ron Packard, Republican; Richard W. Pombo, Republican; Dana Rohrabacher, Republican, and Esteban Torres, Democrat.
