
A sometimes testy three-hour meeting between lawyers for John Huang, the central figure in the Democratic fund-raising controversy, and lawyers for the Senate committee investigating campaign finance abuses ended today with Republican and Democratic lawyers clashing over whether Mr. Huang should be given a grant of immunity to testify.
The Republicans are reluctant to let Mr. Huang testify for fear that his testimony may jeopardize possible prosecutions. 
The Democrats say they want him to appear as a witness to rebut Republican allegations of a Chinese Government plot to influence last year's elections.
This behind-the-scenes debate continues even though some who have seen Mr. Huang's videotaped deposition in a related case said he might make for a surprisingly undramatic witness, one who often obfuscates.
After three days of hearings this week before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, the debate over Mr. Huang's possible testimony has taken on enormous political and legal implications. 
Many had hoped that he would be the star witness, one who even the Democrats say was involved in questionable fund-raising. 
Without such a breakthrough witness, even Republican staff members acknowledge that the hearings have produced few fireworks and few revelations.
Ultimately, the decision on immunity will require the approval of two-thirds of the committee, with the Republican majority expected to take its cue from the committee's chairman, Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee.
Democrats, who first raised the issue of immunity, have said all week that they are confident that Mr. Huang's testimony will vindicate their position that his fund-raising efforts, however questionable, will not support the Republican allegations against China.
"There's no evidence John Huang is anything but what he appears to be -- a politically active and ambitious fund-raiser who cut corners," said James Jordan, a spokesman for the Democratic minority on the committee. 
"Anything more than that is just flimsy inferences."
In the opening week of the hearings, the Republicans were often upstaged by an aggressive Democratic public relations campaign and by the surprise offer by Democrats for Mr. Huang to testify. 
And, with public interest in the hearings flagging, the Republicans may need to produce a high-profile witness, like Mr. Huang, as a star attraction to keep attention focused on their allegations.
So far, the Republicans have failed to generate the kind of excitement with these hearings that has surrounded past Congressional investigations, like Watergate and the Iran-contra hearings.
The Republican's lead witness, Richard Sullivan, a former finance director of the Democratic National Committee, not only failed to support Senator Thompson's charges regarding China but also tried to affirm the basic Democratic position that Mr. Huang was an exception to Democratic fund-raising practices.
Still, both sides continue to negotiate over whether Mr. Huang will testify. 
After the meeting today, Mr. Huang's lawyer, Ty Cobb, said he remained "cautiously optimistic" that his client would testify before the committee, although perhaps not until the fall.
In a surprise move on Tuesday, the opening day of hearings, Senator John Glenn of Ohio, the committee's ranking Democrat, announced that Mr. Huang would testify if given a grant of immunity on several lesser legal issues. 
But Mr. Huang agreed to testify without the protection of immunity on some of the major allegations against him.
"The discussions today were very constructive and professional," Mr. Cobb said. 
"There were some occasional rough spots. 
But from my perspective, we are hopeful it will move forward to the end that we had hoped for. 
We remain cautiously optimistic. 
But it may take more time to resolve this than the public may expect."
Mr. Jordan, the spokesman for the committee's Democrats, said: "Mr. 
Cobb is interested in a way to make it happen. 
And Senator Glenn is hopeful the attorneys can find a way to satisfy the concerns of all and make it possible for Mr. Huang to appear before the committee to answer some of the serious charges against him."
Paul Clark, a spokesman for the committee's Republican majority, had no comment, saying that the Republican members "haven't had time to digest" the results of today's meeting.
Committee Republicans have been concerned that granting any form of immunity to Mr. Huang will prevent him from facing prosecution. 
The precedent for this was set after the Iran-Contra hearings when a three-judge panel overturned the convictions of Oliver L. North and John M. Poindexter on the ground that testimony taken under a Congressional grant of immunity had tainted evidence in their criminal trials.
In addition, Attorney General Janet Reno has objected to any grant of immunity. 
Ms. Reno has not stated specifically the reasons for her objection, but the Justice Department has serious concerns over any arrangement that would impede its investigation into Mr. Huang's fund-raising actions and could undermine possible prosecutions.
"It's a mess in some ways," said Alan Strasser, a former United States Attorney and a lawyer in the Washington office of Kutak, Rock. 
"To some extent, the Democrats have Ollie North in mind. 
If Huang talks, he won't be prosecuted and they would just as soon see that. 
Each party has an expectation of what Mr. Huang's testimony will be: the Republicans don't think it will be helpful to them, and the Democrats think they can benefit from it."
But Joseph E. diGenova, also a former United States Attorney and now in private practice said giving immunity "is a serious matter" and added: "This is just not the kind of thing that you do lightly. 
You run the possibility of ruining a serious criminal investigation. 
Attorney General Reno has made herself very clear on that and someone has got to pay homage to that."
Mr. diGenova added that was possible for the lawyers to agree to withhold the granting of immunity immediately and wait to see whether the Justice Department indicates whether there is a serious case against Mr. Huang. If it appears that the case is not strong, Mr. diGenova said, then allowing Mr. Huang to testify would be less of a risk.
