
The Government of China today put Wang Dan, its most noted dissident, on an airplane bound for the United States after releasing him for medical reasons, according to the official Chinese news agency, Xinhua, in Beijing.
Mr. Wang, 28, was a leader of the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, supressed by the Chinese military in 1989. 
He was accompanied on the flight to Detroit by an American diplomat, Mr. Wang's mother said.
He was expected to be met by fellow dissidents in Detroit.
His release was part of a negotiated arrangement reached last month between China and the Clinton Administration, in return for the United States' dropping its sponsorship of a resolution condemning China's human rights policies.
A White House official reached early this morning said that the Administration was very pleased by the news, but that more would come from the President himself later today in Chile where he is attending a Western Hemisphere summit meeting.
Mr. Wang served four years in prison for his role in the Tiananmen demonstrations. 
He was arrested again in May 1995 and was serving an 11-year sentence in a northeast China prison for "subversion."
American officials said that Mr. Wang had been moved to Beijing in the last few days, indicating that his release was likely.
Mr. Wang's release paralleled that of another noted dissident, Wei Jingsheng, last Nov. 
16. Mr. Wei was also released on medical grounds on condition that he, too, leave China and go into exile.
Mr. Wei's release followed shortly after the summit meeting in Washington between President Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin. 
Mr. Wang's release comes just before Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright visits China at the end of this month, preparing for Mr. Clinton's first trip to China as President in late June.
The deal for Mr. Wang's release was first reported in The New York Times earlier this month. 
At the time, Chinese officials denied there was any deal with Washington, but said that releases of prisoners on medical grounds were a humanitarian practice, and that a final decision would be taken by the Chinese judiciary.
But Mr. Wang's release, like Mr. Wei's, was a political decision by the highest levels of the Chinese Communist Party.
On March 13 this year, the Clinton Adminsitration announced that it would not sponsor a resolution seeking to condemn China's human rights practices at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva. 
Officials said China had met American requirements, including an agreement to sign the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and a willingness to release a number of prisoners.
"Chinese judicial authorities recently allowed Wang Dan to be released on bail for medical treatment in accordance with law," Xinhua said.
"In response to a question from a Xinhua correspondent, a spokesman of the Ministry of Justice said today that Wang Dan, who is ill, has already gone abroad for medical treatment," the Xinhua report said.
Other prisoners who might be released include Gao Yu, a journalist arrested in 1993 just before she was to attend Columbia Journalism School in New York.
She received a six-year sentence for divulging state secrets for an article she wrote in a Hong Kong newspaper about the Chinese budget.
Another prisoner could also be Liu Nianchung, a labor activist serving three years in a prison camp and who is said to be in very bad health.
