
The chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee said today that he expects China to meet President Clinton's human rights demands as a condition to renewing Beijing's trade status. 
If it does, he said, the Administration should stop threatening China with sanctions and use other means to promote human rights.
The chairman, Representative Lee Hamilton, an influential foreign-policy voice, also urged President Clinton to lay the groundwork for a policy that will take account of United States trade, security and political interests.
"I believe the President has not always provided the personal articulation and justification that his policies need," Mr. Hamilton said in a speech at the American Enterprise Institute.
"On China, we need a broader understanding of our national interest. 
We need a skillful balancing of economic, security and human rights interests, rather than a single-minded emphasis on one objective."
Mr. Hamilton thus highlighted an intensifying debate, just three weeks before President Clinton must decide whether to renew China's trade benefits as a "most favored nation."
Senior Administration officials said they are involved in an intense dialogue with China to try to get Beijing to demonstrate as much progress on human rights as possible in the next few weeks.
While no one at the White House will say so out loud, it is now widely assumed within the Administration and on Capitol Hill that Mr. Clinton will find a way to renew all or most of China's trade benefits, which allow it to export products to the United States at the lowest tariff rates.
The only real question is what political steps the President will take to get down from the tall tree he climbed a year ago, when he declared that he would not renew trade benefits without "overall significant progress" on human rights. 
While China has made some progress, and Administration officials hope for more, how "significant" it will be remains to be seen.
One option was endorsed by Mr. Hamilton today, when he said "I hope and I expect" that China will do enough by June 3 -- like accounting for political prisoners -- that the President will be able to declare that Beijing has met his conditions.
Mr. Hamilton said President Clinton should then renew China's trade status, and retire permanantly the threat of a revocation. 
Instead, he said, Mr. Clinton should try to influence China by fostering "change through personal diplomacy and our economic ties."
Under another option, some lawmakers and human rights organizations argue that, barring some dramatic move, China at best will only fulfill some of the President's human rights demands before the deadline.
They contend that the President, for his own political credibility, cannot renew China's trade benefits across the board, given the spotty progress Beijing has made on human rights. 
Instead, they advocate renewing the most-favored-nation status for China's private exports, but withholding it for selected exports from Government-owned or army-owned factories.
Like the White House, this school understands that the economic stakes are too great -- more than $40 billion a year in trade -- for Washington to totally revoke the trade benefits. 
But they want to keep up the pressure.
 
Describing the Targets
"I honestly believe that if the Chinese do not make overall significant progress, the President will honor his executive order and have some revocation" of the trade benefits, Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who has been a leader of the get-tough policy.
She said one possible target is China's state-owned military industries, which export everything from clothing to AK-47 assault weapons to the United States.
Senior officials say the final decision will come down to a political judgment for the President. 
If he gets just enough progress from Beijing, he could swallow hard, renew China's trade status and take the criticism from editorial writers and some members of Congress, who will inevitably point up the differences between his oratory and his actions.
Or he could choose the politically more attractive route of renewing trade benefits selectively, thus remaining true to his campaign promises while not aborting the trading relationship.
Not only the President has a political interest in such a compromise; so do many of the most outspoken Democratic lawmakers who have advocated a tough line on China since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. 
Although many Administration officials believe a selective approach is unworkable, given the difficulty of sorting out whether a company is privately owned or state-owned, it may turn out for political reasons to be the policy.
