
It is not quite a recipe for a typical best seller: a doting biography of an old man by his daughter, with no sex, scandal or gore.
Still, since the old man is Deng Xiaoping, the world's most powerful 88-year-old, a fellow who almost single-handedly keeps expressions like "paramount leader" alive, the biography is causing a sensation even before it is published.
Official Chinese newspapers are daily publishing long excerpts from the biography, which is to be formally distributed beginning Sept. 
10. Translators are already at work preparing English, Japanese and Korean editions.
Deng Rong, the book's 43-year-old author and Mr. Deng's youngest daughter, makes clear that her aim is not to write a Kitty Kelley-style unauthorized biography but rather something closer to a Communist hagiography.
"The reason I want to write about my father is that I respect my father," Ms. Deng explains in an author's note.
 
Gaps in Knowledge Filled
Despite the lack of juicy disclosures, the new biography fills in many gaps in the public knowledge of the life of Mr. Deng, who turns 89 on Sunday. 
For example, the excerpts in the newspapers have included rare photographs of Mr. Deng's wife, Zhuo Lin, indicating that she is even shorter than he is.
Mr. Deng stands about 5 feet tall, and Ms. Zhuo appears to be about 4 feet 10 inches.
In the past, the Government has always been extremely reluctant to release information about the personal lives of leaders. 
Even their dates of birth and the names of their family members were normally supposed to be secret.
A Politburo member, Li Ruihuan, once cited a Chinese expression to explain this shyness: people fear fame the way a pig fears being fattened for slaughter.
"In the past, there were some books like this, such as the book about Stalin that his daughter wrote," said Zhou Zhixing, the book's editor at the Communist Party Central Literature Publishing House. 
"But she was critical of Stalin. 
So from this perspective, this book is a breakthrough."
"This isn't the way children ordinarily write about their parents," Mr. Zhou added. 
"This places Deng Xiaoping in a historical context. 
It places him in China's revolutionary history."
 
Second Volume in Works
Mr. Zhou declined to say how many copies would be printed. 
He did say Ms. Deng is now writing the second volume of what will apparently be the two-volume biography.
More is already known of Mr. Deng than of most Chinese leaders, and half a dozen biographies have been written about him in the West. 
But it turns out that some of the information has been wrong.
For example, previous biographers apparently misreported the given name of Mr. Deng's second wife, who apparently was Zhang Xiyuan rather than Zhang Qianyuan. 
In a grave miscalculation, she divorced him in 1933 because he was in political disgrace and she assumed his career was over.
Mr. Deng's first wife died in childbirth. 
His present wife, Ms. Zhuo, has borne all five of his children.
Ms. Deng adds other personal details, reporting matters like a fondness for croissants, cheese and wine developed when he lived in France as a student and worker in the 1920's.
One mystery that the book does not clear up is the state of Mr. Deng's health. 
Mr. Deng, who now holds no Government or Communist Party positions, but who nevertheless remains effectively the emperor of China, was last shown on television in a brief appearance in January.
Even at that time, his hand trembled, he could barely walk, and he appeared to have difficulty speaking. 
Since then there have been reports that he has undergone surgery and may be dying, although it is impossible to know whether the reports are anything more than the rumors that regularly emerge when Mr. Deng has been out of sight for more than a few months.
Ms. Deng, the wife of a senior army official, has worked since the beginning of 1989 as her father's personal assistant. 
She often appears at his side during his appearances, shouting other people's comments into his left ear, which is not as deaf as his right ear.
