
Officials have been streaming into government bookstores in recent days and hauling away stacks of a hot new product: a 74-page, 50-cent booklet called "A Great Program for Comprehensively Strengthening Party-Building."
This must-read item consists of two recent speeches by the man who is the Communist Party chief and president of China, Jiang Zemin, and a collection of editorials describing the "brilliant thesis" and "essential compass" that Mr. Jiang has laid out -- a purported breakthrough in Communist doctrine labeled the "Three Represents."
To prosper in a new century, Mr. Jiang says in these speeches, the Communist Party "must always represent the development needs of China's advanced productive forces, must always represent the forward direction of China's advanced culture and must always represent the fundamental interests of China's broadest number of people."
In a classic propaganda campaign that has gathered full force this month, Mr. Jiang's supposed breakthrough has been pounded home almost daily in laudatory editorials and televised testimonials by leaders from every province and officially recognized social group.
If this sounds anachronistic for a leader who is promoting a wider opening to the West, it reflects enduring rituals of power within the Chinese Communist Party. 
The booklet's contents may be vague and tedious, insiders say, but that is beside the point: Mr. Jiang is making officials go through the panegyrics as a show of his leadership, as a public blow in his maneuvering to retain supreme power in the decade ahead.
Mr. Jiang is expected to resign as the party's general secretary at the 16th Communist Party Congress in 2002, when he will be 76. 
He is expected to give up the presidency the year after. 
But with no strong successors in sight, Mr. Jiang, who has led the party since 1989 and served as president since 1993, is widely believed to want to continue pulling strings from behind the scenes, as Deng Xiaoping did in the 1980's and 1990's.
And so while Mr. Jiang cultivates the stature he hopes will transcend formal retirement, officials anxious to hold on to their own jobs loudly sing his praises.
"It's like in ancient times, when the emperor would test his ministers by bringing out a donkey and calling it a horse," said an editor at a major party-affiliated newspaper. 
"If you maintained that it was a donkey you lost your head. 
If you called it a horse, then you got a promotion."
Closely related to Mr. Jiang's effort to fortify his image, insiders say, is his effort to secure himself a place in the Chinese Communist pantheon, after Mao and Deng, as an important theorist. 
Not surprisingly, considering Mr. Jiang's current unrivaled position, his "breakthrough" statement on the "Three Represents" is garnering rave reviews and has become a staple of high-level study sessions in provincial capitals.
"A brilliant thesis drawn from insight into the future," said the party's official paper, People's Daily, on May 22 in a typical description. 
"A concentrated embodiment of the fundamental nature of the party and the essence of socialism."
In other newspapers, officials have called Mr. Jiang's prosaic statement "pregnant with connotations and meanings," "a scientific summation of our party's nearly 80 years of historical importance" and "a great program for party-building in the new century."
The Liberation Army Daily hailed it as "an essential compass for military, ideological and political construction in the new era," while the Federation of Trade Unions, not to be outdone, said Mr. Jiang "answers the question of why and how the working class is relied on the during the process of building socialism with Chinese characteristics."
The China Women's News proclaimed, "The 'Three Represents' are the criteria for women's work."
The campaign is, of course, low-key compared with the vicious political winds of the Mao era, and much of the population today can simply tune it out. 
At the popular Xinhua Bookstore in central Beijing today, most customers walked right past the rack up front that featured the booklet on Mr. Jiang's speeches.
But the booklet is a best seller at the Party Documents Bookstore, where officials are buying it in bulk for their colleagues, and ambitious party and government leaders can hardly afford to ignore the new catch phrases.
"Quite apart from substance, the campaign is a test of whether subordinates and local leaders in the provinces are staying in step," the editor said. 
"That's why in recent days we've seen one local leader after another coming forward -- it's a way to affirm their allegiance and keep their jobs."
This new campaign went into overdrive even before last year's "Three Stresses" campaign (theoretical study, political awareness and good conduct) had fully run its course, causing complaints about the sheer waste of time and energy.
In that campaign, still continuing in far-flung local branches, party and government officials have been required to spend weeks at a time studying Deng and Jiang speeches and engaging in self-criticism. 
The process was intended to spot new talent and bring discipline to an organization seen as increasingly lax and corrupt.
"Nobody really cares about this stuff, and people feel disgusted when they have to study it," a former party propaganda department official said of Mr. Jiang's latest ideological offerings. 
"What about Taiwan or the World Trade Organization?
People have even started making off-color jokes about Jiang Zemin's love of 'threesomes.'
"
The current campaign, many believe, is just a prelude to the probable publication this year of Mr. Jiang's collected speeches and writings, providing a showcase for his works.
"It has always been the case here that the party leader is expected to put forth his own thinking," the newspaper editor said. 
"Otherwise he has no prestige."
Party experts have noted that Mr. Jiang opened the new campaign with speeches in the south, beginning in Guangdong Province, in a parallel with Deng's last great act, when he kicked off a new wave of market reforms and economic growth with a celebrated southern tour in 1992.
Whatever his strengths as a power broker, Mr. Jiang is not regarded as a bold theorist, and some officials are quietly grumbling about self-aggrandizement.
But in Mr. Jiang's defense, insiders note, he has not yet tried to elevate himself into a Mao or Deng. 
Up to now, at least, he has not granted his own ideas the official status of a body of thought, as in Mao Zedong Thought, or theory, as in Deng Xiaoping Theory.
      
