
Seven years ago, an elderly driver lost control of her car, jumped the sidewalk and, as my older boy and husband watched, plowed into me and my 3-year-old son. 
My child was unharmed, but the casualties included an iron fence, a stone staircase and my right leg. 
Plus any illusions that life was predictable.
With a lot of help from family, friends, neighbors and medical professionals, I was able to rehabilitate my body and psyche. 
I learned to walk on a prosthesis; the nightmares faded. 
I quit kvetching about what I couldn't do or have, and started valuing what was left me. 
I integrated my old, able-bodied self Before the Accident with the new uniped me of Afterward.
My husband and I had discussed having a third child in that Before time. 
The idea seemed absurd as I struggled to reach Square 1 again. 
But one spring day a couple of years ago, feeling I was indeed getting back in the game, it occurred to me that without further stressing my middle-age body, I could have my baby. 
I could even insure that it would be a girl.
And so began the great adventure of adopting our daughter. 
After such loss, it was thrilling to have a plan for adding to my life, to do this big, wonderful, scary thing.
As an over-45 couple, we found it would be tough going to adopt an American infant. 
So we were drawn to the children relegated to orphanages overseas. 
Because we wanted a girl, we focused on China, where the one-child-per-family rule has led to the abandonment of thousands of female infants.
Part of my initial impulse was to save a child. 
In fact, because we already had children, the People's Republic required us to take a child with a "minor, correctable medical condition" -- a poorly defined category that could include a cleft palate, hearing loss, a birthmark or a club foot. 
This was O.K. by us. 
Indeed, I thought of specifically requesting a more severely handicapped child. 
Who could better understand what was involved?
And if I didn't take one of these kids -- their pictures filling the pages of the adoption agencies' "waiting children" books -- who would?
One of these photographs stuck in my mind. 
It was of a bright-looking Chinese girl among obviously mentally challenged age mates. 
Her placement there was explained by the caption: "Healthy 9-year-old. 
Missing one leg."
The orphanage had lumped all the handicapped kids together, no matter what the nature of their disability.
But I didn't, finally, ask for one of these children. 
Our social worker, who is blind and had adopted a sighted Amerasian child 20 years before, pointed out how much physically harder that would be for me. 
My family is already strained with one handicapped person: we have met our quota. 
I am still learning to accept my altered body and can't yet forthrightly deal with another person's. 
Simply, honestly, I was dreaming of the good times, the funny, heart-stopping moments that are part of watching someone grow up. 
I didn't want to think about more specialists, equipment, operations, therapies, stares. 
I resolved to help these kids as much as possible through donations that go toward their care.
Plowing through the process of gathering documents and getting approved, I began to feel an impatient, selfish longing for an infant I didn't yet know, the one who would become my daughter. 
I agonized through repeated delays -- the result of the fallout from Western criticism of the orphanages and politics in China. 
At times I re-experienced the awful sense of powerlessness that had seized me after the accident, and despaired.
We had hoped to have a baby assigned to us by May 1996. 
We weren't told who she was until November of that year: an adorable 5-month-old, with a diagnosis of rickets and "bad development."
We were finally cleared for travel in January; after all those months, word came that we were to leave for China in six days' time!
It seemed, when we held her at last, as if the delay had been necessary to match us with our little honey.
Our daughter's records say "deformity," but there is no sign of rickets or any other problem. 
She is walking, babbling, clever, deliciously playful.
During our search, my father, an uncle and a dear cousin became ill, suffered and died. 
A madman in Scotland gunned down 16 schoolchildren. 
Flight 800 crashed, and we may never know why. 
Horrible, random things happen, and sorrow triumphs. 
Yet sometimes joy sneaks in and carries the day.
I go around now with a baby on my good hip and a renewed sense of excitement about life, knowing it will surprise me one way or the other. 
Let it throw at me whatever it will -- thrilling or painful, peaceful or exhausting. 
I can do it all while standing on one leg.
