
Over the clatter of Chinese meal-making in the outdoor food stalls that overflow with diners on a hot summer evening, Shen Ping sings with a lonely voice.
A long-faced young woman with wide eyes, Ms. Shen wanders with a friend from one stall to the next through a back alley in this southern city, offering to strum her guitar for any customer willing to throw a dollar her way.
Stopping beside a low-lying table piled high with dishes and surrounded by six men on small wooden stools, Ms. Shen and her partner sing a duet earnestly, if a little off-key. 
It is a sentimental love song, something about being far from home, which is apt enough for the two young women, since they are migrants.
Hundreds of thousands of outsiders looking for easy money have flocked to this part of Hainan Island, touted as China's Hawaii by development-hungry local officials. 
Most of them, like Ms. Shen and her friend, Lan Feng, have to settle for something less.
A leader in free-wheeling economic reforms, Hainan, off China's southern coast, rode a real-estate boom in 1990-1992, only to suffer badly from a crash in 1993. 
Thousands of half-built hotels lie vacant, like ghosts of another era.
But young people like Ms. Shen still pour into Hainan because, even with a downturn, China's coastal areas offer more opportunity than most of the slower-growing interior.
"Mainlanders do the kind of jobs that locals would never want," said Hong Yansheng, a food stall manager, referring to the migrants. 
"A local resident would never sing for money. 
You lose too much face."
In many nations, immigrants often do the kind of work that native-born residents look down on. 
In China, migrants from other parts of the country play that role, on an enormous scale.
More than 100 million of China's 1.2 billion people are estimated to be on the move, leaving their homes to look for work elsewhere. 
This floating population is causing an enormous but largely unmeasured social upheaval across the country.
When Ms. Shen, 23, left her village in Anhui province four months ago, she came to Hainan because a friend told her she could easily find a job in a hotel. 
But Ms. Shen found that one hotel after another would only offer work in a massage parlor, which she declined to do.
Instead, she bought a guitar and teamed up with Ms. Lan.
"I get tired of the men who pinch my rear end, but I can always walk away," said Ms. Shen.
Ms. Shen said she made about $25 to $35 a night, more than 10 times what she made working as a store clerk in her hometown. 
She sends $50 home to her parents each month, but will not tell them the truth about how she earns her living.
"They think it's bad for a girl to work on the street," she said. 
"I tell them I am an attendant in a hotel."
At another food stall, a diner who was red-faced from beer-drinking called Ms. Shen and her partner over to play.
"Where are you from, little sister?" he asked.
Ms. Shen eyed him warily, and did not answer. 
Instead she asked if he had any requests.
"As you like," said the man. 
"Sing a beautiful one."
Ms. Shen had hardly begun her song when the man waved her off.
"That's terrible!" he said loudly. 
"Sing another!"
Letting her finish this time, the man reluctantly gave Ms. Shen the equivalent of $1.25. 
She and Ms. Lan headed for the next stall.
