
Marinus van Gessel, an American, has been here for 21 years, running a small but thriving import company, and business has never been better.
But increasingly aggressive war games by the Chinese and growing vituperation from Beijing's leaders and uncertainty over Taiwan's first presidential election have stirred anxieties over the future.
"I was sweating bullets for a while," Mr. van Gessel said. 
"Now that a large part of our Seventh Fleet is parked offshore, I feel a lot better. 
And it's not just for the Taiwanese but for the Americans as well."
Even so, Mr. van Gessel's business -- importing specialty foods like cheeses, Western fish and fine lettuce -- puts his finger on the pulse of foreign activity in Taiwan, and the beat has been a bit fainter in recent days.
There has been no visible alarm on Taipei's streets over China's threats, but beneath the calm, some economic cracks have appeared. 
Most people, though, see any uncertainty as short-lived and say that in the long run Taiwan's economic might will be unscathed.
"In my case," he said, "I delayed a shipment coming in. 
Some people are canceling meetings. 
Hotel occupancy is down a bit. 
At some promotions, the band didn't show up. 
The last two days and the next two days are going to be slow. 
With all this excitement, people are not going to be doing special things."
In the last 10 days, China has fired ballistic missiles off the northern and southern tips of Taiwan and staged two live-fire war games near islands controlled by Taiwan, all in a declared effort to scare Taiwan's leaders away from visions of independence. 
China claims Taiwan as a rebel province, but on Wednesday President Lee Tung-hui, who has repeatedly disavowed any desire for independence, continued to describe Taiwan as a "sovereign state."
Mr. Lee, who is widely expected to win the country's first presidential election on Saturday, enraged Beijing last summer when he visited Cornell University, where he received a doctorate in agricultural economics. 
China denounced his visit as part of his effort to "split" Taiwan from the mainland.
Today, the Government released data that showed exports for the first half of March down 9.9 percent over the period last year; the reason it cited: a sudden caution by shippers.
The stock market, which has seesawed throughout the crisis, has been buoyed by Government intervention over the last week but is still down some 25 percent for the year -- not, analysts say, because of worries about China, but because of a general sense that stocks are overvalued. 
In a market dominated not by institutional but by individual investors, those small investors have been selling out, analysts say.
For their part, foreign investors regard the tensions between Taiwan and China as transitory, the economy as fundamentally sound and the prospects for investment as good.
"Broadly speaking," said Christian Murck, the country manager for Chemical Bank here and the president of the American Chamber of Commerce, "in a medium- to long-term point of view, the economic fundamentals and the investment climate are very good here. 
We expect to see continued investment."
Indeed, Taiwan has proved to be one of Asia's most formidable economies, both in terms of size and for having shed its reliance on the United States and focused on Southeast Asia. 
In fact, Taiwan is now the world's 14th-largest trader, has the world's third-busiest container port, in Kaohsiung, and has emerged as a big provider of capital throughout the region.
It is the largest foreign investor in Vietnam, has invested between $13 billion and $25 billion (depending on who's counting) in China, and has emerged as a big consumer market for Western goods. 
For Chrysler, for instance, Taiwan is the largest market outside North America, and Citibank makes more money from its credit card business here than in all of Europe, according to the American Chamber of Commerce.
"Foreign companies that are doing business here share a common premise that over the long term there will be stabilityI across the strait and, secondly, that the astonishing process of economic integration will continue," Mr. Murck said. 
"Eventually there will be direct transport links and an integrated China market."
Yet even in the current climate of uncertainty, Mr. Murck said he knew of no companies that had shelved investment plans here.
"Decisions on investment are being made on medium- and long-term economic considerations," he said. 
"Most people think that the Chinese pressure will continue in some degree after the election. 
Obviously, if the situation goes on for a long time and the situation deteriorates, there will have to be a re-evaluation."
Some Americans here even see unexpected benefits from the escalation of tensions. 
"If anything, it will work in Taiwan's favor," said Warren Gerig, the country manager for United Airlines, "because it will show Americans what Taiwan is all about."
At last count, more than 600 foreign reporters had arrived to cover Saturday's election.
"We don't see this as disruptive," Mr. Gerig continued. 
"We see it as what it is, saber-rattling, to intimidate the people here before the election. 
It's totally backfired."
In his industry, Mr. Gerig said that Taiwan would continue to be a big regional market, and that the region would continue to boom for 20 years. 
"The only thing that can stop it," he said, "is if there is some sort of military escapade by some country."
Mr. van Gessel, the importer, said the only way to ease tensions permanently was through closer economic ties, which he said would be possible once the election was over. 
"Most people here think things are blowing over," he said. 
"China and Taiwan need to get back to business. 
From a long-term view, there's a lot of opportunity here. 
Both sides need each other."
