
Polished to a spit shine, Macao welcomed its leader, President Jiang Zemin of China, as he landed here today to mark the former Portuguese colony's first year under Chinese sovereignty.
Such scrubbings are customary for visits by China's top brass. 
But this may be a rare case where the cleansing is more than skin deep.
A year after Portugal decamped from its last colonial possession -- leaving behind a territory riven by gang violence, drained by recession, and demoralized by decades of neglect -- Macao is cleaner, inside and out.
Thanks to a crackdown by the Chinese government, the so-called triad gangs that used to terrorize Macao are in retreat. 
The most notorious triad boss, Wan Kuok-koi, was convicted by the Portuguese just before they left. 
He is now in a heavily fortified jail and nobody is laying claim to his mantle. 
"It would be foolhardy to say that triads don't exist in Macao; they do," said Eric T. M. Yeung, a leading local businessman. 
"But there are clear boundaries. 
The sheer presence of a crack force from the Chinese military is a deterrent."
By putting the triads on a tight leash, China has all but ended the drive-by shootings, car bombings, and mafia-like mayhem that gave Macao an unwanted reputation as the Wild West city of the east.
Every now and again, flames erupt on sleepy side-streets as vandals set ablaze a car or motorcycle belonging to a triad member. 
But with most other violent crime down sharply this year -- particularly around the casinos that are Macao's economic lifeblood -- people are breathing easier.
"Incarcerating Broken Tooth made a big difference," said Ricardo Pinto, a Portuguese journalist, using Wan Kuok-koi's nickname. 
"There is a sense among the triads that they now have a rival to be respected."
The downside of law and order in Macao is a growing intolerance of dissent, not least on politically sensitive occasions like this anniversary. 
The police detained several members of the Falun Gong sect today, after they threatened to protest during Mr. Jiang's visit. 
About 20 members of the sect who came from nearby Hong Kong this morning were turned back at the ferry terminal.
Falun Gong, a spiritual movement with traces of Buddhism, is outlawed in China. 
But it remains legal in Macao and Hong Kong, which have their own legal systems.
Political protesters also come under pressure here. 
Lei Kin Yung, 21, a democracy advocate, said he was detained three times in the last six days for handing out leaflets.
"The authorities don't want Jiang to hear any voices from the other side," Mr. Lei said. 
"It has become worse under the Chinese."
The trouble for Mr. Lei is that he and others in the democracy camp elicit little sympathy from Macao's 430,000 residents. 
Unlike their Hong Kong neighbors, who are covetous of the rights they inherited from Britain, people here had little exposure to democratic political institutions under the Portuguese.
"They have a stronger interest in public affairs than they did a year ago, but not yet in political affairs," said Ng Kuok Cheong, the lone advocate of democracy in Macao's legislative assembly.
Still, Mr. Ng said he was cheered that people were now more engaged in solving the problems of Macao. 
Among the most pressing is the economy, which was mired in recession for four years because the crime wave scared off visiting gamblers. 
With safer streets, Macao's economy bounced back a bit in 2000.
Edmund Ho, the banker chosen by Beijing to run Macao, hopes to give legs to this recovery by opening the gambling industry to competition next year for the first time in decades. 
That decision is bad news for Stanley Ho, the Hong Kong tycoon who has held the sole license to operate casinos since 1962. 
But it cemented Edmund Ho's authority (Edmund and Stanley Ho are not related).
"We have a very smart politician as our leader," Mr. Yeung said. 
"He is also backed to the hilt by the Chinese leadership."
Critics worry that inviting other companies to build casinos here could rekindle the triad wars. 
A few note that while Wan Kuok-koi's gang, 14K, has been defanged, its archrival, known as Water Room, has kept its grip on the private rooms in the casinos where the high-rollers make their bets.
Aware of these risks, Macao is moving slowly. 
It hired the consulting firm Arthur Andersen to study the industry, and it seems likely to push for a small number of competitors, including Stanley Ho's company, rather than unbridled competition.
Mr. Ho has little choice but to acquiesce. 
He thrived on his close ties to the Portuguese colonial administrators. 
And despite having been here for 442 years, Portugual's legacy is waning like an autumnal sun.
Fueling the sense of good riddance was the disclosure that a few days before the handover last Dec. 
19, the departing governor, Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira, transferred almost $20 million from a foundation he controlled in Macao to another in Portugal. 
An independent panel in Macao said his action had taken place in a "gray area of the law," but he refused to return the money.
"For the Portuguese community here, it was an awful way to start a new era," said Mr. Pinto, one of 1,000 Portuguese still left in Macao.
