
In less than two months, Portugal will give up this vest-pocket colony to China. 
Like well-mannered guests in a summer rental, the Portuguese are spending their last days tidying up after themselves.
Sidewalks are being repaved, lush gardens planted and a boxy glass pavilion is rising on the waterfront. 
Designed to resemble a giant Chinese lantern, the building is to be the site of the handover ceremony. 
There, at midnight on Dec. 
19, China will claim sovereignty over Macao, ending 442 years of colonial rule.
Over at the courthouse, the Portuguese authorities are busy with another kind of house-cleaning. 
They are prosecuting a 45-year-old Chinese man suspected of being the most powerful organized crime leader in Macao.
The man, Wan Kuok-koi, is accused of masterminding a string of shootings and bombings that have frustrated the police, scared off tourists, and turned this normally drowsy enclave into an Asian replica of the Wild West.
Mr. Wan, who goes by the nickname Broken Tooth Koi, has become the colony's most celebrated resident -- and Exhibit A for those who say Portugal has allowed Macao to decay from merely seedy to scary. 
Fears of violence during the trial have prompted the government to import security troops from Portugal, who patrol the courthouse with submachine guns.
To say that Portugal would like to resolve Mr. Wan's case before the handover understates its sense of urgency. 
The presiding judge, Fernando Estrela, holds hearings every day from 9:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M. When Mr. Wan's lawyers ask windy questions, the judge cuts them off in an impatient tone.
"They are rushing because hundreds of foreign journalists are coming to Macao for the handover," said Ricardo Pinto, the editor of Ponto Final, a Portuguese-language newspaper here. 
"From an image point of view, it would be terrible for Portugal to have this business unfinished."
Government officials say that Mr. Wan's trial is not being rushed to avoid bad publicity. 
But they acknowledge that the Portuguese administration would prefer not to punt the case to Macao's new rulers.
"People said we were just going to wait for the handover, but we have confronted our problem," said Lieut. 
Col. Manuel A. Geraldes, a Portuguese Army officer who is a spokesman for Macao's Security Department. 
"One of the legacies we will leave Macao is respect for the law."
Resolving Mr. Wan's case is a top priority because last week, Portugal and China removed one of the few other remaining hurdles to a smooth transition. 
Earlier this year, Portugal protested China's decision to send troops to Macao before the handover. 
Portugal's President, Jorge Sampaio, even threatened to boycott the ceremony unless Beijing reversed itself.
During a visit to Lisbon on Tuesday by China's President, Jiang Zemin, the two sides agreed on a compromise: China will dispatch "technical delegation" to Macao before the handover to prepare for a military garrison. 
But it will delay sending troops until after Dec. 
19.
For Joao Manuel Costa Antunes, the Portuguese official coordinating the handover, it was welcome news. 
Mr. Antunes has designed Macao's handover events to emphasize the continuity between Portuguese and Chinese rule. 
He noted that, unlike Hong Kong, which was ceded to the British in 1842 at the end of the Opium War, Macao was settled by Portuguese seafarers in 1557 with the consent of China. 
"We never had a war with China, so for Macao, the handover should be a very smooth process," Mr. Antunes said.
Hong Kong's handover was a brittle affair. 
After the transfer of power, the head of the British delegation, Prince Charles, left abruptly on the royal yacht, Britannia. 
In Macao, by contrast, the Portuguese delegation -- including Mr. Sampaio -- will stay on to watch Mr. Jiang swear in the new government.
"We don't feel like we're losing something and China is gaining something," Mr. Antunes said. 
"We're coming to the end of a long period of historical involvement, and we want to go out with dignity."
With China and Portugal no longer squabbling over troops, the only hurdle to a dignified handover is the man known as Broken Tooth. 
Normally under Portuguese law, criminal trials last about a month -- meaning that Mr. Wan's trial could be wrapped up by mid-November.
But his lawyers are hoping to delay the trial until after the handover, when it would be heard by a Chinese court.
Such a strategy carries high risks. 
China's legal system can be brutal to gangsters. 
Cheung Tze-keung, a Hong Kong crime boss known as Big Spender, was executed last December after being convicted of kidnapping and arms trafficking. 
The crimes Mr. Wan is accused of carry a penalty of 5 to 15 years.
But Mr. Wan's lawyers said they had no reason to believe that he would fare worse in a Chinese court.
One noted that Portugal, as one of its last contributions to Macao, was building a maximum-security prison with only 12 cells. 
He believes the jail is being built with only one occupant in mind: his client.
 
