
The click-clack of the mah-jongg tiles echoed in the senior center's basement, coming from a windowless, cluttered storage room where 20 elderly Chinese immigrants sat around five small tables.
Just beyond the back room at the Elmhurst-Jackson Heights Senior Center in Queens, Julie Rivera, 70, sat hunched over a breakfast tray that held oatmeal, a slice of white bread with peanut butter, a hard-boiled egg and a carton of milk.
Mrs. Rivera hardly raised an eyebrow at the mah-jongg activity, but the game is one reason the building's owner, a fundamentalist church, wants the senior center out.
"We've been trying to look for a new place," Mrs. Rivera said. 
"The ball starts rolling, as we say. 
But we're stuck. 
Right now I don't know where we're going to go."
As if remembering to strain for drama, Mrs. Rivera added: "On the street!"
If Mrs. Rivera maintains a ho-hum attitude in the face of eviction next Saturday -- when the center agreed to leave in an out-of-court settlement with its landlord -- it is not hard to understand. 
For the last five years, autumn has brought an annual ritual: Leaders at the Christian Testimony Church, a three-story, red-brick building at 87-11 Whitney Avenue, say they need more room for their growing congregation and frown on the senior center's gambling and dancing. 
So the senior citizens beg for a lease extension and promise not to dance or gamble, or at least to try not to gamble.
The city's Department of General Services, which finances the center, is negotiating to move it temporarily to a smaller building four blocks east, but similar plans have fallen through in the past, said Jose Prince, the center's director.
After several extensions, the city's license agreement with the church expired on Dec. 
31, 1995. 
Since then, the elders have allowed the center to stay without a contract but have taken legal steps to evict it.
The lack of a suitable building in the densely populated neighborhood, and the feeling of being a guest who has stayed too long, have forced Mr. Prince to look at temporary sites.
Paula Young, a spokeswoman for General Services, said that finding a permanent home for a senior center was complicated because it had to meet regulations regarding space and the Americans With Disabilities Act.
New immigrants from China have fueled growth at the Christian Testimony Church, said Andrew Yu, 60, one of six elders who run the church. 
Mr. Yu said the congregation of 400 regulars needed more space for English classes, Bible studies for youth, and other programs. 
But he said the elders would not likely have the heart to evict the seniors on Nov. 
30 if their move hit another snag.
Mr. Prince does not think space is the whole story. 
In 1994, after the church complained that it was becoming known as the gambling and dancing church, the senior center stopped its Friday dances and forbade its members to play mah-jongg.
"Maybe at a different church, they have different beliefs," Mr. Yu said. 
"But we are more conservative."
Mr. Prince said he felt no moral obligation to prohibit mah-jongg and dancing. 
Not only is dancing not a sin, Mr. Prince said, but it is a staple -- exercise rather than seduction -- at most senior centers.
And so they danced, once again, though only through the spring. 
For as it became clear that the center would not immediately find a new home and would again depend on the church's hospitality, Mr. Prince said, the dancing ended. 
Mah-jongg, being a less public pastime, continues.
The senior center once drew most of its members from the Italian and Jewish elderly in this model working-class community of Queens. 
These days, most of the 160 regulars who come for breakfast and the 260 for lunch are immigrants. 
There is no groping for identity. 
People are Colombian or Taiwanese or Filipino, not Hispanic or Asian-American. 
The Institute for Puerto Rican Hispanic Elderly, a nonprofit organization that took over running the center in 1992, added a multilingual staff -- Korean, Chinese, English and Spanish -- which has helped increase the membership from 700 to 2,500.
Just before noon recently, about a hundred members waited for lunch on the first floor. 
At one table, a group of Latin American immigrants were betting pennies on a game of dominoes. 
At another, five Filipino immigrants shuffled cards in a game of pairs. 
Fermina Mallari, 85, was winning big, so much so that she could not hide all her nickels, dimes and quarters under the wallet she kept on the table.
But the center's most serious gambling was going on downstairs, over mah-jongg. 
Yuk-Shim Chan, the center's social worker for the Chinese, said the players nearly beat sunrise to the center these days, lining up at its entrance well before the doors open at 8 A.M. They eat breakfast quickly, then play mah-jongg until lunch. 
The 20 players split into the same groups of four unless, Mrs. Chan said, they have had a falling out. 
At midafternoon they go home.
"We're all old," said John Chang, 75, sitting at a table with a man from Taiwan and two women from China. 
Mr. Chang, who used to work as a waiter in Chinatown, said their apartments were too small to accommodate all the mah-jongg players.
"Here, it's better," he said. 
"It's like a second home."
