
The academic attacks on a tale of a medieval voyager who apparently beat Marco Polo to China are widening, with more scholars dismissing the newly published book as a clever forgery.
The book, "The City of Light," has been published in Britain, where sales have been strong, but its release in the United States has been delayed as the scholarly debate intensifies.
The latest critique is planned for this afternoon, when a University of London professor in Chinese history has scheduled a lecture there titled "The Faking of 'The City of Light.'
" And in recent weeks other scholars, in Tel Aviv and London, reported finding an Arabic word in the author's glossary that they say was tantamount to finding the word "Oldsmobile" in the Dead Sea Scrolls.
The level of scholarly vitriol is such that historians have abandoned their customary dry conversation. 
"It's unanimous," said Benjamin Braude, a history professor at Boston College. 
"The book stinks. 
The book is a fraud."
"City of Light" is said by its writer, a former Oxford University professor, to be a translation of a secret manuscript written in the 13th century by Jacob of Ancona, an Italian Jewish merchant who chronicled his journey to a busy port in southeastern China where he discovered "a city of measureless trade" torn by debates about issues still current today.
The writer, who describes himself as the book's translator, is David Selbourne, 60, a Briton who lives in Urbino, Italy. 
He did not respond to requests for an interview, but has said he was allowed to read the manuscript only on condition that he not show the original to others or reveal its owner's identity.
After publication of a review questioning the book's authenticity, Mr. Selbourne replied with a mocking letter to The Times of London's Literary Supplement, asking in jest for a group of academics, or a "literary Public Safety Committee," to prepare a "common critique."
"In fact it is all too late," Mr. Selbourne wrote, after making the suggestion. 
"Jacob's argosy is well and truly launched upon the high seas, and nothing -- certainly not the harpoons of the critics vainly pursuing in the wake -- can stop its passage."
The book was published in Britain by Little, Brown & Company, but in September its sister company in the United States postponed the Nov. 
3 publication. 
For the moment, the fate of the book remains "in a holding pattern," said Beth Davey, director of publicity for the company in New York.
Alison Menzies, a Little, Brown publicist for "The City of Light" in Britain, said the book was selling well there, though she did not give specific figures.
"This is a book that we published with the Christmas market in mind," Ms. Menzies said, "and we haven't been disappointed."
Since the book's postponement in the United States, criticism has only intensified.
Bernard Wasserstein, president of the Oxford Center for Hebrew and Jewish Studies, and his brother, David, professor of Islamic history at Tel Aviv University, say they are convinced that it is a fraud because of Jacob's use of the word "mellah," which they contend did not exist in his lifetime.
While sailing south through the Persian Gulf, Jacob reaches the Persian shore at the entrance to the gulf, where he describes a "mellah," a small Jewish quarter, according to a glossary written by Mr. Selbourne.
"Mellah" is roughly equivalent to "ghetto," said David Wasserstein, who added that it did not come into popular usage until more than 150 years after Jacob's purported voyage. 
The root of the word is salt, and the word is derived from a community near a salt marsh in Fez, Morocco, where Jews gathered after 1438.
"We can say conclusively that this case is proven," Mr. Wasserstein said, "because it requires something parallel to the appearance of 'Oldsmobile' or 'shopaholism' in the Dead Sea Scrolls."
Inside Oxford University, where Mr. Selbourne taught the history of ideas at Ruskin College, he still has some supporters.
"He told me, looking me in the face, that this is genuine," said Tudor Parfitt, a professor of modern Jewish studies at the University of London. 
"I tend to believe in what people tell me. 
I believe him an honorable man, but some of the criticisms are fairly difficult to counter. 
What we're all waiting for is him to come out of his corner with his manuscript. 
"
      
