
CHINA'S stock markets have been showing signs of irrational exuberance again.
With so much excess cash swirling around, and an anything-goes mentality at work, China's markets have become prone to wild swings of buying and selling. 
Stock prices surged more than 60 percent in this year's first four months, one of the sharpest rises in the world.
Yet China's central authorities were so alarmed by the buying frenzy they took several steps to cool it last week, sending the market down nearly 10 percent in a single day.
Now, it is anyone's guess whether the buyers -- the retailers of securities and individual investors -- will spring back into action, and if they do, how regulators will respond.
"What's going on is a battle between the regulatory authorities and the retailers," said Peter Alexander, director of Direct Pacific Financial Services in Shanghai. 
"Lately, the retailers have been winning."
Buyers had been betting that Beijing's efforts to calm the market would be mild, Mr. Alexander explained, because of a belief that the Government does not want to take drastic action before July, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule.
So, as if on a dare, regulatory authorities in Beijing decided last week that their past methods -- an editorial in The People's Daily cooled a similar buying craze last December -- would not be enough this time.
To try to absorb the free-flowing cash that has been flooding the market this year -- driven in part by falling interest rates -- the authorities announced plans Thursday to raise their quota for new share offerings this year to $3.6 billion, or double the 1996 figure. 
They also increased the transaction fee charged on each trade to five-tenths of 1 percent from three-tenths of 1 percent.
The following day, the authorities suspended trading in four listed companies that had shown abnormal price movements. 
Because market manipulation is believed to be rampant, the prospect of a crackdown hit home, and the market plunged.
It can hardly be coincidence that word also began circulating in the markets last week that Zhou Daojiong, who heads the Securities Regulatory Commission -- China's version of the Securities and Exchange Commission -- would soon be replaced by an official who better understands markets and the benefits of aggressive regulation. 
No announcement has yet been made.
The market was lackluster yesterday, though trading in the suspended shares was resumed. 
The Shanghai market's index for dollar-denominated shares -- those available to outside investors -- edged up just 0.52 point, to 84.96, though the index that tracks shares available to domestic investors posted a larger gain.
With interest rates falling, said John Pinkel, head of China research for Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong, investors have been less willing to put their savings in the bank. 
When the market began to surge this spring, many new investors stepped forward. 
"The fundamental problem is a lack of investment opportunities," he said.
In April, the Shanghai Securities Exchange processed 1.3 million new accounts, nearly 10 percent of its total.
"The really staggering thing is that the volume is even larger than Hong Kong's," Mr. Pinkel said.
The value of shares changing hands in Shanghai and at China's other market, in Shenzhen, reached a combined $4 billion a day at its peak last week, more than twice the volume in Hong Kong, where the overall market is significantly larger.
The exuberance among China's investors, irrational or not, may look similar to the enthusiasm that has pushed the New York Stock Exchange to levels that made United States regulators, including Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, express concern.
But with their wild swings, their reliance on rumor and their uneven regulation, China's markets look like those in the United States early this century. 
Or, perhaps, like a less exalted venue for placing financial bets.
"Compare it to an OTB parlor at 42d Street and Sixth Avenue," said Mr. Alexander, referring to the off-track betting centers in New York. 
"There are people staring at a huge screen; there's some guy crying in the corner that he just blew his daughter's college tuition, and the boss is in the back counting all the money. 
Exactly the same."
Many investors in China, he added, are still uncomfortable with the idea of leaving their money overnight in something as abstract as a stock. 
"They all want out by the end of the day," Mr. Alexander said. 
"And then they'll go back in the next morning."      
