
"CREDIT," as Tom Paine, the American revolutionary, once wrote, "is suspicion asleep."
Nowhere is the snoring louder than in the market for foreign debt. 
To be sure, there is some evidence that the public is not quite as enthusiastic as the investment bankers, but a lot of it is selling quite well.
Last week brought two extraordinary events in the sovereign debt market. 
First was a $500 million bond issue from the Bank of China, a government-owned operation. 
Buyers seemed to want the five-year bonds but to be dubious about the 20-year variety. 
The People's Republic had never before sold bonds of that maturity, and it appears that the decision to sell $100 million of such bonds was based more on what the bank wanted than on what the market demanded. 
Morgan Stanley, the lead underwriter, acknowledged that not all the bonds had been sold.
The other deal was Turkey's. 
There, a $1 billion issue that was being marketed by Salomon Brothers and Merrill Lynch supposedly was pulled from them and assigned to CS First Boston, which is said to have promised a lower interest rate. 
So far, CS First Boston has not announced plans to sell the bonds, and it won't comment on any of this.
Both deals show how eager Wall Street is to do business with governments these days. 
A decade ago, the very idea of underwriting debt for a country like China would have been laughed at. 
Now its debt is investment grade, and its 20-year bonds were priced to yield just 1.35 percentage points more than Treasury bonds.
Whatever you might think of Washington, it does have a dollar printing press, which makes it highly likely it will be able to meet its obligations. 
On the other hand, if the Bank of China were to default, there is no guarantee that Chinese courts would uphold an American judgment ordering it to pay.
The billion dollars raised by the Bank of China, said Huo Tuan Jie, a deputy general manager of the bank, will be used to finance a variety of energy, communications and transportation projects in China. 
Not the most liquid of investments in a pinch, but these days the words "emerging markets" bring out the greed, not the fear, on Wall Street.
The Chinese deal was sold as Secretary of State Warren Christopher was on his way to China to express concern over human rights abuses and to threaten to remove China's favored treatment as a trading partner unless things improve. 
The buyers seem to be unconcerned, pointing instead to the bank's solid balance sheet -- audited, as it happens, not by an accounting firm but by the bank's own accounting department.
It was only a few years ago that most of America's large banks took huge losses due to defaults by foreign governments that turned out to be worse credits than expected. 
But there's no similar danger here. 
To be sure, banks bought almost half the Bank of China bonds, but not for their own accounts. 
Instead, they put them in the trust accounts they manage for customers.
