
DID the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company steal a tire factory in broad daylight?
Absurd as the question sounds, two details make it the beginning of a potentially important, cautionary tale. 
First, Goodyear is being sued, accused of having stolen the factory, and if it loses it faces a ruinous penalty of as much as $3 billion. 
Such a judgment could provide a windfall for the Hong Kong company that filed the suit, China Tire Holdings, which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Second, the dispute is about a venture in China, and it speaks volumes about the development of one of the world's wildest capitalist markets.
Although it is ultimately a complex story, the basics are relatively clear. 
Several years ago, Nicholas G. Clarke, who runs an international tire distribution company in San Clemente, Calif., linked up with a Chinese company seeking to purchase a secondhand radial-tire factory.
In 1991, Mr. Clarke helped the Dalian General Rubber Factory, which is principally owned by the Dalian municipal government in northeast China, to acquire a production line from the Nordic Tire Company of Boras, Sweden. 
The plant, though old by Western standards, produced modern radial-ply tires in relatively large quantities, a rarity in China.
The plant was moved and became known as the Dalian International Nordic Tire Company and was owned by various Chinese Government entities. 
The plant had an annual capacity of up to 1.4 million passenger car tires, and there was a plan to increase the capacity to 3 million tires a year.
Mr. Clarke's company, Orion Tire, eventually agreed to acquire 25 percent of the company that owned the Dalian factory, and received the right to distribute internationally at least 350,000 tires a year from the plant.
The venture was expected to be highly lucrative. 
Although a remarkably small number of cars and trucks ply China's rutted roads, the sprint toward industrialization is expected to introduce traffic jams to even modest-sized cities within a decade, making China one of the world's most promising tire markets.
There are also huge cost savings at the Chinese factory. 
Mr. Clark said that in the United States the labor on a typical 155 x 13 passenger car tire is close to $4; it is 25 cents in China. 
The factory was expected to generate annual profits of at least $28 million.
It is easy to understand why, therefore, Mr. Clarke was approached by Goodyear several times about buying his interest in the relocated plant. 
Mr. Clarke said he refused, partly because the company did not offer enough money, partly because he thought he was on to one of the great deals of his career, and partly because he had another deal cooking.
At the same time, Mr. Clarke was negotiating to sell a majority stake in his company to China Tire Holdings, the Hong Kong holding company that owns interests in tire factories across China. 
It is one of several ventures controlled by a Chinese entrepreneur, Oei Hong Leong, who lives abroad.
Even Mr. Oei's supporters call him "a deal junkie," as a prominent Hong Kong investment banker put it. 
He has made dozens of investments in China in the hopes that some modest proportion will pay off.
China Tire -- whose stock price soared after its initial offering on the Big Board last year, and has languished since then -- did acquire 60 percent of Mr. Clarke's company, Orion Tire. 
And that is when the situation in Dalian got interesting.
Mr. Clarke said that his orders for tires went unanswered and that he finally learned that a new company had been set up in Dalian -- a joint venture between the municipal authorities and Goodyear. 
The radial-tire factory had been transferred to this venture.
China Tire still held its interest in the Chinese tire company, but that company no longer owned the modern radial-tire factory.
"I did all that, and then Goodyear just comes along and takes it," Mr. Clarke insisted. 
"This is the best tire factory China has right now."
One modest bit of recompense came last year, when China Tire and Mr. Clarke won $13.5 million in a Chinese arbitration ruling against its Dalian partners. 
But the ruling left Goodyear with the radial-tire plant.
Goodyear, of course, takes a different view.
"We consider the action totally without merit," Goodyear said in a statement. 
"Goodyear will defend itself against these allegations."
