
There was a certain tautness to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's face yesterday, a vague twitch of impatience, as he stood next to the recently released Chinese dissident, Wei Jingsheng, in the Blue Room of City Hall. 
The Chinese reporters in the room were asking endless questions about China, everyone was looking at Mr. Wei and no one was asking the question the Mayor wanted asked.
So finally he just had to ask it himself.
"Can you tell us," the Mayor inquired, "your first impressions of New York City?"
He smiled a feline smile, as if he knew what the answer would be, which it turned out he did. 
Sure enough, Mr. Wei, who was released from 18 years in a Chinese prison last week and flown to the United States, could not have answered more congenially if he had spent as much time on the Mayor's staff.
"There are not as many violent crimes and criminals as the Chinese Communist propaganda media said," Mr. Wei said, through a translator, to raucous laughter all around.
Other mayors, particularly Edward I. Koch and Fiorello La Guardia, Mr. Giuliani's favorites, loved to dispense foreign policy advice to governments around the world, instructing Russians, South Africans and Nazis to behave themselves. 
Mr. Giuliani has demonized his share of unpopular world figures -- Yasir Arafat, Fidel Castro, double-parking diplomats -- but for the most part has stayed out of international disputes. 
He may love to stand next to a hero of democracy, but his real interests are strictly local.
He criticized the Chinese government only indirectly yesterday in lamenting the lack of human dignity in China. 
Instead, he made it clear that China and similar countries could learn a lesson in tolerance from the city over which he presides.
"This is a city that's built on an understanding of human freedom, founded very largely because people wanted to practice their religion the way they would like, not the way the government would tell them to do it," he explained to Mr. Wei, who has spent the last several days in New York. 
"It's a city that has accepted people from all over the world and grown as a result of that. 
And it's a place that is unafraid of new people, because we understand that new people allow us to grow even more."
Nothing in the room was too small to be turned into a object lesson in local virtues. 
When television camera operators got into their usual shouting match with still photographers, Mr. Giuliani described it as the price of free expression in a free country. 
When he held up a copy of Mr. Wei's book of prison writings, "The Courage to Stand Alone," he explained to Mr. Wei that it might help sell the book, "which is one of the things a capitalist country has to offer."
In an hourlong private meeting with the Mayor that preceded the news conference, Mr. Wei signed a copy of his book and discussed human rights, trade policy and his life in prison. 
That was also where he revealed that Mr. Giuliani's achievement of lowering crime in New York City had not reached the ears of the Chinese Communist leadership.
Aides to the Mayor agreed later that even if Mr. Wei hadn't made the remark about reduced crime, he still would have received the key to the city, putting him in the company of the 1996 New York Yankees, former Police Commissioner William J. Bratton and Pope John Paul II.
At the news conference, Mr. Wei dismissed criticism made by some of his fellow dissidents in China on Monday that he had become arrogant and was too soft on Deng Xiaoping, China's former leader. 
"I think if you read my book, you know how critical I was of Deng," he said.
And he had nothing but praise for Mr. Giuliani's support of his human-rights crusade. 
"I think the Mayor is a very smart American," Mr. Wei said. 
"Because Mr. Mayor knows that what happens on another side of the planet is not irrelevant to what happens on this side. 
I hope that many more Americans are as smart as Mayor Giuliani."
