
When Thomas F. McLarty 3d was President Clinton's chief of staff, he approved a 1994 meeting that brought inside the White House several Chinese businessmen working on a project with the controversial Lippo Group, documents show.
The meeting, according to White House documents obtained by The Associated Press, was sought by C. Joseph Giroir of Arkansas, a former law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton, and was also supposed to involve John Huang, whose later fund-raising activities for the Democrats are under investigation.
Mark Middleton, a White House aide at the time, greeted the Chinese businessmen and a Lippo executive on the afternoon on April 22, 1994. 
Mr. Huang, then a Lippo employee, and his wife met with Mr. Middleton earlier in the day at the White House, Mr. Middleton's calendars show.
The Huangs made $20,000 in donations to the Democratic Party the month before the meeting and a $5,000 contribution a week after it, Federal election records show. 
Mr. Huang later joined the Commerce Department and, at Mr. Giroir's urging, became a Democratic fund-raiser. 
He is the central figure in the current campaign money inquiry.
The disclosure marks the first time a meeting is known to have taken place inside the White House related to a proposed $1 billion project to build a power plant in China. 
The project, now dormant, was led by the Lippo Group, based in Indonesia, and Mr. Giroir.
Mr. Middleton set up the meeting after being directed to do so by Mr. McLarty, said Bob Luskin, Mr. Middleton's lawyer. 
Mr. Middleton "was asked by McLarty to spend about 15 minutes to kind of meet and greet," Mr. Luskin said on Friday.
Mr. Middleton has left the White House since then and has a consulting arrangement with Mr. Giroir.
Among the documents turned over to investigators is a phone message to Mr. McLarty the week before the meeting indicating that Mr. Giroir would be in Washington to meet with "different energy groups."
"If your schedule permits," the message said, "he would like to see you either in the office or for dinner."
In a statement on Friday, a White House spokesman, Lanny J. Davis, said, "Mr. 
McLarty has no recollection of asking Mr. Middleton to set up a meeting with Lippo or the North China Power Group."
He said Mr. McLarty did not think he had any other "information other than what is in the phone message."
