
While emotional memorials to the 1989 Tiananmen massacre were held in cities from Hong Kong to New York this week, on the streets of Beijing there was nervous silence.
June 4, 1989, remains China's ultimate skeleton in the closet: the day troops ended six weeks of pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square with guns and tanks, killing hundreds and injuring thousands.
There is no public discussion of the incident, except for occasional Government announcements defending the military action as necessary to combat a "counterrevolutionary rebellion."
Editors delete even oblique references in manuscripts. 
In private, it is mentioned cautiously, generally only among friends.
But thousands of Chinese witnessed the bloody spectacle that played out on the boulevards of central Beijing on the night of June 3 and the early morning of June 4.
A factory worker recalls hauling a dying man away on a bicycle cart; a surgeon remembers two days without sleep, operating on more than 20 students, workers and soldiers; a young businessman -- then a high school senior -- tells how he roamed the streets watching protesters set fire to military vehicles and soldiers shoot into crowds.
However, with public discussion banned, such events remain largely undigested, and many people refer to "the June 4 problem" without really being able to define it, much less say how it might be solved.
Chinese who experienced the crackdown often voice disillusionment with the Communist Party and politics in general. 
Others say that to avoid a repeat of such carnage, compromise and patience are in order, as long as China continues on its path of economic development and slowly expanding personal freedom. 
Still others say that the country will never truly move forward until the events of Tiananmen are addressed.
"There is certainly support to redress June 4," said Li Sunzhi, former president of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, whose students protested. 
"You hear it from taxi drivers, retired generals and even some retired cadres. 
But the Government strategy is to let it drag out."
And perhaps with good reason. 
"If June 4 were reappraised," Mr. Li said, "I think many potential liberals could become more aggressive and it could lead to a real political awakening among Chinese."
No one expects the Government to reverse any time soon its official verdict any time soon. 
At least not as long as leaders like Li Peng remain. 
Mr. Peng, who as Prime Minister issued the declaration of martial law on May 20, 1989, is now chairman of China's Parliament. 
Still, some prominent citizens speak out, although within limited circles.
Dr. Jiang Yanyong, who in 1989 ran Beijing's most prestigious military hospital, told a small meeting of Yanjing University alumnae last week that he had "always believed in the party."
But on the night of June 3, scores of wounded were carried into his emergency room and many were dead by morning, including the son of two army officers.
"In my wildest dreams I never imagined that something like this could happen," he said. 
"A Government should never do such a thing. 
That is counterrevolutionary."
But many less potent memories have been submerged in the past decade. 
Many Chinese have only the vague sense that June 4 was a terrible tragedy that will someday prove a watershed in modern Chinese history, although many are reluctant to guess why or how.
"I was a participant and also to some extent a victim of June 4," said a 36-year-old former university lecturer who, like many protesters, was fired and afterward unable to hold another state job.
Now a small businessman, he struggled to define the legacy. 
"June 4 was a national tragedy and a major historical event," he said, "though we've not reached the point where we can appraise and understand the event or its consequences."
He added, with a note of sadness, "Following the trauma of June 4, many people like me arrived at the conviction that the only path for China was one of cautious, progressive liberalization -- anything else was unacceptable."
The taboo regarding June 4 sits uncomfortably in a country whose opinionated citizens now debate environmental pollution, corruption and foreign trade. 
China today is richer, less ideological and more pluralistic, and it offers many more opportunities to its citizens.
In 1989, students were assigned jobs at graduation, and only the privileged got passports. 
Today, at China's more prestigious universities, more than half the students in some departments study overseas.
Since 1989, the Government has confronted some of the student protesters' leading complaints, including official privilege and corruption.
Young Chinese, in particular, say they are more concerned with pursuing careers than multiparty democracy, which they see as a distant prospect. 
Many students and other Chinese now view 1989 protests as naive and its leaders as uncompromising.
"In 1989 that kind of event was so new that young people were responding from the heart," said a 28-year-old advertising account manager who remembered going to the square every day after school to watch. 
"Today, it's true, we're more willing to accept the realities of life. 
But we're also able to look at issues in more independent and mature ways."
For the most part, today's college students have only their childhood recollections. 
"The memory is already fading in society and relatively speaking among intellectuals," said one writer. 
"In fact, where the memory of June 4 is least faded is among officialdom. 
It hangs over them all the time."
The most prominent voice for a re-evaluation of June 4 is Bao Tong, a former Central Committee member who was jailed in 1989 for seven years after he opposed the military crackdown. 
He remains under constant surveillance, though authorities have thus far allowed him to pursue his campaign for a reversal of the official verdict.
"There is no doubt in my mind that public support for a reappraisal of 1989 and for major political reform not only exists but is widespread even under current political conditions," Mr. Bao said.
Even in 1989, he said, most Politburo members opposed a deploying troops against the protesters but were overruled by Deng Xiaoping, China's late paramount leader.
The most heartfelt call for remembrance comes from Ding Zilin, a retired professor who vowed to publicize the Government killings after her son, then a high school senior, was shot on the night of June 3.
She rues and also understands the general public's silence. 
"If my own son had not been lost in the massacre, I probably would have been one of the silent majority," she said.
These lone voices have been joined by a smattering of career democracy advocates, a number of whom were detained this week for trying to commemorate Tiananmen.
"Events of that day changed my life, until then I was an ordinary worker," said Ma Qiang, 29, who helped carry away the dead and injured that night, and who is now affiliated with the fledgling China Democratic Party. 
"Afterward, I felt the need to start writing and studying things like democracy and law. 
So for me June 4 is a terrible memory but also a resource."
But far more numerous are the vast pool of Chinese who have set aside the memories, knowing how unlikely a reassessment is.
"It is not very convenient to talk about this topic now," said a nervous young banker, who 10 years ago spent several weeks in Tiananmen Square. 
"The widespread attitude among the participants is that they hope that June 4 can someday be re-evaluated. 
But this is an event officials are still very sensitive about."
And too much pressure now, some say, could provoke a backlash that night erase the freedoms Chinese have gained in recent years.
"I think that June 4 is an event that should be left to history to judge," said a 34-year-old man who uses the English name Andy. 
"There are disagreements here that will be unresolved for 10 or 20 years. 
And until then we should do what we can do in the present circumstances and not provoke a crisis."
But by then, others say, memories may be so faint that a reassessment would be meaningless.
In the meantime, hundreds of families mourn in a vacuum. 
Many a June 4, the families of two slain students, Hao Zhijing and Duan Changnan, go to a leafy cemetery and wail by the photographs on their sons' headstones, with little public sympathy to console them.
      
