
Like New Yorkers, residents of China's largest city have a reputation for aggressiveness, savvy and style. 
But when it comes to comparisons, there is no Shanghai equivalent to Manhattan. 
With 14 districts instead of 5 boroughs, Shanghai has no single cultural, financial and political center.
Nor is there an equivalent to Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, who visited Shanghai this week with a dozen New York businessmen and three members of her staff.
One Chinese official wondered aloud what a local official was doing in China talking about international business, since government work of the districts here typically concerns only matters like housing and municipal infrastructure.
Ms. Messinger described her tour -- Shanghai is the fourth of six Asian cities she is visiting -- as a way "to deepen economic, cultural and governmental ties between New York City and Asia."
Yet the trip also seems to be a chance for her to act mayoral and to engage in the nebulous field that businessmen and politicians like to call "building relationships," relationships that may, or may not, lead to some meaningful investment or cultural exchange.
Rudolph W. Giuliani has never traveled abroad as Mayor, but Ms. Messinger joins a long list of borough presidents who have journeyed far from home turf. 
Claire Shulman has visited Portugal, which has close historical ties to Queens, and herself went to China to promote Queens in 1988. 
Fernando Ferrer has pushed the Bronx in Israel. 
Howard Golden last year visited Brooklyn's sister city, Anzio, Italy.
On Thursday, Ms. Messinger worked on her relationship with Han Zheng, head of Lu Wan district, who asserted that his district was actually the Manhattan of Shanghai. 
Lu Wan, something like the Upper East Side in size and temperament, is competing with two rival areas for Ms. Messinger's affection, which may lead to designation as an official sister district of Manhattan.
Lu Wan's strongest draw is Huai Hai (pronounced HWAI-high) Road, the city's premier shopping street, even if nearly half of it is under construction. 
Mr. Han, looking clean-cut in a navy blue suit, showed off the street to his visitor on Thursday and was eager to impress her.
"The first McDonald's in Shanghai is on Huai Hai Road," he boasted.
Mr. Han spilled a long list of plans and statistics about construction and office space. 
Ms. Messinger studiously scribbled notes, nodding steadily.
Over an eight-course lunch, Mr. Han got down to business.
"How is the Chinese food in New York?" he asked.
Ms. Messinger, grappling with a slice of sauteed squid that kept slipping between her chopsticks, replied diplomatically. 
"We have many different kinds," she said, "but none are as good or as beautifully served as this."
Mr. Han, one of his aides noted, is widely expected to rise to a citywide post one day. 
What is Ms. Messinger's future, the aide asked.
"She's going to run for mayor in two years," said one businessman on the trip, James Jao, chairman of the Long On Group, a conglomerate of trading and consulting companies based in New York.
For those accompanying Ms. Messinger, the trip is a way to get formal introductions to officials in Asian cities where they want to do business.
While other New York borough presidents say they usually pay for their own trips, the businesses represented in the delegation are paying for Ms. Messinger and her staff, although local Chinese officials are picking up most hotel and meal expenses. 
Ms. Messinger's husband, Andrew Lachman, a public school administrator, paid his own way on the trip, she said.
Ms. Messinger, who said she had not officially decided whether to run against Mayor Giuliani in 1997, described the trip as an outgrowth of the work she already does as Borough President to encourage Asian investment in New York. 
The delegation, which has so far also visited Beijing, Changzhou, Seoul and Hong Kong and plans to visit Taipei.
"People do business with their friends," she said. 
"We've been able on this trip to expand friendships and build on the relationships we already had."
Andrew Breslau, her director of communications, put it another way: "Economic integration is proceeding. 
You have to surf it."
