
A third smuggler's ship carrying Chinese migrants was finally towed into port here today after being kept offshore because of tensions among the 235 passengers. 
Most were then deported.
After the rusting, 30-year-old cargo ship docked, most of the Chinese were herded down a gangplank onto 10 buses that took them to the airport in Tijuana. 
They then boarded an L-1011 jet for China, where their long voyage began many weeks ago. 
Mexican officials said 19 refugees who were suspected of causing friction had been handcuffed and put onto a separate bus.
More than 400 Chinese from two other ships arrived here on Saturday, three days after Mexico ended a standoff with the United States Coast Guard by deciding that the illegal refugees could come ashore. 
The Mexican authorities have been loading them steadily onto planes for China.
Seventy passengers from the vessel that docked today remained in Ensenada tonight but are scheduled to fly out on Monday.
Even as the dispute over the three ships seemed to be ending, Mexican officials said another ship loaded with Chinese emigres had been sighted in international waters south of here and was heading this way. 
They said several more ships were off the coast of San Francisco, near Panama and in the waters near Hawaii. 
Officials said they could not accept all the ships.
The crews of all three ships now docked here have been arrested and will be prosecuted for violating Mexican immigration law, officials said. 
If convicted, they face jail sentences of up to 18 years.
Like the hundreds who were sent back on Saturday, their hands bound with plastic straps, the Chinese who were taken off the third ship today appeared to be stunned into silence.
Jorge Medina Viedas, the spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said a 29-year-old man had suffered an attack of appendicitis and had to be taken from the vessel before it arrived.
Officials would not say what dispute had occurred on the third ship, only that it could not proceed into port until the problem had been resolved. 
Mr. Medina Viedas said no one aboard appeared to have any injuries resulting from a fight.
