
With unusual sharpness, a senior official in the Mexican foreign ministry told the United States today that the fate of 659 undocumented Chinese aliens aboard three ships off Mexico is up to the United States, and that Mexico's rejection of a request by the United States for assistance still stands.
"Mexico is not going to accept these people," said the official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified. 
"This is the responsibility of the United States."
The official said Mexico had made it clear in a letter to Ambassador John D. Negroponte on Saturday that it "was not in position" to accept the United States' request to allow the three ships to dock in Mexico, where the passengers could be interviewed and then either allowed to enter the United States or returned to China.
The official disputed the accuracy of a statement by the State Department over the weekend that negotiations were continuing on possible solutions. 
Moreover, he contended that the United States had made an unreasonable request because the Chinese had no desire to go to Mexico and because, he said, United States immigration law so often worked against Mexican citizens trying to enter the United States.
 
Policy Change Suggested
"Why would we do this as a favor to the United States when our own people are victims of the same policy?" the official asked. 
He also said the United States seemed to be trying to change an immigration policy that for last 12 years had allowed Chinese citizens to seek asylum in the United States.
The Mexicans denied that further negotiations had taken place. 
They said officials from both countries had met, but only to share information.
In Washington, however, the State Department said that talks were continuing "with some intensity" but that there was no sign of resolving what is becoming an embarrassing international dilemma.
The dubious conditions on board the ships added to the urgency of the negotiations. 
The Coast Guard said today that conditions on the three aging commercial vessels crammed with Chinese were "fair" at best. 
In the last few days the Coast Guard has ferried out hundreds of pounds of rice and military meals, as well as life jackets and an electric generator for a ship whose engine had failed.
But a State Department spokesman gave a harsher assessment. 
"Conditions on these ships are truly appalling," said the spokesman, Michael McCurry. 
"That's one more reason that requires us to deal quickly and accurately with the threat that is presented to those on board."
The origin of the ships has not yet been disclosed, but officials in the United States and Mexico said they appeared to be part of international smuggling rings.
Mexican immigration officials backed off earlier reports that four other ships carrying more than 700 Chinese were heading toward the coast. 
And Coast Guard officials said their air patrols had not sighted them.
Thirteen employees of the Immigration and Naturalization Service have boarded the three ships, but officials said today that they were sent mainly as interpreters, not as part of any resolution to the diplomatic standoff between the United States and Mexico.
Verne Jervis, a spokesman for the immigration agency in Washington, said the Chinese-speaking interpreters were helping United States Coast Guard personnel who have been caring for the aliens since the ships, which were heading east, were intercepted last week and brought to a point in international waters 64 miles west of Ensenada, Mexico.
While Coast Guard medics have treated several passengers for minor injuries, only one person, a 19-year-old woman, has required hospitalization.
Immigration officials in San Diego said the woman, Zhou Shiuyun, of Fuzhou province in China, was airlifted Sunday afternoon to the University of California at San Diego Medical Center, where she underwent emergency surgery for a tubal pregnancy. 
She was in good condition today, said Eileen Callahan, a hospital spokeswoman.
Ms. Zhou spoke to The San Diego Union-Tribune on Sunday but has declined further interviews, Ms. Callahan said. 
"She's under a lot of medication," the spokeswoman added.
 
'I Hate the System'
Immigration officials said they suspected that she was going to the East Coast because she was carrying a New York-area telephone number.
"It's not just an economic problem," Ms. Zhou said in the Union-Tribune article. 
"I hate the system in China. 
There's no justice. 
I'll be punished severely, too, if the Americans send me back. 
That will be the end of me."
In the same interview she said it was a smuggler's promises of opening her own business that led her to borrow half of the $20,000 fee to be smuggled to the United States.
Immigration officials said Ms. Zhou was allowed into the United States under a medical parole permit and would be returned to the boat as soon as her condition improved. 
But an I.N.S. spokesman, Rudy Murillo, predicted that Ms. Zhou would ask for political asylum to buy time in the United States.
"She's talking like she's very well versed, very well coached," he said. 
"It's hard to reconcile the entire story."
