
In a sudden reversal, the Mexican Government apparently bowed to American pressure today and agreed to take responsibility for 659 Chinese refugees aboard three ships about 60 miles off the Mexican coast that were intercepted by the Coast Guard while headed for the United States.
Only hours after officials here had reiterated their stance that the smuggled Chinese were an American problem, a senior official announced that Mexico would allow the ships into port and then immediately return the immigrants to China.
The official, Andres Rozental, Under Secretary of Foreign Relations in Charge of North America, said in an interview tonight that Mexico was taking charge of the Chinese "purely on humanitarian grounds," because of the deteriorating shipboard conditions.
 
Pressure From Washington
But privately, Mexican and American officials confirmed that the United States had pressed Mexico hard to help resolve the problem, which embarrassed the Clinton Administration only weeks after it announced a new policy to discourage illegal immigration.
Some American officials had voiced concern that Mexico's tough rejection of the United States request came at a particularly inopportune time.
Only four months from now, the United States Congress is to cast the decisive vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement that is intended to eventually unite the United States, Mexico and Canada in a single, tariff-free zone. 
Mexico's demonstrated willingness to cooperate with the United States on non-trade issues is certain to weigh heavily in the vote.
Mr. Rozental said that Alexander Watson, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American affairs, raised the issue of the immigrants in talks with senior Mexican diplomats in Mexico City on Monday. 
But Mr. Rozental said, "I don't think there was any major pressure or anything."
Still, the episode was the latest in a series that have seemed to define the relationship between the two countries on the basis of Mexico's overwhelming desire to see the trade agreement passed. 
The accord is expected to increase jobs and wages in Mexico only slowly, but it is expected to quicken the flow of much-needed foreign investment in Mexico right away.
Over the last year, Mexico has prominently reversed itself several times in disputes with the United States, and almost every time Mexican officials have acknowledged their fears for the trade agreement as a leading factor.
A United States official said that tonight, even while senior officials in the Mexican Foreign Secretariat were publicly insisting that Mexico was not negotiating over the fate of the Chinese, and would not, other officials under President Carlos Salinas de Gortari were continuing to hold out the possibility of Mexican help.
 
Decision Is Welcomed
"Throughout this thing, there were some Mexican officials who were irritated and were unwilling to cooperate on this, and others who were willing to cooperate to work this situation out," the American official said.
In a public statement in Washington, Martin Judge, a State Department spokesman, said: "We welcome Mexico's humanitarian decision. 
Our discussions with Mexico continue, and we are willing to cooperate with the Mexican Government in this matter."
Mr. Judge said "consultations" on the immigation issue would continue Thursday in Mexico City.
Tonight in Washington, National Security Council and State Department officials were so sensitive about the appearance of having pressured Mexico that they would not discuss the nature of the talks that took place with Mexico this week.
On Monday, Mr. Watson met in Mexico City with Foreign Minister Fernando Solana Morales to discuss the request that Mexico accept the Chinese refugees, Mexican officials said. 
But the Foreign Minister expressed his displeasure at the request and its timing, four days after the request was first reported in American newspapers, and the talks faltered, Mexican officials said.
 
Treatment of Mexicans
Mexican diplomats had shown their ire at the American request for help with the Chinese openly. 
They suggested it was almost hypocritical to seek Mexico's aid with the problem when, Mexico maintains, the United States habitually mistreats some of the estimated two million Mexican citizens who cross illegally into the United States each year.
For more than a year now, Mexico also has been pushing the United States to change its immigration policies to guarantee undocumented Mexican immigrants better treatment and to allow more Mexicans living on the Mexican side of the border and working in the United States to be allowed to cross legally. 
Mexican officials said they feared that the Clinton Administration's new harder-line policy on keeping illegal immigrants out could have negative consequences for those goals.
But Mr. Rozental insisted that Mexico did not change its position. 
In its written appeal to Mexico for help last Friday, Mr. Rozental said, the United States had asked that Mexico bring the three Chinese boats into Mexican ports, then process the smuggled aliens jointly with the United States and the United Nations High Commission on Refugees to determine the validity of any claims of political persecution. 
The United States said it would then assume the cost of sending the rest of the Chinese, most of whom are believed to have paid thousands of dollars to be passed like chattel across the Pacific.
 
Mexico's Own Plan
Rather than accept those conditions, Mexico came up with its own plan, Mr. Rozental said.
He said the Mexican authorities would only tow the Chinese ships into port once they had made their way from their current position, about 70miles out to sea, to the 12-mile limit of Mexican territorial waters. 
Since one of the three ships is disabled and another is believed to be in precarious mechanical shape, Mexican officials said they expected the United States to take charge of assisting the boats to the 12-mile limit.
Mexican officials added that, as is their policy, they would not hear any claims of asylum from the immigrants. 
And though they have consistently accepted American compensation for processing third-country immigrants in the past, they said they would reject an offer of United States financing this time.
"These people were in really bad shape and in order not to prolong their suffering, we felt that we should get them back to China as soon as possible," Mr. Rozental said.
 
Persecuted or Not?
A Mexican official added: "We know very well that none of these people who are coming here are being persecuted. 
The U.S. knows that, too. 
The only difference is that in the United States, the only thing you have to do is to step on American soil and cry asylum, and you get a hearing."
Mr. Rozental said Mexican diplomats had ascertained that more than 100 Chinese repatriated by Mexico in May had not been punished by the Communist Government. 
But American immigration officials said an additional 112 Chinese whom the United States repatriated around the same time were subsequently jailed and fined.
Mexico has long prided itself on a generous policy of providing asylum to peoples fleeing politically motivated repression.
But last year, as Mexico struggled to begin the repatriation of more than 40,000 Guatemalan refugees who have been camped on its southern border for a decade, it expelled 123,050 illegal immigrants, many of whom it said were trying to cross into the United States for economic reasons. 
They included people from India, Latin Americans and Asians, 427 of them Chinese.
Mexico was especially angered in May, when about 200 Chinese from a group seized in Baja California escaped from the Mexicali airport and fled toward the United States. 
Most were caught, but Mexico was livid when the American authorities refused to allow the Mexican plane deporting them to even refuel on Alaskan soil.
