
In a decision intended to avoid further roiling the tensions between China and Taiwan, the Clinton administration agreed today to sell Taiwan upgraded versions of three missiles and a long-range radar system, but not four technology-laden destroyers.
The decision was made today at a White House meeting among the national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger; Defense Secretary William S. Cohen; and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, and it was relayed to Taiwan this evening, Pentagon and White House officials said.
As details of the decision spread, senior Republicans on Capitol Hill voiced some anger that the administration had not delivered a more robust weapons package.
Senator Jesse Helms, the Republican of North Carolina who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, pledged to seek passage of a bill known as the Taiwan Security Enhancement Act that would greatly strengthen military ties between Washington and Taipei.
How to gauge what to sell to Taiwan has become one of the most sensitive questions for Washington's relationship with Beijing, which has in recent months been recovering after almost a year in the deep freeze.
"We are conscious this is a sensitive time, but our primary guide is what is needed for Taiwan's security," said Undersecretary of Defense Walter B. Slocombe.
In recent years, the sale of weapons to Taiwan -- governed by the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act, which calls for the United States to provide "sufficient" means for Taiwan to defend itself -- has been a fairly routine affair.
But this year, particularly after China released a policy paper in advance of the Taiwan presidential election that toughened its stance toward the island, the shopping list from Taiwan was among the most sensitive. 
China, which regards Taiwan as a renegade province and has long refused to rule out military action to block Taiwan's formal independence, warned in the paper that putting off serious talks on reunification could be grounds for war.
Beijing had repeatedly told Washington in recent months that selling four Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, equipped with the Aegis battle-management system, would be "unacceptable."
China views such a sale as tantamount to endowing Taiwan with a system to defend against "theater missiles," a move it has consistently opposed.
A senior administration official called the weapons package a judicious response to Beijing's military threat to Taiwan.
"The real issue is the increasing investment Beijing has put in its offensive capability against Taiwan," the official said. 
"And to the extent that Beijing has fired missiles around Taiwan and is adding 50 missiles a year to its arsenal, that increases what we have to do to provide adequate countermeasures."
Conservative Republicans in Congress led by Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, in whose district the destroyers are built, have threatened to move more swiftly on the security enhancement bill if the administration does not proceed with the destroyers. 
The White House has said it will veto the bill, which the House has passed.
Also at stake is legislation that would give China permanent normal trading relations with the United States, a pivotal element if American businesses are to benefit from China's requested membership in the World Trade Organization. 
The White House is in a tight battle with Congress over passage of the trade legislation.
The package falls in three categories -- missiles that Taiwan has requested but that Washington declined to sell, a long-range radar system that was promised last year and whose precise character is to be determined and a study of Taiwan's naval needs. 
Pentagon officials said tonight that the study would not rule out a reconsideration of the Aegis destroyers, which are mounted with missiles and radars that can track up to 100 targets simultaneously. 
The ships cost $1 billion each.
The missiles to be sold to Taiwan include advanced medium-range air-to-air missiles, which are to be stored in the United States. 
If China acquired a similar missile like the Russian-made AAX-12, the medium-range missiles would be moved to Taiwan, a Pentagon official said.
Another missile to be sold is an upgraded version of the Maverick air-to-ground missile, guided by an infrared sensor. 
The third is the Javelin antitank weapon.
Probably most objectionable to Beijing is the long-range radar, Pave Paws. 
A senior Pentagon official said "exact details" were to be worked out on what would be the best model to give early warning for long-range missile launchings, as well as incoming aircraft.
The long-range radar would be "geared to the threat which we expect to be up a few years out" in China, the Pentagon official said.
The most sophisticated version of Pave Paws can track missiles 3,000 miles away. 
But it is far from clear that this is the model contemplated for Taiwan.
In deciding on the weapons package, the Pentagon, whose officials had been suggesting that they proceed ahead with the Aegis ships, finally acknowledged that such a move would be too provocative, a senior administration official said. 
"The Pentagon looked around and found they had underestimated what the Chinese reaction would be," the official said.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said his government was "particularly concerned that Washington was selling advanced weapons."
"Any American arms sales at this time," said the spokesman, Zhang Juanjuan, "might be viewed by the pro-independence people in Taiwan as open support."      
