
Justice Department officials said today that an F.B.I. press release contradicting statements by President Clinton about possible illegal foreign donations was intemperate and possibly misleading.
Attorney General Janet Reno would not comment on the issue today. 
Other senior officials of the Justice Department, speaking anonymously, offered a mild rebuke of the Federal Bureau of Investigation as part of an effort by the Clinton Administration to tamp down Monday's extraordinary public disagreement between the bureau and the President.
The underlying issue is whether counterintelligence specialists from the F.B.I., while passing on sensitive information to mid-level officials at the White House in June 1996, insisted that the information not be passed on to their superiors in the White House.
Mr. Clinton on Monday said he should have been told of the information, a warning that the Chinese Government might try to purchase influence through campaign donations to several members of Congress. 
"I believe I should have known," he said, but he complained that he was denied the knowledge because of the restrictions requested by the bureau.
The F.B.I. responded on Monday in a statement that in briefing two staff aides at the National Security Council at the White House, its counterintelligence agents did not place any restrictions on the information going up the chain of command.
But today, the Justice Department officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that bureau officials had placed significant restrictions on the dissemination of sensitive information, as Mr. Clinton had complained.
"Some form of caution was passed on by the F.B.I. people at this meeting with regard to transmission of the information," said a senior Justice Department official, reflecting the Department's review of the F.B.I.'s behavior. 
The official added, however, that the bureau did not explicitly tell the White House officials not to tell their superiors. 
The F.B.I. is supervised by the Justice Department, though by tradition it has a degree of independence.
The Justice Department official said the two security council officials who received the information interpreted the caution to mean that the information about possible Chinese efforts to buy political favor should not go to anyone else in the White House.
"It's a classic situation of two parties having a conversation and coming away with two different understandings," the official said. 
"No one has been able to come up with the exact words that were used in that meeting."
The White House today said it had obtained notes from one of the national security officials at the June 3, 1996, meeting. 
The notes say the bureau asked for "no wider dissemination" of the information.
Administration officials said the notes were taken by Edward Appel, who is an F.B.I. agent assigned to the National Security Council at the White House. 
The White House said the other security council member at the briefing did not recall the bureau official's exhorting him not to pass on the information.
The other official has been identified as Rand Beers, the senior director of the National Security Council's office for intelligence programs.
One White House official said today that the President was also dismayed that whatever instructions were given to Mr. Beer and Mr. Appel, they chose not to pass on the information to their superiors.
Another Justice Department official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, criticized the bureau for its blunt public statement on Monday.
Bureau officials today continued to believe that the Monday statement did little more than accurately reflect what happened at the meeting. 
"The sole purpose of why we conduct these briefings is so these people can tell their superiors," said one bureau official speaking on the condition of anonymity
The intercession by the officials of the Justice Department, as well as comments by White House officials today, leaves the bureau increasingly isolated on this issue even as it conducts an investigation into whether anyone in the Clinton Administration violated any laws in raising money for the Democratic Party.
Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick said in an interview this morning with National Public Radio that the Justice Department had begun an internal inquiry to find out what was said in the meeting. 
Although the Justice Department supervises the F.B.I., the bureau has a significant degree of independence. 
The President appoints the F.B.I. 
Director with the approval of the Senate.
The June briefing given to the National Security Council officials by the F.B.I. concerned intelligence information that the Chinese Government may have been seeking ways to increase its influence both in Congress and the Administration with political donations.
China has repeatedly denied that it tried to influence United States elections.
Questions about whether foreign business interests or foreign governments were trying to influence the Administration first arose publicly last October over Democratic Party fund-raising by John Huang, a former Commerce Department official who had once worked for one of Indonesia's wealthiest families.
The Democratic National Committee has since returned more than $3 million in contributions, much of it raised by Mr. Huang because the money was from questionable or unlawful sources.
Several members of Congress have said they were among six lawmakers warned by the F.B.I. last June -- at about the same time that the two security council officials were briefed -- that China was trying to influence members of Congress with campaign contributions. 
The F.B.I. said it would not identify the lawmakers, but four have come forward and said they received the briefings: Senators Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer and Representative Nancy Pelosi, all Democrats from California, and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.
      
