
SPURRED on by China's movement farther and farther from a controlled economy, "China funds" have been popping up fast -- so fast that only one among four new China-flavored mutual funds and three new closed-end China funds has celebrated its first birthday.
Their timing seems auspicious. 
Late last month, the International Monetary Fund reported that, at $1.7 trillion, China's economy is four times larger than previously believed and the third-largest in the world, behind the United States and Japan.
But investors who want to tap into China's fast-growing economy should remember that "10 to 12 percent economic growth rates won't translate into big investment returns overnight," said Colin Mathews, a closed-end fund analyst with Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago. 
And, like all investments in emerging markets, these funds carry plenty of risks.
From the time they came to market last summer, the three closed-end funds -- the China Fund, the Greater China Fund and the Jardine-Fleming China Region Fund -- have been volatile. 
They trade, like common stock, on the New York Stock Exchange, and began selling at premiums of roughly 8 percent over the net asset value of the securities they own. 
But by October, all three had fallen to discounts approaching 20 percent.
Why?
Because the funds are so similar, supply exceeded demand, explained Thomas J. Herzfeld, in Miami, a specialist in closed-end funds. 
Then there was a buyers' riot on China's stock exchange, followed by a threat in the United States to revoke China's most-favored-nation trade status.
But the funds quickly rallied when China agreed to reduce barriers to imports from the United States, averting a costly trade war. 
Then in April the Securities and Exchange Commission ruled that the funds were allowed to buy "B" shares -- Chinese company shares created for foreign investors -- clearing the way for direct investment in Chinese issues.
Until the S.E.C. ruling, Chinese investments were nearly impossible. 
So funds labeled "China" haven't necessarily invested there, or at least not heavily, and that's still true. 
Direct Chinese investments account for only 16 percent of the Greater China Growth Fund's portfolio, for instance, and just 3 percent of the China Fund's.
Mutual fund investors likewise can only get a taste of China through regional funds. 
The two granddaddies here are Newport Tiger, started in 1989, and T. Rowe Price's New Asia, the only no-load in the group, set up in 1990. 
Two more began investing last year: the Merrill Lynch Dragon Fund and the Eaton Vance Greater China Growth Fund, in Boston, the first mutual fund to make China, rather than the Pacific Rim, its investment focus. 
In April, Van Eck, in New York, set up the Asia Dynasty Fund and Fidelity introduced its Southeast Asia Fund.
None of the China mutual funds, however, are loading up on direct investments in China. 
Instead, all try to capitalize on China's growth mainly by buying shares in Hong Kong, Korean or other Pacific Rim companies with large sales revenues from China or manufacturing facilities there.
Typical is Eaton Vance, which invests just 4 percent in China -- in Shanghai Refrigeration Compressor, Dazhong Taxi and Shenzhen China Bicycle, among others. 
Some 45 percent is in Hong Kong, whose exchange is better established and better capitalized, 13 percent in Singapore, roughly 10 percent each in Malaysia and Korea, and the rest in the Philippines, Thailand and Taiwan.
Newport Tiger, with no direct investment in China, has 48 percent of its portfolio in Hong Kong and the rest throughout Asia. 
"The China story is compelling, but it's going to be some time before the securities markets are settled enough to invest there," said Tim Tuttle, managing director of the fund's sponsor, Newport Pacific Management.
George Murnaghan, vice president of Rowe Price Fleming International, sponsor of the New Asia Fund, said, "We looked at 'B' shares, but there are cheaper ways to get China exposure."
New Asia has 31 percent of its portfolio in Hong Kong and the rest in Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Australia and New Zealand.
Most of the funds plan to continue investing outside China despite the S.E.C.'s blessing to plunge in. 
Valuations are high on the Chinese exchanges, managers say, partly because so few new issues are floated on the exchanges, which are not very liquid anyway.
Managers are enthusiastic about China's prospects, but concede that interim performance will probably be erratic, despite flashy gains this year of 30 to 35 percent (closed-end) and 19 percent and up (mutual) funds.
Mr. Mathews suggests that investors hang onto shares in Pacific Rim funds for at least 10 years to capture the long-term value built into China's economic prospects, and limit their exposure to only a small part of the high-risk portion of their portfolios. 
As shown by the lukewarm performance of funds that sprang up after Eastern Europe opened for investment, new and uncharted territory isn't easy to till profitably.
As for the closed-end funds, today they again sport hefty premiums and Mr. Herzfeld advises waiting to buy until the funds return to discounts -- which, because the funds react so sharply to political news, he noted, could be any time.
