
The Nationalist Party challenger unseated Taipei's popular Mayor today in a suspenseful election that was closely watched here and abroad because of its possible effects on Taiwan's relations with mainland China.
Defeating the incumbent by a surprising 51 percent to 46 percent, according to unofficial results, the challenger, Ma Yin-jeou, 48, established himself as a new star of the Nationalist Party.
"It doesn't matter whether you voted for me or not, my victory is everybody's victory," he said this evening before tens of thousands of wildly celebrating supporters in midtown Taipei.
Beyond the mayoral contest, the Nationalist Party reasserted itself across much of Taiwan today. 
In elections for the national legislature, which was expanded to include 225 representatives this time, the party won a commanding 123 seats, according to preliminary results.
But it was the mayoral contest, which had been considered too close to call before today, that had captivated the country. 
By defeating Chen Shui-bian, 47, Mr. Ma set back the career of a man considered a major contender for the Presidency in elections in March 2000.
Mr. Chen's Democratic Progressive Party pledges to seek eventual independence from mainland China, which regards Taiwan as a renegade province. 
Its ascension to national power would raise tensions across the Taiwan Strait.
The Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, while promoting Taiwan's separate status in the world, is formally committed to eventual reunification with the mainland. 
This symbolic gesture is considered crucial by China, which threatens to attack if Taiwan ever declares legal independence.
"The voters are giving the Kuomintang another chance," said Andrew Yang, a political scientist at National Sun Yat-sen University in Kaohsiung. 
But Mr. Yang said the approval of many voters was contingent on further efforts by the party to rid itself of cronyism, to make its internal operations more democratic and to define a program for the future.
Today's elections were a major setback for the Democratic Progressive Party, which was born in the 1980's in opposition to the Nationalist dictatorship that dated to 1949, when Chiang Kai-shek fled the Communist victory on the mainland.
Chen Shui-bian, 47, became Taiwan's first directly elected Mayor in 1994 and won high public approval for improving traffic flows and attacking vice. 
But some saw him as high-handed and he lost ground today in former strongholds, where his efforts to suppress karaoke bars and prostitution cost jobs.
He met his match in Mr. Ma, a former Justice Minister and a graduate of Harvard Law School who is known for his scrupulous honesty. 
There were few substantive issues in the campaign, with Mr. Ma promising to do a better job and make Taipei a "world class city."
Handsome and vigorous, he used a drawing of a jogger as his campaign logo.
Mr. Ma was greatly helped today as many members of the New Party, -- which comprises breakaway Nationalists who are strong supporters of reunification with the mainland -- deserted their own candidate to support him and insure the defeat of Mr. Chen. In legislative elections, too, the New Party suffered a collapse.
Mr. Ma overcame a feared bias against "mainlanders" -- those from families that fled China in 1949, who are sometimes resented by the majority of "native" Taiwanese. 
Mr. Ma was born in Hong Kong and moved here when he was one.
"We are going to work with you all together," he said in his victory speech tonight, extolling his ethnically inclusive new concept of a "new Taiwan person."
At one point he switched from Mandarin Chinese to the Taiwan dialect.
Taiwan's popular President, Lee Teng-hui of the Nationalist Party, says he will step down after this term. 
Within Nationalist Party circles Mr. Ma is considered too young and inexperienced to run in 2000, and he has not been close to Mr. Lee or the party establishment.
But his victory and the party's strong national showing today have prevented a serious crisis of confidence in the party. 
Vice President Lien Chan and another party heavyweight, James Soong, are considered leading contenders for nomination for the 2000 race.
At the same time, Mr. Chen remains the best-known opposition figure, popular in much of Taiwan, and political experts here do not count him out as a candidate in 2000.
Before a dejected crowd tonight, Mr. Chen offered congratulations to Mr. Ma and said, "I hope he can fulfill the city's expectations."
"Although I lost," he said, "I feel my team has done a good job in making Taipei a better place to live."
In a rare plus for the Democratic Progressives, Frank Hsieh, their candidate for Mayor of the second-largest city, Kaohsiung, was a surprise victor by a narrow margin over the Nationalist incumbent, Wu Den-yih. 
After a week of frenzied campaigning, Taipei was quiet earlier today, its residents strolling to neighborhood polling places in schools, fire stations and temples where they stamped their choices for mayor, city council and the national legislature on long paper ballots.
Many voters marveled at a democratic process that in just one decade has become deeply ingrained.
Only in the late 1980's did the Nationalists -- who had firmly ruled Taiwan since they fled the mainland in 1949 -- give free reign to the building opposition. 
The first direct legislative elections were in 1991, the first mayoral elections in the two major cities in 1994, and the first Presidential election in 1996.
Vote-buying has been a problem in elections here, especially on the part of the wealthy and well-organized Nationalists, but is declining and mainly confined to rural areas.
"Now, the elections are peaceful and well organized, and after we get the results everyone will accept them," said Tseng Li-ming, a 64-year-old bank officer, as he left the midtown college where he voted.
"And if you don't do a good job, you'll get voted out," he said.
