
Whether they are carving ivory in Africa, jade in China, marble in Greece or lava in Hawaii, sculptors often reveal a great deal about their surroundings by the materials they use.
This is also true in Williamsburg, where artists like Boaz Vaadia and Tim Main draw inspiration and materials from the streets beneath them and the world around them.
Mr. Vaadia works with bluestone from the sidewalk and boulders that were excavated when the city dug up the sewer lines. 
These days he is finishing "Binyamin," a large sculpture of both materials that depicts a classically proportioned figure leaning on a boulder.
"I don't see New York City as an unnatural environment," Mr. Vaadia said in the converted garage that serves as his studio. 
"New York is as natural as anyplace else. 
We are creatures of nature, and this is our habitat. 
When we see bird nests, we don't say they are unnatural. 
But somehow when we talk about where people live, it becomes unnatural."
Drawn to bluestone by its layered properties, Mr. Vaadia began asking for it whenever old sidewalks were replaced with concrete. 
In exchange for friendship, money, Scotch or simply the convenience of not having to take the stone to a dump, road crews were soon bringing him a steady supply. 
Now that his demand exceeds the supply he can get from the crews, most of the bluestone Mr. Vaadia uses comes from quarries, but a slab along one wall of the studio was recently dug up in front of the grocery store across the street.
"For me, bluestone signifies the connection of man and nature," said Mr. Vaadia, 43, who was born in Israel and went to the Brooklyn Museum Art School, Pratt Institute and the Avni Institute of Fine Arts in Tel Aviv. 
"Man quarries the stone by separating its layers, and then uses it for sidewalks and slate roofs."
Mr. Vaadia's bluestone has made it to the White House. 
One of his sculptures, "Zur With Dog," is on display in Hillary Rodham Clinton's sculpture garden.
A few blocks south, Mr. Main was working in his studio on an interdisciplinary art project inspired by railroads. 
Mr. Main has made one of the area's problems -- illegal dumping -- into an art supply bonanza.
Scouring the waterfront for debris, he once stripped pieces of distressed metal from castoff appliances and carefully painted messages like "To Trains" and "Baggage" on them as if they had come from the old Pennsylvania Station.
Mr. Main, a 35-year-old film maker, sculptor and set designer, surreptitiously installed several mosaics a few years ago in Manhattan subway stations where the tile walls had cracked. 
"It was something between a repair job and graffiti," he said. 
The Transit Authority left them untouched for a while, but ordered them removed after Mr. Main installed a provocative mosaic in the IRT station at West 34th Street depicting Bernhard H. Goetz and the teen-agers he shot.
Mr. Main is now at work on a film project inspired by the old tracks that still line parts of the Brooklyn waterfront. 
From the days before trucks until 1959, the Jay Street Connecting Railroad ran from several piers to nearby warehouses. 
Mr. Main has begun building tracks around his studio for the project. 
"I like the way you can look around and still see fragments of things," he said.   MICHAEL COOPER
