
Mitch Perl, general manager at Cala Di Volpe, an elegant SoHo restaurant, says two Broome Street vegetable wholesalers are spoiling his business. 
First, there is the stench from vegetables stored on the sidewalk. 
Then, there are the delivery trucks that block the view of the restaurant, at the corner of Broome and Crosby Streets.
"We offer outdoor dining," said Mr. Perl. "It makes the place look like Hunts Point."
But Nann Chan, the co-owner of World Farm, one of the wholesale operations that is the target of complaints from SoHo residents, says she is being harassed because she is Asian. 
"One man come in and said, 'Go back to China,' and curse me," she said in halting English. 
"We clean up after loading and unloading. 
It's not a problem."
With Chinatown's expansion into Little Italy and eastern SoHo, Asian merchants are clashing more and more with their neighbors over quality-of-life issues. 
Artists, gallery owners and restaurateurs in SoHo have complained vociferously. 
So have members of the Grand Street Association, formed to battle the problems in what is technically Little Italy, but is for all practical purposes now Chinatown. 
Because of the complaints, the police issued 203 summonses to merchants in March and April.
On the congested streets of Little Italy and Chinatown, the environmental violations are pervasive. 
Merchants throw fish guts and vegetable debris in the street and down sewers, causing the latter to back up. 
Produce and fish are sold from the back of trucks, illegally parked and double-parked on narrow streets. 
Peddlers clog sidewalks, despite the opening last fall of an open-air market in Sara Delano Roosevelt park, created to relieve the problem. 
Many merchants have turned their storefronts into warehouses and now sell produce, fish and meat from sidewalk displays, spilling blood and brine onto the street.
"No one does enforcement in Chinatown," said Councilwoman Kathryn E. Freed. "A guy using a wooden board instead of an aluminum board at the San Gennaro festival will be issued a summons. 
But a Chinese guy selling unwrapped beef on a cardboard box is allowed to do so. 
It's an interesting form of reverse racism. 
Why is it okay for Chinese people to get sick?"
There is a cultural element to the schism, said Ning Zhou Zhang, who runs the Roosevelt market. 
"In the southern part of China, business is conducted just like in Chinatown. 
They put their merchandise outdoors, because there is no air conditioning."
But Ms. Freed doesn't think the cultural argument holds up. 
The Chinatowns in San Francisco, Boston and Los Angeles are clean and orderly, she said.
Peter Eng, the son of Chinese immigrants and a member of the Grand Street Association, says he believes some Asian merchants have unfairly accused their neighbors of racism when they are told to clean up their act. 
"They'll say things like the Italians are jealous of our prosperity," he said. 
"These are some of the same people who raise their kids in the suburbs. 
And their kids won't come into Chinatown because they think the people who live here are dirty."   MONTE WILLIAMS
