
They may be strangers to most of the city. 
But Edward Miller and Peter Tartaglia have made a name among Chinese in New York as two of the toughest detectives who deal with Chinese gangs. 
Their recent retirement brought out emotional farewells from Chinese New Yorkers.
"They've done something that many could not accomplish before," said Steven Wong, a leader of the Fujianese Chinese.
For years, Chinese restaurants and grocery stores were easy targets for extortion payments that started around $100 a week to Chinese gangs. 
In the early 1990's, the gangs began to rob homes and kidnap illegal immigrants from Fujian for ransoms of upward of $20,000. 
Out of fear of retribution, many victims did not report the crimes.
As a lead Asian gang detective in the Brooklyn Robbery Squad since 1989, Mr. Miller and his partners routinely canvassed Brooklyn's Chinese neighborhoods and developed a rapport with merchants. 
This resulted in hundreds of convictions. 
Mr. Miller joined the Major Case Squad in 1995, but had a heart attack shortly afterward. 
He retired in July.
Mr. Tartaglia became the executive officer of the Major Case Squad at the height of Chinese kidnappings in 1994. 
During his tenure, the unit established a working relationship with the police in Fujian, China, and the central Chinese law enforcement agency in Beijing. 
This made it more difficult for criminals to find a haven in China.
In 1995, the squad made headlines by capturing members of the Plum Blossom Boys, a gang whose members had kidnapped an illegal Fujianese immigrant, and tortured and killed her after her family failed to come up with the ransom. 
Mr. Tartaglia, who retired in in October, is now a detective in the Nassau County District Attorney's office.
The Police Department did not respond to requests for crime statistics and interviews. 
But Robin Mui, the president of the Chinese Language Journalists Association, who works closely with the police, said he had been told that reported push-in robberies and extortions against the Chinese in Brooklyn dropped from about 300 cases a year in the early and mid-1990's to about 10 cases a year now. 
He said reported Chinese kidnappings in the city declined from about 50 cases in 1994 to none so far this year.
Although many violent Asian gangs, like Fuk Ching, Tong On, and the Fujianese Flying Dragons, have been hobbled by aggressive joint law-enforcement efforts involving the Police Department and Federal agencies, officials warn that crimes against the Chinese are far from eradicated. 
Criminals, they said, have moved away to other states.
Even though violent crimes by Asians against Asians have declined, extortion has made a comeback in pockets of Chinatown in Manhattan. 
Officials say the criminals, ragtag groups of teen-agers and young adults with no affiliations with the real gangs whose names they invoke, have hit Pell Street, where the Flying Dragons once ruled, and East Broadway, the home turf of Tong On. 
They have broadened the range to include beauty salons, driving schools and furniture stores.
"At this point, the problem is contained to a small area," said a law enforcement official who insisted on anonymity. 
"We're trying to nip it in the bud."   JANE H. LII
