
Under a burning sun last week, 34 specially chosen workers from China -- 8 carpenters, 7 bricklayers, 6 painters, 3 rock positioners, 3 pavers, 2 project managers, 2 landscape architects, a brick polisher, a stonecutter and a chef -- labored to bring a little bit of the Ming Dynasty to Staten Island.
Before they are done in November, six more artisans from China will join them on the project they started on June 15: a $4 million cedar, brick and stone evocation of a Chinese scholar's garden from mid-15th-century China. 
Part of the Staten Island Botanical Garden, it will open to the public next spring for exhibitions and seminars on subjects like Chinese horticulture.
Based on Taoist ideas of how to promote meditation and reflection and on 2,000 years of Chinese design tradition, the one-acre garden will be the kind of sanctuary that renowned scholars specializing in literature, mathematics and Confucian philosophy might receive from the emperor if they were court favorites, or that prosperous families might build using their own money.
The Chinese artisans were handpicked for their skills by Landscape Architecture Corporation in Beijing, and come mostly from Suzhou, about an hour north of Shanghai, which is renowned for its gardens. 
Most have had experience building Chinese gardens in other countries like Canada, Japan and Singapore.
The project was conceived 12 years ago, said Frances Huber, 47, president of the botanical garden. 
Ten years ago, an expert in feng shui, the Chinese art of balancing the unseen forces of landscape, buildings and people, chose the most auspicious spot for the 8,000-square-foot garden.
An imposing array of materials -- in 44 containers, each the size of a medium-size U-Haul truck -- took a month to travel by ship from Suzhou to Port Elizabeth, N.J. 
Twenty containers have 350 tons of rock from the Tai Lake region of southern China, 10 contain wooden beams, mostly cedar; 6 have roofing materials, and 2 have hand-cast windows.
The crew members work as they do in China, from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M., with a two-hour break for lunch and a nap. 
Although each worker has specialties, most typically work on many parts of the project, since nothing is prefabricated.
The painters mix their own paint to get the historically correct reddish-brown hue. 
Those working on the beams of the Tea House of Hearing Pines do not use glue or nails, but rely on hand finishings and exact fit. 
The three rock positioners place the stones, with the help of a mechanical crane, around the Reflecting Lake to harmonize with the universe and their own esthetic judgment.
The men live on the grounds in nearby cottages. 
They have their own chef, Zhang Yong, to prepare Suzhou-style cuisine like marinated cabbage and stir-fried eels. 
Mr. Zhang gets his food from Chinese stores in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
"He makes everyone happy," said Liu Yinbai, 35, a project manager. 
And what about the Chinese restaurants of Staten Island?
"They're not Chinese," Mr. Liu said, shaking his head.
For their often backbreaking work, the artisans are paid 2,000 yuan a month, more than double their usual monthly wage of 800 yuan, or about $100, said Du Gen Xing, the other project manager. 
They telephone their families every week or so and joke that much of their bonus goes to A.T.&T. 
On breaks, they have visited Wall Street, the Statue of Liberty and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"But what we are really looking forward to," Mr. Du said, "is Atlantic City."   ANTHONY RAMIREZ
