
Founded in 1702 by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts as a mission of the Church of England, St. George's Parish could have hardly imagined itself conquered by a Chinese-American rector some 300 years later .
But then again, growing up as a son of a minor warlord who had ruled parts of the Guandong Province in China, the Rev. Franco Kwan, 46, never dreamed of leading a flock of Episcopal congregants either. 
A grander goal beckoned throughout much of his childhood, which was spent in a village in the New Territories section of Hong Kong.
"I wanted to reunite China and lead the country," Mr. Kwan, the parish's first Chinese-American rector-elect, recalled with a hearty chuckle one recent afternoon. 
That goal took him to the University of Chinese Culture in Taiwan, from which he earned a bachelor's degree in political science in 1976.
But the lack of wealthy, powerful political patrons quickly forced him onto a divine path that took him across Hong Kong and Taiwan to New York over the last two decades. 
These days he contents himself with the lesser task of unifying the three factions that make up his congregation: an English-speaking group, made up of longtime residents and recent immigrants from the Caribbean; a Spanish-speaking group, and the Chinese-speaking group.
Until 20 years ago, St. George's Parish catered to the pillars of Flushing society, said Kevin H. Cruz, a member of the vestry, the parish's governing body. 
But the arrival of middle-class and poorer immigrants changed the parish composition and caused resentment among old-timers. 
"Initially there was some animosity," said Gladys Field, chairwomen of the search committee. 
"People felt they got along nicely and that they didn't need somebody else."
Although that sentiment has subsided a little, the three groups now operate separately for the most part.
In 1988, Mr. Kwan came to St. George's as a vicar at the behest of the Diocese of Long Island to help revitalize the congregation, which had dwindled to 100, as a result of the white flight, from its heyday of 400. 
Today, membership has climbed back to about 250.
This helped him beat out 12 other applicants earlier this month to take the position left vacant by his predecessor, who retired three years ago.
"We wanted someone who is either bilingual in Chinese-English or Spanish-English and with substantial experience in community outreach to fulfill the needs of the community," Mr. Cruz said.
With a charitable wave of the hand, Mr. Kwan, who is fluent in English, Cantonese and Mandarin, says he does not hold a grudge against those who still feel bitter about his appointment. 
Instead, he will focus on renovating the three parts of the church -- the Gothic Revival main church, the Romanesque old parish house and the Tudor revival new parish house -- for its 300th birthday. 
"I want to create a godly love fellowship in the parish as well as in the community," he said. 
"We also need to create a service center to help enrich the lives of people in the parish and in the community."   JANE H. LII
