
At the new vendors' market in Sara Delano Roosevelt Park on the Lower East Side, Cheng Kin Wah flipped mounds of fried rice and two kinds of noodles on a big grill while his helper fried chicken wings in a large wok (four for $1).
For an hour, the stand was never idle; in fact, the line was at times three or four deep.
But Mr. Wah, who used to run a stand on bustling Canal Street, said volume was only "so-so."
And while dozens of vendors occupy the stands, with bargains ranging from fresh squid at $1 a pound to down-filled coats for $40, Mr. Wah is by far the busiest.
The market, one of several created by the city to clear unlicensed vendors from the streets, opened on Oct. 
10, next to the Grand Street subway stop and a block east of Chinatown's teeming Bowery. 
The entrance is dressed up with red flags and "Roosevelt Market" emblazoned on banners in English letters and Chinese characters in bold red. 
Inside, 84 stalls are laid out in wide aisles under white tents. 
The larger spaces, 10-by-10 feet, go for $350 a month; the smaller, 5-by-10, for $200. 
Almost all, said Ningzhou Zhang, the director, have been rented.
Some merchandise has a strong ethnic bent, like Chinese periodicals, dried Asian herbs, radishes thicker than baseball bats, foot-and-a-half-long green beans and raw lily roots. 
Other items are aimed at a broader audience, such as hats, plants, bras, jewelry and baby clothes. 
There are tube socks, six pair for $4.50, and a somersaulting Barney-clone toy for $5 -- batteries included.
But sales have been thin, merchants say.
"Pretty slow," Jimmy Chan said during a recent noon hour while he waited on a trickle of customers at his produce stand, where he works seven days a week. 
"Business is getting a little bit better, but still not enough to cover expenses" and draw a salary, he said.
Raymond Ng figures his sneaker stand's overhead of rent, storage and insurance at $24 a day and says his sales average only three or four pairs a day. 
"Most people are losing money," he said.
Weekend subway closings for repairs have hurt the market on what should be its peak days, a problem expected to end when work is completed next month. 
But the market's operator, the University Settlement Society, says the situation is improving as word spreads and start-up problems are addressed. 
The vendors worry that any gains may be offset by winter weather.
The need to promote the market, which is enclosed by a brick wall and recessed below grade, is evident just across the street. 
Albert Leung of Queens, who was waiting at the corner of Chrystie on Friday while his wife shopped inside a store, said they were unaware of Roosevelt Market. 
Another passing shopper, Jiewei Zhou of Brooklyn, also did not know about it. 
Now, though, he said he would certainly check it out.   BRUCE LAMBERT
