
How do you advertise to the thousands of Chinese immigrants in Flushing?
Some simple tips, to begin with. 
Avoid the number four, which means death. 
Just as many buildings here have no 13th floor, many Chinese high-rise elevators jump from the third to fifth floor, says Roger Lo, an advertising agent in Flushing. 
But lucky numbers, like six and eight, are sprinkled liberally in ads.
"Chinese businesses like to have telephone numbers beginning with 666," says Margaret Lo, his wife and business partner. 
Mr. Lo adds, "It's simple."
Simple for them, maybe.
The Los run Solomon Advertising, one of the city's few agencies that specialize in marketing to the burgeoning Asian immigrant groups. 
Because of language and cultural differences, the thousands of new arrivals from Korea, Taiwan or China in the last decade remain an elusive market for non-Asian businesses. 
But because they are comparatively affluent consumers, they have attracted the attention of marketers. 
On the city's Asian-language television channels, for example, viewers are bombarded with ads from AT&T and MCI urging them -- in their own language and with Asian actors -- to call someone across the Pacific.
Paul Sladkus, a Manhattan advertising-agency owner who has studied the buying tastes of Asian-Americans, says that because the United States' Asian population more than doubled since 1980, to seven million in the 1990 census, the majority still preserve the values of their native countries.
"So even for those who want to get out of Chinatown or Flushing, the focus in reaching that community is to target them in their own media and language," says Mr. Sladkus, whose agency holds the Asian accounts for Sprint and Western Union.
That is why Mr. Lo, who came from Taiwan 13 years ago, says he started his agency 6 years ago. 
Perusing the Chinese-language dailies, listening to the radio and watching television, he says he saw many ads that simply translated from English to Chinese and did not account for cultural preferences. 
In an industry where the subtlest nuances and imperceptible suggestions can mean the difference between a successful and unsuccessful marketing campaign, the unsophisticated ads held little promise.
The Los work according to a host of unusual rules of thumb, both musts and musts to avoid. 
Lucky colors, especially red, are splashed in newspaper advertisements. 
And in what will no doubt come as a shock to the Irish, ads directed at the Chinese will never, never, show green hats. 
In Chinese culture, a green hat is considered one of the cruelest of all imaginable insults: It implies that the wearer is being cuckolded.
The Los' non-Asian accounts have included Flushing's Queens County Savings Bank and Woodner House Condominium in Flushing.
In what he describes as his most successful campaign, Mr. Lo says he revamped a unsuccessful newspaper ad that was placed in a Chinese-language newspaper and showed the high-rise condominium against the glittering, nighttime Manhattan skyline. 
Instead, he inserted a photo emphasizing the interior's spaciousness, included Chinese models, and underlined the high-rise's conveniences. 
"Chinese immigrants want something real," Mr. Lo says, clenching his fist. 
"If they spend $1, they want $1 in value.
"Many of them, even the ones who are rich, work 12 hours a day. 
They don't have time to open the curtains to enjoy the view."
Once all the cultural hurdles are overcome, however, there is no guarantee of success.
Richie Rada owns Utopia Lanes, a bowling alley in Jamaica Estates. 
Seeking to attract Chinese bowlers, he placed ads by the Los in a Chinese daily, and attracted seven Chinese groups in the first month.
"But they didn't come back," Mr. Rada laments. 
"The ads drew them here. 
But, of course, when they got here, none of us spoke Chinese."   NORIMITSU ONISHI
