
The campaign start drew many of Chinatown's most prominent civic and business leaders to the 31 Division Dim Sum House. 
They listened to speeches, drank tea and worked on platters of dumplings, chow fun and Italian pastries. 
More than a half-dozen reporters and photographers from the Chinese-language press observed the event.
The candidate, in a fuchsia suit with a floral corsage, sat at a long, red-clothed table under banners in Chinese and English: "The Committee to Re-Elect Po-Ling Ng to Community School Board No. 2."
In most neighborhoods the opening of a school board campaign attracts little notice. 
But in Chinatown, where no Chinese-American candidate has ever been elected to the Council, State Assembly or State Senate, the school board race has taken on special importance. 
As one of the neighborhood's few Chinese-American elected officials, Ms. Ng is a familiar voice on Chinese radio and television programs. 
And while more than a third of District 2's pupils are Asian, she is the only Chinese-American candidate.
"I'm really thinking about new immigrants, because many go to public school," Ms. Ng said last week. 
"Many have a good I.Q. and are good in math and science but have trouble reading, writing and speaking. 
Bilingual education is a bridge to help them. 
Not just Chinese students, but Hispanic and Latino students as well."
Ms. Ng has served on the board for 14 years. 
In the "1996 National Asian Pacific American Directory," a guide to Asian officials across the country, she is one of only 33 Asian officials listed in New York State.
So Ms. Ng's candidacy has united factions of Chinatown that are sometimes at odds with one another. 
Her party on March 22 at the dim sum parlor drew both the old guard -- like leaders of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, an umbrella group that was founded in 1890 -- and officers of social service organizations that have sprung up in the last three decades.
Ms. Ng, 54, grew up in Hong Kong, where she taught school and ran a Y.M.C.A. program for troubled children. 
In New York since 1967, she began working for the Chinatown Planning Council, which provides social services. 
She now directs its Project Open Door center for the elderly and helped lead its fight to expand into the old police building on Grand Street. 
After her husband died, she reared her four children on her own. 
They attended District 2 elementary schools and then Stuyvesant High School and Bronx High School of Science.
"No votes, no voice," Ms. Ng told the crowd in Chinese. 
But she was preaching to the choir. 
The bigger test will be on May 7, when parents and voters go to the polls.
Ms. Ng's campaign manager, May Chin, said that getting the 5,000 votes needed to win will be a challenge. 
"We estimate that there are about 10,000 registered voters in Chinatown," said Ms. Chin, who works for Unite, the garment union, which has many members with children in District 2. 
"We usually get about 2,000 votes from Chinatown and get the rest by running on a slate."
Ms. Ng is running on the Advocates for Better Community Schools slate, which has a majority on the District 2 board. 
Nonregistered voters with children in District 2's schools can also vote, but not many do so. 
"I don't know why more people don't come out," Ms. Ng said.   MICHAEL COOPER
