
Along Canal Street in Chinatown, banks now outnumber restaurants. 
At the intersection of Mott, rival branches occupy all four corners: Chase, Chemical, Abacus and United Orient. 
The bank proliferation in the last decade has been fueled by waves of immigration and investment from Hong Kong, Taiwan and China that have doubled deposits in Chinatown to $4 billion.
But Federal and state regulators say that some banks are not reinvesting enough of that money locally in loans. 
"It's a major concern," said David Chen, executive director of the nonprofit Chinatown Planning Council. 
"There's a real problem for a great number of banks who may be getting all this business but not doing adequate outreach."
The United States Comptroller of the Currency gave "needs to improve" ratings -- the second lowest of four ratings -- to three Chinatown banks: Bank of East Asia, Bank of China and Ka Wah. 
New York regulators gave a similar designation to United Orient. 
Comparisons with banks in other parts of the city are hard to make because many operate branches citywide and receive one overall rating. 
The ratings do not incur direct penalties but can hurt a bank's application for new branches.
Critics say the lending policies reflect bias. 
A study covering 1987-89 found that Chinatown banks not owned by Chinese or Chinese-Americans issued fewer home mortgages in the neighborhood than Chinese banks. 
Chinatown does pose hurdles, say people who have studied the issue: 95 percent of the residents are renting, so have no mortgages, and banks are often geared to big businesses, not the small ones common in the area.
Some banks have already made changes, said Christopher Kui, executive director of Asian Americans for Equality, a nonprofit organization that works with banks to finance housing and small businesses. 
"Now banks are approaching us to do deals, so we're seeing progress," he said.
Competing for a share of Chinatown's lucrative savings market, domestic and foreign banks now have 41 branches in the community, making it one of the most densely packed banking zones outside Wall Street. 
Some branches have traditional Chinese architecture, but most are sleek, modern offices of marble, glass and brass. 
On the signs, Chinese characters have at least equal billing with English letters.
"Our employees are not only bilingual but speak about seven different dialects," said James R. LoGatto, an executive vice president at Republic Bank for Savings, which has a major stake in Chinatown. 
Its branches include the big-domed former Manhattan Savings Bank, at Canal and the Bowery.
Saving is a Chinese tradition. 
Even conventional bankers' hours are suspended in Chinatown, with many branches open evenings and weekends for late-working garment and restaurant employees and for Chinese-Americans in the suburbs and other boroughs who return for shopping and business.
"You really have to become part of the community and the culture," Mr. LoGatto said.
   BRUCE LAMBERT
