
A city crackdown on Chinese-owned stores in Little Italy has sparked tensions in the neighborhood, with Chinese businessmen asserting they were singled out.
City inspectors descended on Mott Street on Feb. 
22 and March 1, issuing more than 220 violations to merchants between Hester and Grand Streets. 
The sweep involved nine city agencies, including the Departments of Consumer Affairs, Buildings, Traffic, Fire, Sanitation and Health.
"We tried to work through this voluntarily and that has failed," said Rudy Washington, deputy mayor for community development and business services. 
"It was decided we had to coerce people into compliance."
Cathy Glasson, who has lived on Grand Street for three decades, said the open-air markets were making life unbearable. 
"Mott Street has been transformed into something like the Fulton Fish Market," she said. 
"I've seen rats swarming."
Many Chinese merchants were cited for altering storefronts in violations of rules governing what is known as the Special Little Italy District. 
The district was created in 1977 to preserve the area's historical and cultural character, at about the same time that Chinese-owned stores began spilling into traditional Little Italy.
"Little Italy is now drastically different," said Phillip Wong, assistant secretary to the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, one of the area's most influential groups. 
"This part of Chinatown should no longer be a part of the special district."
"I'm sure there are people who believe the original neighborhood has been denigrated because Chinese people have moved in," Mr. Wong said. 
Some Mott Street merchants said they thought the crackdown was racist.
But Mr. Washington said, "Racism has nothing to do with it."
The city's action, he said, was "simply a question of quality of life and public safety."
Some local officials said the assertion of racism was used as an excuse for avoiding responsibility. 
"A number of individuals, for their own reasons, seem willing to push this into a racial confrontation," said Councilwoman Kathryn E. Freed.
Anne Compoccia, president of the Little Italy Chamber of Commerce and chairwoman of Community Board 1, which covers part of Chinatown, said: "This Chinese versus Italian thing is reprehensible. 
We complement each other with tourism."
On Tuesday, Po C. Shum, an owner of a Mott Street seafood store, told members of Community Board 2 that the fines could put him out of business. 
Like many merchants on the block, he removed the original facade several years ago without permits.
"These are old buildings, and we can't just put it back," he said. 
"It would cost thousands of dollars just to research."   DENNY LEE
