
The Clinton Administration is drafting a trade policy toward Japan, China and Southeast Asia that would combine aid to American high-technology industries with negotiations to open Asian markets for these products, Administration officials said today.
The new policy of supporting specific exports is a sharp departure from the Bush Administration approach of seeking across-the-board trade liberalization, which sometimes benefited other countries as much as American companies.
The policy, the first and clearest outcome of President Clinton's call for making trade an integral part of the nation's economic and national security concerns, reflects a belief that the Bush Administration sometimes fought free trade battles that did little to create American jobs.
They point to the Bush Administration's long and successful struggle to persuade Tokyo to remove restrictions on large stores and allow Toys "R" Us Inc. to open outlets there. 
Many toys sold by the company come from Southeast Asia, not the United States.
 
Roles for 2 Agencies
"You open up the distribution system and lo and behold, everything is manufactured in Thailand," said a senior Administration trade official who insisted on anonymity.
The Commerce Department, for example, would spend money to help the computer, semiconductor and aerospace industries stay technologically competitive, while the Office of the United States Trade Representative would oversee negotiations on opening Asian markets for them, the official said.
The new policy does not include any plans for the sort of severe trade restrictions that the auto and textile industries have been seeking. 
The Administration trade official said that because of the program's emphasis on supporting exports, there might be little immediate effect on the nation's swelling trade deficit with Japan, which reached $49.42 billion last year.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, told the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday that American officials might seek specific shares of foreign markets for American companies, adding, "There is great interest in this Administration on that approach."
He said an interagency review had begun of policy toward Japan, but he provided few details.
Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, has played an extensive role in the development of the new policy. 
She has been in many hours of meetings with Mr. Kantor, who is overseeing the policy's development, and his top aides.
Ms. Tyson published a book last year, entitled "Who's Bashing Whom?
Trade Conflict in High-Technology Industries," that outlined some of the specific policies now envisioned.
The new policy may also be tempered by the same diplomatic and military concerns that limited the Bush Administration's willingness to restrict imports from Japan.
Diplomatic and military concerns are also strongly affecting trade policy toward China but are being used within the Administration to justify a more restrictive trade policy instead of the less restrictive one for Japan. 
At a meeting last week with about two dozen chairmen of the nation's largest multinational corporations, President Clinton said he did not want a "showdown" on China's trade access to the United States but was concerned about Chinese exports of military technology.
 
Strong Position Urged
Three people who attended the closed-door meeting in the Old Executive Office Building's elegant Indian Treaty Room said Mr. Clinton told the gathering that unless the United States took a strong position now, it might find itself a decade from now with a nuclear bomb under the World Trade Center and a need to evacuate all of Manhattan. 
White House officials declined to discuss the remark, saying the meeting had been confidential.
The Bush Administration persuaded Beijing last year to adopt a 12-page list of tariff reductions and other measures to open its markets. 
The agreement was partly intended to address a yawning trade imbalance, as the United States imported Chinese goods worth $25.73 billion and exported only $7.47 billion worth of goods to China.
Chinese bureaucrats appear to be obstructing some American exports covered by the agreement, notably auto parts. 
"We're coming up with all sorts of horror stories," the senior Administration official said.
The Clinton Administration is including Southeast Asia in the same policy review because it is one of the few regions in the world now showing strong economic growth. 
The United States holds the rotating chairmanship of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation this year, an organization with headquarters in Singapore that includes six Southeast Asian nations plus Australia, Canada, China, Japan, New Zealand, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan.
 
The Semiconductor Example
The new policy is heavily influenced by the perceived success of the Bush Administration's policies toward the semiconductor industry. 
These included a Government-sponsored industry research program, Sematech, as well as a 1991 trade agreement in which the Japanese Government "recognized" the American industry's expectation that it would win 20 percent of the Japanese semiconductor market by the end of 1992.
The new policy also owes an intellectual debt to Japanese Government-guided growth policies of the 1950's and 60's, which have fallen into disfavor with many academics during the current economic stagnation in Japan.
