
As he settled into his job as Hong Kong's new Chief Executive today, Tung Chee-hwa made clear where his priority lies: real estate.
With the handover from British to Chinese rule this week, people around the world are wondering how Hong Kong will handle delicate political issues, like meddling by Beijing or street protesters who criticize Chinese leaders by name.
Hot political issues may grab headlines, but residents here regularly say in opinion polls that the issue they care about most is housing and property prices, which are rising ever higher.
With growing demand from China and with a longstanding government policy that has limited the supply of new land, the prices here have become among the highest in the world. 
Selling an apartment for more than $1,000 a square foot is no longer unusual, and the world's most expensive home was recently sold in Hong Kong for $100 million.
Speaking at his first news conference as Chief Executive, Mr. Tung warned that Hong Kong could lose its competitive edge as a regional business center if the cost of property continued to rise as it had this year. 
He also expressed concern that prices, which have gone up more than 30 percent since Jan. 
1, were making it impossible for many ordinary people to buy a home.
"Property prices have been zooming up, which has a negative impact on the whole community," Mr. Tung said. 
"At the appropriate time, we will take resolute action."
Real estate is arguably Hong Kong's most important business. 
Real estate companies dominate Hong Kong's stock exchange, one of the reasons that many business people insist that public confidence -- and its effect on the demand for real estate -- is critical to Hong Kong's prosperity.
In recent years, Hong Kong's real estate boom has made billionaires of several local businessmen.
But Hong Kong has suffered increasingly crowded housing conditions, and the demand for new homes is expected to rise in the coming years with growing immigration from the rest of China. 
Already, tin shacks have sprung up on the rooftops of buildings, where people build makeshift homes.
Only about half of Hong Kong's residents own their own homes, a low ratio for a relatively developed area. 
Mr. Tung said in his inaugural address on Tuesday that he would try to double the supply of new apartments and to reach a 70 percent home ownership rate in the next 10 years.
But attacking real estate prices, as Mr. Tung promised to do, may bring him into conflict with Hong Kong's big businessmen, who benefit from high property prices and who generally supported Mr. Tung to be Hong Kong's first Chief Executive under Chinese rule.
Mr. Tung acknowledged that there was now a seven-year wait for new government housing, and said he understood the frustration that some potential home-buyers felt.
In a poll published today by Ming Pao, a local newspaper, 78 percent of respondents said they thought the government should take steps to bring down real estate prices as soon as possible.
At his news conference, confidently speaking fluent Cantonese, Mandarin and English, Mr. Tung also faced several questions about how he will handle relations with Beijing.
"There will be conflicts, and obviously they will need to be talked through in order to make sure that our interests are looked after," Mr. Tung said. 
"But the important thing is that our long-term interests are very similar."
Asked about demonstrations, Mr. Tung said they could continue as long as they were conducted legally. 
But as a man who often says Hong Kong should emphasize traditional Chinese values, including civility and obeying those in power, Mr. Tung indicated his distaste for demonstrators.
      
