
It was supposed to be a lift-the-glass rally for the future of Hong Kong business. 
Beijing's de facto ambassador, Zhou Nan, recently described the paradise that awaits the colony after the Union Jack comes down on June 30, 1997, and the Chinese flag goes up. 
One after another, tycoons and corporate chieftains raved over his vision.
But then, Raymond Chien, trim and bespectacled, stepped to the podium. 
An economist by training, the managing director of one of Hong Kong's larger food-and-beverage conglomerates by vocation and an oenophile by avocation, Mr. Chien meandered into the murky world of metaphor to make his point. 
"A confident wine maker would choose to be minimally interventionist, allowing the wine to make itself," he said. 
"After all, there is no way for the wine to escape the bottle."
Mr. Chien's not-so-subtle appeal for Chinese restraint apparently fell on deaf ears. 
If Hong Kong is a fine wine, then the Communist leaders are suddenly doctoring it to fit their tastes. 
In late April, they engineered an agreement obliging Swire Pacific Ltd., the British owner of Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd., to sell a big stake in the airline and in its affiliate, Hong Kong Dragon Airlines Ltd., to Chinese interests at bargain prices. 
While details of the negotiations remain unclear, it seemed apparent that the Chinese were using their future position of power to pressure Swire into delivering two of Hong Kong's business jewels into their hands.
"It's obvious that China is assuming greater control over strategic industries," said Miron Mushkat, the chief economist for Asia at Lehman Brothers. 
"Hong Kong's neutrality is in the process of being redefined on the ground."
Beijing has already declared its intention to abolish the colony's political institutions, including the dismissal of all elected bodies throughout the territory and their replacement with members of its choosing.
But until last month, many people had assumed it would refrain from throwing its weight around too much on the economic front for fear of scaring away the capitalists who have made this the globe's fifth-largest stock market, its second-largest port, an Asian banking center and the gateway to the mainland.
Many analysts regard the prospect of such meddling as a major reason why two British companies, British Telecommunications and Cable and Wireless, called off merger talks in April. 
British Telecom was attracted to Cable and Wireless's 57.5 percent stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications, but worried it would not get Chinese approval to acquire the subsidiary.
"Telecommunications is a strategic industry," Mr. Mushkat said. 
"Electricity is a strategic industry. 
It goes without saying that anything through which information flows is a strategic industry. 
But then you have to ask what else?
Is banking a strategic industry."
Hong Kong's resilient business community wants to believe the best about Beijing's intentions. 
The stock market's immediate reaction to the Cathay deal was relief that Chinese threats to start a rival airline had apparently evaporated. 
The day after the agreement was announced, shares in Cathay rose more than 5 percent, and the Hong Kong stock exchange's Hang Seng index gained 1 percent.
Even so, many Hong Kong residents interpreted the move as a clear signal of China's intention to take charge of their economic affairs. 
"It's a de facto nationalization through the stock market," said John M. Mulcahy, the managing director for UBS Securities. 
"They sold things at a very deep discount to their value."
But, Mr. Mulcahy added, Swire really had no choice. 
"I think they were coerced," he said.
Westerners are not the only foreign investors to worry about the implications of China's new activism. 
Hiroshi Zaizen, the senior managing director for the Mitsubishi Corporation, came from Japan to address the same gathering as Mr. Chien. He told the several hundred business leaders that a survey of its members by the Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Hong Kong disclosed anxieties about the impact of Beijing's rule on Hong Kong's public order, monetary stabilityI, tax system, press freedom and real estate market. 
He also fretted about the dangers of a "brain drain" and "declining English proficiency among young people."
Ishii Yoshiaki, the president of the Japanese Chamber of Commerce here, said it was the uncertainty of the business climate that he found most nettlesome. 
"Hong Kong is going to be affected 100 percent by China," he said. 
"The point is, what is going to happen?"
The Americans are also getting nervous. 
In April, Merrill Lynch, a long-term booster, startled the colony with a report entitled "Bumps in the Road" that offered an uncharacteristically downbeat assessment. 
"Negative factors relating to the mechanics of the transition seem set to cause some significant jolts to confidence in the weeks and months ahead," the analysis said. 
"It is not possible to say at this stage whether such jolts will have lasting negative effects."
A senior American executive who has spent many years here said the No. 1 concern of foreign investors was that Hong Kong's rule of law would be overwhelmed by the corruption that was already rampant on the mainland. 
"With more Chinese coming in, it's a major worry," said the executive, who requested anonymity. 
"Once it starts, there's not an easy end."
Beijing's tightening grip is hardly a big surprise. 
In anticipation of Britain's departure, more than half the companies on the Hong Kong stock exchange have moved their official domicile abroad. 
Many of the trusts of Hong Kong's wealthiest families are also registered overseas, and even the most publicly pro-China tycoons have foreign passports tucked in their back pockets, just in case.
The man on the street apparently harbors the same forebodings. 
In February, as a deadline for obtaining British travel documents loomed, more than 100,000 Hong Kong citizens stood in line in the hopes of snagging one of them.
However China behaves, Hong Kong's stature as the entrepot to China and a regional base for Southeast Asia is being challenged by the explosion of opportunities elsewhere. 
Last month, Kazuo Wada, the chairman of Yaohan International Holdings Ltd., a Japanese conglomerate involved in department stores, restaurants, trading and property, announced that he would be shifting the majority of his operations from Hong Kong to Shanghai.
To be sure, no one here regards Hong Kong as a sinking ship. 
Every morning, divisions of finely suited bankers, lawyers, brokers and accountants charge into the mirrored towers of the central business district. 
Restaurants are packed, cell phones chirp incessantly, and property prices are edging upward. 
But what is different now is that conversations over dim sum turn more often to Hong Kong's clouded future.
Mr. Chien, the managing director of the Lam Soon Hong Kong Group who likened Hong Kong to bottle of wine, takes a sympathetic view of Beijing. 
"Their primary task is governing a country of 1.2 billion people that is still poor," he said. 
"Then you have this little place of six million people, with bigger foreign exchange reserves, bigger trade. 
It's almost like you have to switch from one compartment of your brain to another."
But Mr. Chien is hopeful that Beijing will take the road of pragmatism. 
"The more freedom you give Hong Kong, the sooner will Hong Kong as a community develop the high comfort level to be an integral and highly developed part of the People's Republic of China," he said. 
"The more autonomy you allow Hong Kong, it will be better for everyone."
