
In a bid to jumpstart an inquiry hampered by recalcitrant witnesses and staff defections, House Republican investigators today released what they portrayed as further evidence of a Chinese Government connection to President Clinton's re-election campaign in 1996.
Investigators for the panel led by Representative Dan Burton of Indiana said bank records showed that a bookkeeper for a Democratic fund-raiser, Yah Lin Trie, had shared several bank accounts here with two Chinese officials -- a senior executive of a Chinese state-run corporation and a former Chinese Embassy attache in Washington.
Investigators acknowledged that the evidence was highly circumstantial. 
But they decided to release it in part to try to breathe life into Mr. Burton's inquiry, which has been hamstrung by partisan wrangling and strategic missteps.
The bookkeeper, Keshi Zhan, shared a checking account at the International Monetary Fund credit union here with Zhengkang Shao, a senior executive at China Everbright, a financial holdings conglomerate owned by a Chinese state council, according to bank records. 
From 1988 to 1994, Mr. Shao was a permanent resident of the United States and an economist with the International Monetary Fund.
But the investigators found no evidence that Mr. Shao's money was funneled to the Democratic Party and no connection between Mr. Trie, who was indicted earlier this year, and China Everbright.
Ms. Zhan and Mr. Shao also shared an account with Yongli Su, an attache at the Chinese Embassy until 1992 and a friend of Ms. Zhan.
The disclosures were made by senior investigators for the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, which Mr. Burton heads. 
The investigators said the information bolstered the so-called "China connection" to the 1996 elections. 
They said they decided to release the information after recent reports that a Democratic fund-raiser, Johnny Chung, had told the Justice Department that nearly $100,000 in his contributions originated with a lieutenant colonel in the Chinese Army.
Investigators called Mr. Shao an "intriguing figure" who could have important information about "Mr. 
Trie's money-laundering network."
Mr. Burton said in a statement: "The material developed by the Committee regarding Charlie Trie, Keshi Zhan and others raises serious questions. 
Did representatives of the Chinese Government have a hand in this conduit contributions scheme or is it all just a coincidence?"
The panel's disclosures also raise new questions about Ms. Zhan, a former clerk for the Arlington County, Va., government and a part-time hostess for Mr. Trie, a former Little Rock restaurateur known as Charlie whose $645,000 in donations to the Democrats were returned when their origins could not be determined. 
After being granted immunity by the Senate campaign finance committee, Ms. Zhan answered questions under oath for two days.
Ms. Zhan's lawyer, Breckinridge L. Willcox, said: "To me, what Mr. Burton is doing is simply an exercise in completely unwarranted and creative inference building in a desperate search for a Chinese connection. 
This is a complete joke."
Mr. Willcox said that much of the information released by the House panel was gathered by the Senate campaign finance committee led by Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee.
"They did not view it as evidence of a Chinese connection," he said. 
"Isn't it ironic that Mr. Burton now views it that way?"
Indeed, there may be other motives for the disclosures. 
Mr. Burton's committee has been reeling in recent weeks from criticism by Democrats, particularly after the bungled release of audiotapes of Webster L. Hubbell's prison conversations, and the dismissal of the panel's chief investigator, David Bossie.
Much of the attention has shifted away from Mr. Burton's committee since Speaker Newt Gingrich appointed a special select committee, led by Representative Christopher Cox of California, to investigate Clinton Administration policy that has permitted American satellites to be launched by Chinese rockets.
Kevin Binger, Mr. Burton's chief of staff, denied that the disclosures amounted to the panel's final piece of business. 
"These circumstances raise a lot of questions that have not been answered," Mr. Binger said.
Still, there are signs that Mr. Burton's inquiry is slowing down. 
Several investigators said in interviews that they intended to leave the committee in the weeks ahead to pursue other opportunities. 
And the House leadership has said it would like to move to a different House panel the testimony of four witnesses who have been denied immunity by Democrats on the Burton committee.
      
