
Timed to coincide with President Clinton's visit to China this week, American and Chinese doctors plan to perform a live consultation over the Internet tonight to discuss two severely ill children in China. 
It will be the first real-time medical consultation between China and the United States over the Internet.
The event is less a practical medical move than a show of diplomacy. 
Members of the Clinton Cabinet are expected to be on hand with doctors at the Medical University in Xian, a city in central China, as they consult pediatricians at the Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford University about a 12-year-old girl with inflammation of the heart and a newborn with brain damage.
The consultation will take place using standard Internet tools for audio and video, as well as a "white board" feature that enables participants to share text, images and sketches. 
"When there's direct interplay, you get more from it," said Dr. David Teitel, chief of pediatric cardiology at the University of California at San Francisco, who will be participating. 
"They can respond, and you can respond more quickly."
There have been other experiments with telemedicine in China, relying mainly on E-mail among doctors. 
Several hospitals in China, including Peking Union Medical College Hospital, have acquired sophisticated video-based teleconferencing systems, but such systems are not available for the rest of China's population.
"Everyone in the world has satellite links to Beijing, which is not a very real test of medicine to China," said John Reuling, director of information technologies at Stanford University's School of Medicine. 
Mr. Reuling said the group had chosen to use widely available Internet tools rather than state-of-the-art video-conferencing systems because they wanted to focus on what was actually available to doctors in Chinese cities outside the capital.
High-performance computers provided by Sun Microsystems will be left in Xian so further exchanges between doctors from both countries can take place. 
The consultation was organized by Bridge to Asia, a nonprofit group.
