
AS Cambodia wobbles yet again on the edge of a violent implosion, barely five years (and billions of dollars) after the United Nations mounted the largest national recovery mission in its history, the rest of the world might justifiably wonder, as an anonymous diplomat asked last week, whether Cambodians are simply bent on killing each other. 
"Let them be," seems to be the common sentiment. 
"We have done all we can for them."
That's the problem.
There has always been foreign meddling in the affairs of this extraordinary country of Buddhist piety, royalist loyalty, artistic brilliance, exquisite natural beauty and inexplicably deep strains of human cruelty and venality.
Thailand, France, Japan, Vietnam, China, the United States have had a hand in writing and rewriting Cambodia's history and, more broadly, the history of Indochina. 
A short but not small part of the story is known to Americans as the Vietnam War.
The effects of that war are still being felt throughout Southeast Asia. 
Perhaps it was fateful coincidence last week that while rumors were flying in Cambodia that Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader responsible for at least a million deaths from 1975 to 1979, had been captured, Robert McNamara, the American Defense Secretary who played a major role in raising United States stakes in the war, was in Vietnam discussing how that war could have been avoided.
Perhaps, too, he had learned enough to know that history did not begin with the Americans.
The Indochinese conflicts of this century have roots in old animosities that were easily exploited by new players. 
The ancient Siamese were such a perennial threat to the Khmer people of what is now Cambodia that the home of the stupendous temples and palaces at Angkor was joyously and proudly named Siem Reap, for victory over Siam. 
Modern Thailand, which inherited that Siamese legacy, has never given up the game. 
The Thai military until very recently enjoyed a lucrative business partnership with the Khmer Rouge that allowed generals to exploit impoverished Cambodia's timber and gemstones.
Vietnam was Cambodia's other traditional foe. 
Some scholars on how Pol Pot came to power believe that the Khmer Rouge's vicious hate propaganda against Vietnam earned it genuine support -- and still does, because Cambodians believe their two larger neighbors will always fight over them.
But Siam and Vietnam were outdone by France, which consolidated its hold over Indochina -- Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos -- by the late 19th century. 
Decades of relative peace followed, until World War II when Japan occupied much of Southeast Asia. 
When the Japanese were driven out in 1945, it was only a matter of time before French Indochina became independent countries in 1953-54 -- and again vulnerable.
It is fitting that Mr. McNamara and veterans of the leftist-nationalist movement in Vietnam should be talking about how the war got out of control, because the critical decisions made in Hanoi and Washington in the 1950's and 1960's still send out ripples.
After the defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 and the division of Vietnam, the communist leadership under Ho Chi Minh decided that the conquest of South Vietnam, not national development, was the top priority. 
America's entry did not deter Hanoi, only raised the real and human costs of its policy.
"Vietnam was prepared to make extreme sacrifices, but the Americans didn't understand this," Deputy Foreign Minister Dao Huy Ngoc told the gathering on Friday.
The war set Vietnam back at least a generation, but Hanoi thought the price worth the prize. 
While other Southeast Asian nations were spawning tiger-cub economies, the country was re-educating its people. 
The economic damage was compounded when an embittered United States, which had dropped bombs all over Indochina, denied Hanoi recognition and investment dollars for nearly 20 years after the fall of Saigon.
American capital and development -- including roads that the Vietnamese can only dream of -- rained on Thailand during the war. 
United States troops and planes found a home and a lot of good times. 
Thais, until they belatedly concluded that an American military presence would not serve their regional interests, prospered by the arrangement.
 
Missed Opportunity
The Thai economy, however troubled, now dominates Laos, which America bombed to box in the Vietnamese, and where it armed anti-communist hill people. 
Many Hmong were abandoned by their American paymasters and left in refugee camps in Thailand. 
Laos, always fragile, has yet to recover from its role as ideological battleground.
But it is in Cambodia that the Vietnam War itself seems never to have ended. 
Cambodia was everybody's opportunity. 
The Vietnamese used it as a sanctuary for North Vietnamese troops and Viet Cong while talking of a federation of Indochinese states (dragging in the hapless Lao) that sounded very similar to what the French had planned half a century earlier. 
The communists in Beijing and Hanoi courted Cambodia's radical leftist movement, which Prince Norodom Sihanouk had first called, disdainfully, the Khmer Rouge. 
The Khmer Rouge had, paradoxically, picked up their communist education in France. 
The Prince, who found himself in opposition in the 1970's, flirted with them enough to give Pol Pot credence with many Cambodians and served briefly and disastrously as their figurehead when they took power in 1975.
By then the United States had waded clumsily into Cambodia to support the anti-communist Lon Nol Government that had overthrown Prince Sihanouk's original regime in March 1970. 
Secret American bombing raids into Cambodian territory in violation of Congressional restrictions, compounded by an American-South Vietnamese invasion, helped the Khmer Rouge recruit new followers, although many Cambodians say now that the raids were probably not the most critical factor in Pol Pot's rise to power, given the support he got from the Vietnamese and China -- and from Norodom Sihanouk.
The fall of Phnom Penh to the Khmer Rouge in 1975, days ahead of the fall of Saigon, did not end American, Chinese or Vietnamese involvement in Cambodia. 
The war soon went on by proxy, with a part of the Khmer Rouge movement drawing closer to Vietnam as another faction threatened Hanoi's interests. 
In December 1978, Vietnam invaded, setting up a cooperative government the next month under Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge -- who is today the country's Second Prime Minister. 
China was furious and marched over the border into Vietnam to teach the Vietnamese a lesson. 
The Vietnamese taught them instead.
When the defeated Khmer Rouge fled toward the Thai frontier, they were drawn into an unholy alliance with the Cambodian royalists and a small, more democratic and moderate faction under Son Sann. 
China and the United States were among those who gave the alliance diplomatic and material support. 
Eager to rid Cambodia of the Vietnamese, Beijing and Washington, strongly supported by other Southeast Asian nations ready to seize economic opportunities in Indochina, forced Hanoi's withdrawal and engineered a peace treaty that put all factions back in play in Phnom Penh in 1992.
Until recently, it appeared that the Vietnam War had finally ended in Cambodia. 
Last week, the Cambodians struck up the music, and a new game of musical chairs began.
