
A group of 13 Nobel Prize-winning economists signed a letter today that backs China's bid to join the World Trade Organization. 
But the letter, released in a ceremony with top Clinton administration officials, was at least as notable for what it left out.
The four-paragraph letter, endorsed by 149 economists including the Nobel laureates, makes no mention of what the White House has called its top remaining legislative and foreign policy priority: persuading Congress to grant China permanent normal trade relations. 
The omission was conspicuous. 
As the administration has stressed many times, Congress has no say in whether China joins the trade body. 
Congress votes only on whether to elevate the trade ties, a step that is necessary if American companies are to benefit fully from China's membership in the W.T.O.
Clinton administration officials said the letter did not mention the vote because the administration sought to attract support from a broad array of economists. 
Some economists might not have agreed to sign the letter if it explicitly mentioned a political issue before Congress, the officials acknowledged. 
The officials said that they thought most of the economists who signed the letter personally support permanent normal trade relations, but that some do not and that others felt uncomfortable taking a political stand.
Qualms about delving into politics did not stop 200 corporate chief executives from endorsing permanent normal trade relations in a letter released earlier this month. 
And a group of former Treasury and State Department secretaries spanning five administrations explicitly backed the Clinton administration's position on the vote this month. 
So did 47 governors in a letter released in late March.
The White House released the economists' letter in high-profile fashion, kicking off the final month of an intense effort to persuade wavering lawmakers in the House to back permanent trade ties. 
The vote is expected in late May and the tally in the House is considered too close to call.
Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers; Gene Sperling, the director of the National Economic Council; and Martin N. Baily, chairman of the council of economic advisers, were on hand to present the letter to reporters. 
Robert M. Solow, a Nobel laureate from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, also came to Washington to speak in support.
"It's a once-in-a-generation event that Bob Solow and Milton Friedman, Paul Samuelson and Merton Miller are signing a letter on the same side of a major public policy issue," Mr. Summers said. 
He was referring to four of the Nobel-winning economists who signed the letter but have often taken opposing positions on other economic issues.
The lack of a clear stand on the issue before Congress also comes at a time when the administration is under scrutiny for its lobbying efforts on behalf of increased trade with China. 
A complaint from Representative Frank R. Wolf, a Virginia Republican who opposes making China's trade status permanent, prompted the General Accounting Office to open an investigation this month into whether the administration violated legal restrictions on lobbying Congress when it set up a White House "war room" to coordinate the campaign. 
That investigation is continuing.
When first asked why the economists' letter made no mention of permanent normal trade relations, Mr. Sperling said the administration had to abide by legal restrictions on what it could urge outsiders to say on a matter before Congress. 
But Mr. Sperling and other officials later said that explanation was incorrect.
They said that there were no legal restrictions at issue in choosing whether to mention the Congressional vote in the letter, and that it was drafted well before the G.A.O. began its investigation. 
The letter did not mention permanent normal trade relations because the administration was seeking support from a wide spectrum of economists on the left and right, some of whom might not want to weigh in publicly on a Clinton administration legislative priority, they said.
"The economists all believe that it's important to have open trade," said Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, who is leading the administration's lobbying campaign on the China vote. 
"But they want to stay out of the political fight."
      
