
When my family and I planned an overland journey to Ladakh last summer, it seemed like the ideal conclusion to our assignment in India, where I had spent nearly five years as the South Asia correspondent of The New York Times. 
Our aim was to round out our travels with a trip so ambitious and compelling that it would ease the wrench of leaving a country that had entwined our hearts.
The plan was to make a two-week, 2,500-mile round-trip road journey northward from New Delhi -- first, across the north Indian plain to the foothills of the Himalayas, then up the deep valleys and over the mountains to Ladakh, a part of ancient Tibet that became a northern outpost of India when it was annexed by Britain in the mid-19th century. 
Along the way, we would cross several of the world's highest-altitude road passes, one of them at nearly 18,000 feet, close to the height of the base camp used by mountaineers planning ascents of Mount Everest.
In Ladakh, we would explore a territory that has been Buddhist since the third century B.C., and of special significance to Tibetan Buddhists for the past 40 years, when it became a safe redoubt for many of those fleeing the Chinese Communist brutalization of Tibet. 
For fun, we would camp in the mountains; shoot the headwaters of the Indus on a raft; browse the Tibetan markets in Leh, Ladakh's capital, and mingle with the Western back-packers who have trekked to Ladakh since India opened overland routes to foreigners in 1989.
I had traveled previously to Leh to interview the Dalai Lama, who has spent part of many summers visiting Ladakh since he left Tibet in 1959 to begin his exile in India. 
But I made that journey by air, gazing down from 30,000 feet as the Indian Airlines plane flew across the narrowing triangle of Indian territory that lies beyond Simla, the old British retreat in the Himalayan foothills north of New Delhi, which is a staging post for travels into what ancient Indians knew as "the land beyond the mountains."
We had, I thought, all we needed for the trip: A Japanese-made four-wheel-drive vehicle, an Isuzu Trooper; plenty of experience of the vicissitudes of driving in rural India, and a family mature enough to handle any trials the journey might bring. 
Our children, Jamie, 17, and Emily, 15, had traveled with us to assignments in Russia, China and Canada, before India, and would be home for our last weeks in India from their boarding schools in England. 
Jamie's girlfriend, Sarah, 16, the daughter of a New Delhi-based diplomat, had also volunteered to come along.
An added challenge came from making the trip in August, in the middle of the north Indian monsoon, when swollen rivers in the Himalayas burst their banks and landslides carry away entire villages in the regions we would cross. 
Once into Ladakh, though, with valley floors at 10,000 feet, we would be in the one part of India where we could escape the rains and the stifling humidity. 
Guidebooks promised us 75-degree days and cloudless skies.
A few nagging counterpoints came from Jane, my wife, whose innate skepticism has restrained many a harebrained scheme. 
"Do you know any foreigner who has driven over those passes?" she asked. 
"And how will we fix the vehicle if anything goes wrong?"
Finally, a query inspired by Jane's lifelong passion for smoking: "How do you suppose I'll cope at 18,000 feet?"
Any road journey in India begins against imposing odds: An official death toll of 65,000 a year almost certainly understates the losses in a country where record-keeping, even of road deaths, is haphazard. 
Statisticians have calculated that a fatal road accident is somewhere between 15 and 20 times more likely in India than in the United States, and we knew that medical help on the passes we planned to cross would be rudimentary to nonexistent.
We had driven shorter distances outside New Delhi many times, experiencing the kamikaze conditions. 
No journey, however short, had been free of mangled wrecks, mostly of trucks and buses that had collided in a never-ending struggle for possession of narrow, potholed, impossibly overcrowded roads. 
We knew, too, that many Indians subscribe to the karma school of driving. 
This holds that it is not crazed driving that kills you, it is an individual's karma, or destiny -- a concept that has the effect of diminishing any sense of personal accountability in drivers.
We trusted less to providence. 
Before we set off, we insured that the Trooper had heavy "bullbars" for added protection in front, imported radial tires for better road holding -- and new brake disks. 
For added assurance, we took on the services of an experienced guide, Shaukat Singh Sikand, who had accompanied other expatriates in New Delhi on overland journeys to Ladakh. 
A wiry, 38-year-old Sikh, Shockey, as he calls himself, or The Shocker, as we affectionately nicknamed him once our journey began to go awry, is the son of a highly decorated fighter pilot. 
With that pedigree, we reasoned, Shockey would be the ideal companion for the trip.
The journey north went well enough. 
With Shockey driving ahead to Simla in his Maruti Gypsy, a lightweight Indian jeep, to prepare our onward journey into the mountains, we made our first nightfall at the Glasshouse. 
This comfortable wood-and-glass hotel on the banks of the Ganges in the Himalayan foothills is an hour's drive beyond Haridwar, one of the holy cities on India's holiest river. 
There, we had paused to chat with the saffron-robed saddhus, or holy men, who gather along the river's banks, offering blessings in return for alms.
Our second day brought us a foretaste of the travails ahead. 
Skirting the Himalayan foothills, we tore a tire to shreds on an iron spike that road builders had left in the road. 
After we had struggled fruitlessly with the jack and the Trooper's spare wheel for about 15 minutes, things took an ugly turn with the arrival of a village woman, and soon afterward a group of sullen-eyed village men, demanding money. 
When we demurred, the men began circling ominously around the mountain of baggage, camping gear and food we had unloaded.
Just then, a passing vehicle stopped. 
The driver, a powerfully built Sikh, told us he was visiting from his adopted home in Australia. 
In heavy rain, he rolled up his sleeves, borrowed a jack from a passing minibus and replaced the tire; as he worked, the disconsolate villagers melted away. 
When we thanked our new friend, he shook his head. 
"People were kind to me when I arrived in Australia," he said. 
"I like to take any chance I have to repay."
While new tires were forwarded from New Delhi, we paused in the plush comfort of Simla's Oberoi Cecil Hotel, savoring the fading elegance of a town that was once the summer retreat for Britain's viceroys. 
Then we set off again, running up the Kullu Valley to Manali, at the foot of the passes to Ladakh. 
The landscape was as impressive as anything we'd seen in India, with a mix of vegetation -- bamboo glades side by side with pine forests -- that seemed a metaphor for the semitropical region we were leaving and the mountains ahead.
Next day, with Jane driving, we headed up through thick mists onto the narrow, switchback road that runs more than 250 miles across the mountains into Ladakh. 
Ahead lay a succession of imposing passes, beginning with the 13,078-foot Rohtang, above Manali, and ending with the 17,582-foot Tanglang-la, said to be, after another pass near the Tibetan border, the second-highest drivable pass in the world.
The road from Manali to Leh, one of only two into Ladakh -- the other runs between between Leh and Srinagar, the Kashmiri city to the west -- was built by the Indian Army in the 1980's as a supply route for forces defending Ladakh's eastern frontier with China and its northern frontier with Pakistan. 
After four wars pitting India against its neighbors, one with China in 1962 and three with Pakistan in 1947, 1965 and 1971, Ladakh has become once more what it was in the 19th century, a cockpit of confrontation. 
Its borders with both Pakistan and China bristle with opposing forces, including some, on the Siachen Glacier north of Leh (contested by India and Pakistan) that, at 21,000 feet, represent the world's highest battlefields.
Winter snows close the passes from September to July, leaving only three summer months for the passage of supplies needed to sustain 150,000 Ladakhis and at least as many Indian troops.
Fifteen years after its completion, the road remains, in large sections, little better than a cattle track -- unpaved for dozens of miles on end, frequently too narrow to allow more than a single vehicle to pass, with bridges and culverts that are poorly constructed and liable to crumble away at any time. 
On the downhill side of the road, where the soft edge can subside without warning, there are sheer drops 1,500 feet or more to the river valleys below, and no walls or guardrails
Much of the traffic consists of trucks and buses, many of them driven in roller-derby mode. 
In an effort to calm matters down, the Indian Army has erected a series of warnings, but since these are in English, while most of the truck drivers speak only Hindi (and are illiterate,in any case), they have little effect. 
We liked, especially, "Be Gentle on My Curves" and "Better to be Mister Late than the Late Mister."
As we crossed the Baralacha-la, a 16,010-foot pass that follows the Rohtang River, we stopped for a picnic at a spot overlooking the wreckage of a fuel tanker that had rolled down the mountain. 
From the log at an Indian Army checkpoint nearby, we learned that five men died in the crash, two of them Israeli backpackers riding on the top of the tanker, and that the five were among 15 people who died on the Baralacha-la in the previous week.
Then there was the altitude. 
We had taken altitude-sickness pills before reaching the passes, but when we reached the top of the Tanglang-la, after camping at 15,500 feet, Jane was seized with a pounding headache and severe shortness of breath, Sarah was wracked with nausea and Emily had fallen unusually quiet. 
At this point, from the driver's seat, I had a growing sense of affinity with Lord Cardigan, the hapless commander who in the 1850's led the Light Brigade "into the valley of death" in the Crimea.
Shockey, driving blithely ahead, was deep in Jane's personal doghouse. 
At our first overnight camping stop, his promised "American portaloo" proved to be four poles wrapped with a burlap sheet that left a gaping space 30 inches above the ground, made decent -- in Shockey's view, at any rate -- by being erected 300 yards out into what amounted to a desert. 
His "full-course" dinner turned out to be beans on toast. 
And now, at a height where only aircraft fly, the "bottled oxygen" he had pledged to carry with him turned out to be wholly theoretical. 
At this point, he ceased to be Shockey, at least to the disconsolate Jane, and became The Shocker.
As we descended the Tanglang-la, the weather was superb, just as the guidebooks promised. 
The first Ladakhi village we came to, a cluster of flat-roofed houses built of mud and straw, was set in a typical Ladakhi moonscape, brown and ocher mountainsides bare of vegetation. 
But the village itself was aflame with color -- the green of ripening crops, the turquoise water and foamy whitecaps of a rushing river, the reds and yellows worn by Buddhist monks ambling home toward a nearby monastery. 
In the glow of a setting sun, groups of women and girls were at work harvesting in the fields. 
Others waved cheerfully from their houses, many of them dressed in the traditional finery visible everywhere in Ladakh -- high felt hats, richly embroidered red shawls, heavy necklaces of silver and turquoise and coral -- and with long, thick tresses plaited to their waists.
By dusk, we were comfortably installed in the Shambala Hotel on the outskirts of Leh, a city that seemed more like an overgrown village, sprawling flat-roofed across an ancient moraine that fills a space between two craggy mountains. 
The younger members of our party headed forthwith for the Tibetan markets and backpackers' hangouts in the cafes and restaurants that cluster in the lee of the ancient royal palace that dominates the town.
Jamie, Sarah and Emily were in teen-age heaven, save for a curious social pretentiousness they sensed among the backpackers. 
"They have their own hierarchy, and we aren't even on the ladder," Jamie said. 
"I don't have a beard, I don't have an earring and my boots aren't scuffed from trekking across the mountains, so I'm squat."
But the sense of exclusion didn't stop our three from joining in the avid bouts of shopping in the markets, for Tibetan jewelry and shawls and other gewgaws. 
And the monasteries around Leh provided endless fascination. 
Ladakh has at least 100 active monasteries, with perhaps 15,000 monks and novices; hardly any town or village of any size is without one. 
Along with the snow-capped mountains, they provide Ladakh's dominant sights, most of them perched on cliffs and crags, the most ancient of them ruins that appear to grow from the rock.
Several of the best-known gompas, or monasteries, are close to Leh, including the Shey and Tikse monasteries that lie within a half-hour's drive south of the city. 
Our favorite was the Spituk monastery, improbably situated above the airport at Leh. 
While Spituk lacks the grandeur of better-known monasteries, with their candlelighted libraries of Tibetan scrolls and giant statues of the Buddha, it has an engaging informality. 
Twice, we drove up to the monastery for evening prayers, sitting cross-legged in a pillared hall while rows of wizened monks intoned their prayers, struck their gongs and sipped from tiny cups of a yak's-milk tea.
At regular intervals, their cups, and ours, were filled by a novice of 8 or 9, lugging a pewter kettle at least half his own size. 
As best we could divine it, the essence of Tibetan Buddhism resides in a sense of the insubstantiality of all material things, but we were relieved to find that the friendly monks of Spituk were not unapproachable ascetics. 
On the contrary, several appeared intensely worldly, watching us as closely as we watched them, scratching and shifting and snorting as they worked their way through their chants, one of them even winking at us -- or so we thought -- at each striking of the gong. 
We noticed, too, that the monks were eagle-eyed when it came to taking money for the tickets needed to enter the monasteries, and bold in soliciting donations.
We ended our stay in Leh with a visit to the city's polo field and a half-day's rafting on the fast-flowing, chilly waters of the Indus. 
The polo was hilarious, played in a bare-earth stadium at the upper end of town by teams of Indian soldiers and Ladakhi civilians with no regard for any polo rules I'd ever heard. 
"Free polo," one of the Ladakhis called it, after he and an opposing player had ridden their scrawny ponies full-tilt into the bleachers behind one set of goal posts, sending spectators running for their lives.
The rafting proved almost as rule free. 
In New Delhi, The Shocker had promised us an American-made raft, life jackets and helmets, and in this, at least, he was as good as his word, even if the ancient craft and battered life-jackets he unlimbered from his jeep looked as though they might have begun their working lives on the Colorado about the time that Wild Bill Hickok was raising hell in the West.
Jane took one look and begged off, but the rest of us, with The Shocker at the rear of the raft, imploring the Sikh gods when all seemed lost, went barreling 30 miles down the Indus, plunging into towering waves, passing within inches of rocky overhangs and shooting down rapids as if there were no tomorrow. 
We loved every soaking second of it, especially when Jane met us at the confluence of the Indus and the Zanskar with the kind of lavish picnic that The Shocker, God bless him, had only been able to summon up in his fevered imagination.
We had planned to return to New Delhi by driving west from Leh to Srinagar, in the Muslim heartland of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, of which Ladakh forms the eastern extremity. 
But the aftermath of the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan earlier in the summer was still reverberating in heightened tensions between the two countries, and regular exchanges of artillery fire across the front line between the two armies at Kargil, midway between Leh and Srinagar, some of them killing passing truck drivers, had closed the road. 
This left no alternative to retracing our route over the passes back to Manali, a daunting enough prospect even before things began to go seriously wrong.
Even when they did, the problem came not from the cause we feared, the altitude on the passes, nor even from the madcap Indian driving, but from something closer to home, our Isuzu Trooper, hitherto the cynosure of every Indian truck and bus driver on the road. 
Later, we realized how lucky we had been to have the vehicle break down on us on the last of the passes before Manali, and not earlier, when we could have been stranded, impossibly, at somewhere close to 18,000 feet. 
As it was, the shuddering of the clutch as we descended the Rohtang at dusk on our second day out of Leh, followed by its complete failure, presented a seemingly impossible dilemma.
We made nightfall, just, at the Span resort near Manali, but after that it became distressingly clear that the Trooper was not going another foot. 
Calls on my satellite telephone to New Delhi, London and Tokyo, and inquiries at a local garage, determined that there were no new clutch plates available within 5,000 miles, and that even if we could somehow get the new parts to Manali, no mechanic in the Indian Himalayas had the necessary expertise or the equipment.
This left two options: Loading the Trooper on an Indian truck for the 500-mile journey to New Delhi, or towing it home. 
Fearful of a truck toppling on the narrow roads and passes still ahead, we took a family vote and settled on towing, aided by a second vehicle, an Indian-made Tata Sumo that we recruited in Manali, that helped to push from behind, against our spare wheel, while The Shocker pulled from in front. 
After a night of gloomy prognostications in Manali, we soon discovered that what looked like a nightmare -- 500 miles of being towed on Indian roads, a situation rendering us inert in the face of every driving outrage -- turned out to be the moment when an interesting journey turned into one that cemented our affections for India forever.
To begin with, there were The Shocker's heroics -- a veritable David-and-Goliath performance, his Gypsy with its motorcycle-sized engine outweighed a ton or two by our Trooper and its load. 
For five days, and much of five nights, at speeds that rarely exceeded 10 miles an hour, up passes that tested the Gypsy and its Japanese engine to the limit, The Shocker threaded his way, and ours, through the traffic madness. 
Not once did he complain, nor did he ever seek any guarantee of compensation for his own vehicle, his most valued possession, in case of disaster. 
"Never worry," he said, again and again, "I'll get you home."
But if The Shocker earned his stripes, the journey ended with still less- likely heroes: Indian truckers. 
As long as we were driving along in shiny, air-conditioned opulence, they were rarely our friends. 
But as underdogs, sitting forlornly at the end of a fraying towrope, we seemed to engage their better nature. 
At the worst moments, on steep, muddy inclines, with sheer drops to oblivion off the roadside, we found ourselves looking up at grinning drivers, thumbs raised, pulling over to make space, shouting encouragements, ever-ready to assist when the towrope snagged or snapped, pushing us up impossible slopes, or lifting us out of crater-sized potholes.
When we finally made it back to New Delhi, exhausted and dirty, but with the Trooper intact, we headed straight for the bar in the Oberoi Hotel, where our first toast was to the truckers of India, all 10 million of them, hardly a one earning more than $2 or $3 a day. 
But the most enduring epitaph came from Sarah. 
In the bar, I apologized for involving her in a "holiday from hell."
She laughed. 
"Not at all," she said, grinning from ear to ear. 
"I'll always think of it as the Indian fun run."
