
Forty-four years after the Korean War ended with a bitter, tenuous cease-fire, North Korea agreed yesterday to hold talks with South Korea, the United States and China in an effort to negotiate a lasting peace.
The two Koreas remain profoundly divided, and intractable issues must still be resolved, but the agreement represents a breakthrough in efforts to forge peace on the Korean Peninsula, which remains one of the world's most troublesome, potentially explosive regions.
North Korea's agreement cleared the way for "preparatory talks" to begin in New York on Aug. 
5 between delegations from the two Koreas and their principal allies during the war, China and the United States.
The agreement was announced yesterday after a final day of wrangling over details between senior delegations from North Korea, South Korea and the United States at the New York Palace Hotel in midtown Manhattan. 
Yesterday's meeting was the third in four months. 
The previous meetings ended in frustration.
In impromptu remarks to reporters on East 51st Street, the head of North Korea's delegation, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Kim Gye Gwan, said his country would enter the "four-party" talks, calling them "very conducive to the peace and security on the Korean Peninsula."
While senior officials of the two Koreas have met before, the talks would be the first between the North and South to address directly some framework for peace, including mutual recognition, improvement of relations and, many officials believe, an eventual reunification.
President Clinton and President Kim Young Sam of South Korea proposed the "four-party" talks last April as a way of overcoming North Korea's unwillingness to negotiate directly with its enemy. 
The North had long sought talks only with the United States, hoping to isolate the South.
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright welcomed North Korea's decision to take part in what she called "this historic process."
In a statement from Hong Kong, where she attended ceremonies marking the return of the British colony to Chinese rule, Ms. Albright said the talks were meant "to reduce tensions and build confidence on the Korean Peninsula with the aim of putting a formal end to the hostilities of the Korean War."
While an armistice ended the fighting in July 1953, the two countries technically remain in a state of war, with the border between them the most heavily armed in the world.
In the previous meetings in New York, Mr. Kim, of North Korea, had signaled a willingness to hold peace talks, but continued to raise objections, insisting that any agreement had to include substantial donations of food aid to cope with growing shortages in the North. 
The United States and South Korea, while responding to international appeals for emergency aid with donations, refused to link the aid to North Korea's participation in talks.
By yesterday, North Korea had dropped its insistence on food aid, though American and South Korea officials said that Mr. Kim's delegation raised the issue again. 
"They again repeated that they have an urgent and substantial need for additional food aid," a senior Administration official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
A senior South Korean official said the shortages in the North, which have become dire according to many reports, were "something structural and elemental" and would be part of future peace talks.
The progress toward the negotiating table follows a year of tumultuous relations between the North and South, which included the incursion of a North Korean submarine into South Korea's coastal waters last fall, and the defection of a senior North Korean minister. 
It also comes at a time when North Korea's ruler, Kim Jong Il, prepares to assume in July the official mantle of his father, Kim Il Sung, on the third anniversary of his death.
In a joint statement, the three delegations said the preparatory talks in August would resolve "procedural matters" for the future talks, including "the earliest agreeable date, venue and agenda."
The United States and South Korea had apprised China and received its commitment to take part, the officials said.
Despite North Korea's agreement to attend talks, the officials cautioned that much remained to be resolved before a peace treaty could be reached. 
After all, it took more than a year and a host of high- and low-level meetings to persuade the North simply to agree to attend talks.
"While this is a very important step," the Administration official said, "it doesn't bring us 100 percent of the way."      
