
IT was wondrously quiet at Tibet House yesterday morning, which hardly came as a surprise. 
The cultural center, on West 15th Street, is a place for study, for contemplating sacred art, for silent meditation.
Showing a visitor around, Kyra Borre, the administrative director, pointed out the Shrine Room, dominated by a clay Buddha covered in gold leaf. 
Offerings had been laid at its feet in small bowls. 
There were dried nuts, cookies, raisins, caramels and even a couple of Tootsie Rolls.
"It's just a neat place to be," Ms. Borre said. 
"Some people come to sit, some simply to look around."
The noisy, fractious world of politics seemed far away indeed. 
That is how it is supposed to be, said Nancy Braxton, another Tibet House official. 
"We are a cultural organization, not a political branch, and we really believe in holding that line," she said.
But let's not kid ourselves. 
Politics can never be kept entirely outside the front door, and it has certainly been seeping into Tibet House with the latest dispute to swirl around Tenzin Gyatso, better known as the Dalai Lama, spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism.
You may have heard about the loftily named Millennium World Peace Summit of Religious and Spiritual Leaders, which is taking place in New York City this week and features ample amounts of pontification in conference halls at the United Nations and the Waldorf-Astoria. 
Yesterday's topics carried high-minded titles like "The Role of Religion in Conflict Transformation" and "Towards Forgiveness and Reconciliation."
There are more priests, rabbis, mullahs, monks and ministers in town than you can shake a scepter at -- all for a gathering largely underwritten by Ted Turner, whose theological positings once included the observation (later retracted with an apology) that Christianity was "a religion for losers."
One religious figure is conspicuously missing from the interfaith gabathon. 
You guessed it: the Dalai Lama, who only won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 and is arguably the best-known spiritual leader other than perhaps Pope John Paul II.
Why in the world leave someone like that off the guest list?
Because China, occupier of Tibet for four decades and destroyer of much of the Tibetan culture that the Dalai Lama represents, made clear that it would not accept his presence on the United Nations grounds. 
And the United Nations, displaying the fortitude that has made it such a universally admired organization, went into full kowtow.
THIS is the same body that had no problem in 1974 with letting Yasir Arafat speak to the General Assembly with a gun holster strapped to his hip. 
At least now we know the dress code for that stretch of the East River. 
Green military uniforms are O.K., but leave the saffron robes in the closet.
Almost as an afterthought, organizers of the "peace summit" invited the Dalai Lama to attend and address conference sessions being held today and tomorrow, all at the Waldorf and not the United Nations. 
Talk about too little, too late.
"The invitation, which comes at the last minute, this is not very sort of, as you say, smooth," the Dalai Lama told a CNN interviewer on Monday night. 
As you see, he is far more gracious than the average New Yorker when it comes to saying fuhgeddaboudit.
"The guy has been denied even a visitor's tour of the U.N.," said Robert Thurman, president of Tibet House and a professor of Indo-Tibetan studies at Columbia University. 
"He's been coming to this country since 1979 and he hasn't been able to set foot in there all these years for fear of offending the Chinese, poor dears."
"His Holiness doesn't want to be pushy," Professor Thurman said. 
"He would not use this occasion to bad-mouth the Chinese. 
He would talk in general terms about world problems and avoid touching on his own problems. 
He's tactful -- excessively tactful, some of us think."
Then again, snubbing the Dalai Lama to please China did not start just this week. 
"We feel the political effects," Ms. Borre at Tibet House said. 
"It's hard to get corporate sponsorship" for her center's programs, she said. 
Of course it is. 
Trade with China is at stake.
One consolation is that, even if the politics may not be uplifting, the religious art on display at Tibet House is. 
One interesting item is a bronze stupa from the 13th century. 
An accompanying brochure says that the stupa, a dome-shaped shrine, represents "enlightened mind."
Sounds like it ought to be sent over to the United Nations.
