
Aggressive Crickets
What makes the elephant charge his tusk,
In the misty mist or the dusky dusk?
What makes the muskrat guard his musk?
Courage!
For the Cowardly Lion, who posed those questions in "The Wizard of Oz," aggressive behavior was a function of just one thing, which he sorely lacked. 
Scientists, however, know that it is not that simple, and indeed, what makes animals aggressive is not fully understood.
Now German and American researchers, writing in Nature, have provided new insight into aggression, at least among one species. 
What puts the fight in crickets?
Not courage, the researchers say, but flight.
Cricket fighting was a royal sport in ancient China and has persisted in some Chinese cities and in Chinese communities elsewhere. 
Gamblers bet on whether their insect will prevail in a fight that involves fencing with antennas, locking mandibles and wrestling. 
The losing cricket retreats, usually losing its will to fight.
But, as the gamblers know, a defeated cricket can regain its aggressiveness if it is shaken in cupped hands and thrown into the air a few times.
The scientists studied this effect, showing that it was not dependent on how long the insects were in the air, and not transitory -- aggressiveness remained restored for hours. 
Other stressful activity, like being tumbled in a rotating tube or walking in a wind, had no effect.
The researchers suggest that the specific motor pattern of flying produces some kind of command in the nervous system that resets aggression in the brain.
 
Tiniest Chemical Sensor
Nanotubes, those cylindrical molecules of carbon atoms, are steadily becoming much more than just a laboratory curiosity, as researchers develop potential applications for them.
One of the latest possible uses for nanotubes is as tiny chemical sensors. 
Researchers at Stanford report in the journal Science that they have used nanotubes to detect minute amounts of gases quickly and at room temperature.
The researchers used a single-walled nanotube, one in which just a single layer of carbon atoms forms the cylinder walls. 
These nanotubes are on the order of a billionth of a meter wide, and about three-millionths of a meter long. 
The structure of the molecule is such that it acts like a semiconductor if a charge is placed across it. 
This quality is what makes it useful as a sensor.
The researchers found that the electrical resistance of the nanotubes increased or decreased greatly when exposed to small amounts of nitrogen dioxide or ammonia. 
Nitrogen dioxide is found in car exhaust, among other sources, and gaseous ammonia is toxic, so tiny devices capable of detecting these gases would serve a real need.
The nanotubes were more sensitive than existing sensors. 
They also operated at room temperature. 
Most sensors currently used require heating to at least 400 degrees Fahrenheit.
 
The Mighty Nanotube
Before sensors or other devices based on nanotubes can be produced commercially, more has to be learned about the basic properties of these molecules. 
Scientists at Washington University in St. Louis have taken a step in that direction, determining for the first time the force needed to break one by stretching.
The study, reported in Science, used multiwalled nanotubes consisting of 10 to 40 single-walled tubes nested inside each other. 
The stretching occurs inside a scanning electron microscope, and the electron beam is used to fuse the ends of the nanotube to tiny cantilever tips that do the stretching.
The scientists said the force needed to break the nanotube was many times greater than would be required to break a similar-sized structure of steel, if it were possible to create one. 
Next up for the researcher: to break a single-walled tube.
