
The former head of counterintelligence at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico said yesterday that Wen Ho Lee, the American scientist who is the top suspect in the Chinese atomic spy case, was unfairly singled out for Federal investigation because of his ethnicity.
"It was a key factor," the former counterintelligence leader, Robert S. Vrooman, who himself is to be disciplined for his handling of the case, said in an interview. 
"There were 83 people who went to China" from the New Mexico weapons laboratory in the 1980's, he said, any one of whom might have leaked secrets.
"A lot of Caucasians" were not investigated, Mr. Vrooman said, even though they had access to weapons secrets. 
"And they made contact with the same people that Lee was in contact with," added Mr. Vrooman, who investigated the case for nearly three years and is still a consultant to the laboratory.
Though intelligence experts eventually discovered that Dr. Lee had downloaded secret weapons-related computer codes onto an unsecure computer, Mr. Vrooman said yesterday that Dr. Lee's ethnic background "was a major factor" in initially making him the top suspect. 
He has not been charged with any crime.
Dr. Lee, who says he is innocent of spy accusations, is a Taiwan-born scientist who worked at Los Alamos for more than two decades before being fired in March for violations of security rules. 
After he was fired, investigators discovered he had transferred vast amounts of secret nuclear data from Los Alamos's classified computer system to an open network. 
The data included the legacy codes, mathematical approximations of nuclear weapons designs.
Counterintelligence experts say racial focusing is not uncommon in spy investigations because foreign intelligence services often target people who may have sympathies with foreign states.
Mr. Vrooman is apparently the first investigator in the case to raise the issue of racial bias publicly, though some Chinese-American rights groups had previously done so. 
His remarks were first reported yesterday in The Washington Post.
Energy Secretary Bill Richardson and other managers at Los Alamos have denied that Dr. Lee's Asian ancestry sparked suspicions that he was involved in possible espionage.
Mr. Vrooman's comments come as Secretary Richardson last Thursday called for Mr. Vrooman and two other Los Alamos officials to be disciplined for failing to handle the laboratory's investigation properly. 
Mr. Vrooman was not named in the department's news release, but officials disclosed his name to reporters. 
Mr. Vrooman was criticized specifically for allowing Dr. Lee continued access to nuclear secrets.
Los Alamos officials said yesterday that a decision on any disciplinary action would probably not be made for weeks. 
Mr. Richardson has recommended terminating Mr. Vrooman's contract as a consultant.
In the interviews yesterday, Mr. Vrooman strongly defended his actions, accused the department of playing politics and said the nation's nuclear weapons laboratories had been unfairly made targets. 
Though China has obtained secret weapons information, he said, it is more likely that information came from the military or defense contractors than from weapons laboratories.
"It was not design information," he said of the lost secrets. 
"It was engineering data. 
If you were a Las Vegas odds maker, you'd put your money on D.O.D.," or the Department of Defense.
Mr. Vrooman said Federal investigators had found that secret data on the warhead at the center of the investigation, the W-88, the most modern in the American arsenal, had been made available throughout the Federal bureaucracy to hundreds of people.
"A rather detailed description of the W-88 had a distribution of 548 copies," he said, most to the Defense Department, the military services, the National Guard, Federal agencies and contractors like the Lockheed Missile and Space Corporation. 
"Please note that I am referring to 548 mailing addresses, not people."
Mr. Vrooman's criticisms that the investigation prematurely focused on Dr. Lee echo the more general findings of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, which earlier this month made public a report on the China espionage investigation. 
It said Federal investigators erred early on when they focused on Dr. Lee without having adequately reviewed other possible suspects.
The spy scandal erupted in March when the House select committee on Chinese espionage, led by Representative Christopher Cox, neared completion of a report saying China stole secrets about seven of America's most advanced warheads. 
Dr. Lee was not mentioned by name when the report was publicly released in May, but his identity had emerged months before then. 
All along, he has maintained his innocence.
In a televised interview on the CBS News program "60 Minutes" several weeks ago, Dr. Lee said that he was a victim of ethnic bias and that he had downloaded secret files to protect them. 
He denied giving the material to anyone.
In interviews last week, the Los Alamos director, John Browne, and other laboratory managers strongly disagreed with Dr. Lee's explanations about why he violated security rules by transferring millions of lines of classified computer code.
"We have no evidence that anyone has ever done anything like this before at Los Alamos," Mr. Browne said.
Mr. Vrooman, a former case officer at the Central Intelligence Agency, said yesterday in interviews and in a two-page statement that Federal investigators had "not one shred of evidence" that linked Dr. Lee to Chinese espionage. 
He said he scrutinized the case for nearly three years, from June 1995 until he retired from Los Alamos in March 1998.
Mr. Vrooman said the Energy Department's Office of Counterintelligence had identified Dr. Lee as "the prime suspect based on, at best, cursory investigation at only two facilities."
They were Los Alamos, the birthplace of the bomb, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, the nation's other main center for the design of nuclear arms. 
"The investigation lacked intellectual rigor," he said. 
"They missed a lot of people. 
It was a mess."
Last week, in recommending the disciplinary action against Mr. Vrooman, the Energy Department pointed to Dr. Lee's continued access to classified information.
The department's inspector general reported to Secretary Richardson last week that in 1997 the Albuquerque field office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation told Mr. Vrooman that there was no longer any investigative reason to keep Dr. Lee in his position with access to classified information. 
Mr. Vrooman did not take any action to move Dr. Lee and did not tell the managers at Los Alamos about the bureau's finding, the department said.
But yesterday, Mr. Vrooman said his decision to continue Dr. Lee's access had been made in concert with officials of the F.B.I. and the Energy Department's chief intelligence officer, Notra Trulock. 
Mr. Trulock, who first raised the alarm about China's theft of American nuclear secrets, did not return calls yesterday seeking comment.
"It is important to note that executive order 12333 specifies that the F.B.I. has responsibility for counterintelligence investigations within the United States," Mr. Vrooman said in his statement. 
The internal security office at Los Alamos, he added, "can only provide support to the F.B.I."
Mr. Vrooman added that he had been made the target for disciplinary action because he opposed the Energy's Department's view that the Chinese espionage had occurred in its warrens rather than elsewhere.
Energy officials have "put constraints on us that are going to destroy" the Los Alamos laboratory, Mr. Vrooman said. 
"This is a national treasure. 
I don't want to see it destroyed based on false allegations."
      
