
THE ACTUAL
By Saul Bellow.
104 pp. 
New York:
Viking. $17.95.
One doesn't read Saul Bellow's fiction for well-made plots. 
I never have; I have admired it boundlessly for the torrent of his narrative, for the astonishing, often brutal revelations that would reduce a less great writer to ashes, as Zeus did Semele, for the incomparable beauty of the language when Bellow is at his best and, inseparable from that beauty, for the contact with the author's richly nourished intelligence. 
"The Actual," Mr. Bellow's new novella, made me wonder if he paid much attention to the plot, and, if he had, whether he would have bothered to repair its inconsistencies, repetitions and small absurdities. 
In my opinion they don't matter, but I suppose the reader had better know what lies in store.
Harry Trellman, the novella's narrator and protagonist, is in his 60's, a product of one of those lower-middle-class Jewish neighborhoods of Chicago that are Bellow's heartland, and a very odd duck indeed. 
His father was a carpenter, his mother an oddly elegant hypochondriac whose sojourns in American and European spas were financed by her brothers, who were rich sausage manufacturers. 
Although both parents were perfectly alive at the time, they put Harry in an orphanage -- for convenience. 
This circumstance, together with his appearance -- a face sufficiently Asiatic to let him pass in China for a native -- has reinforced his sense of having "a masked character" and made him a nihilist.
After the Korean War and Chinese language school, Harry went to China and then, for two years, to Burma. 
There, he tells us, "I made important business connections. 
. . . Provided with a lifetime income through the Burmese operation, which had a Guatemalan branch, I returned to Chicago where my emotional roots were."
Aha, thinks the reader, our Harry is a drug dealer, but in spite of other hints dropped here and there, this doesn't seem to be so. 
Damaged Chinese antiques, fixed up with cheap labor in Guatemala, are what give Harry ease in his partial retirement, as well as the artistic perch from which to meet the 92-year-old "trillionaire" Sigmund Adletsky, who takes Harry on as a member of his "brain trust."
Through this comic-strip figure we meet Adletsky's wife, Dame Siggy, and a couple of other throwaway types involved with a smashing Lake Shore Drive apartment that Adletsky wants to buy to humor his wife. 
(Perversely, one cannot help feeling happy for Mr. Bellow that he is not more familiar with the milieu of the superrich he describes.)
Thereupon, quite miraculously, Amy Wustrin appears on the scene. 
She is the Actual --Harry's unseverable Chicago connection, the girl whom he has loved since high school days. 
What have Mr. and Mrs. Adletsky to do with her?
It's elementary: she is an interior decorator and will redo the apartment. 
Amy carries some heavy baggage. 
Her second husband was Jay, a lawyer with no political clout but a large sexual drive, who was Harry's best friend in high school and who was horning in on Amy even then.
Never mind: they all initially married other people, but when Harry returned to Chicago, Jay was still alive and Amy was the wife of someone else. 
Jay invited Harry to a postprandial shower a trois with Amy, and left them there, under the hot water, while he ran off for an appearance in court. 
That is when Harry got to kiss her "under the breast and inside the thigh."
One might think that they would have seized the occasion, but they didn't. 
Amy married Jay, not Harry, and Harry went on as the "family friend" and silent observer of Jay's peccadilloes. 
The new marriage ended badly. 
Amy fooled around. 
Jay wired her bedroom for sound and played the tapes of the orgasmic screams for the divorce court judge and whomever else he could induce to listen, including Harry.
This was not the end of Jay's practical jokes. 
From Amy's father, he had bought the cemetery plot adjoining the one where Amy's mother already reposed. 
It became Jay's final resting spot. 
When Amy's father dies, she decides to exhume poor Jay. 
Harry assists in the operation, having been dispatched to the cemetery by the kindly Adletsky in his stretch limo. 
Inside, Harry makes his move. 
"Other women might remind me of you," he declares, "but there was only one actual Amy."
The circumstances are awkward, what with Jay just then being lowered into a new grave, but Harry thinks it's now or never. 
As he puts it to the Actual, "It's not the best moment for a marriage offer. 
But if it's a mistake, it won't be my first one with you. 
This is the time to do what I'm now doing, and I hope you'll have me."
Proust thought that we all carry within us, as though from a mysterious earlier existence, a set of duties -- such as the need to do good, or even to be merely polite -- that conditions of the world we know cannot justify. 
Thus a writer will rework a text 20 times, even though the admiration it may command in the future will signify nothing to his corpse when worms are feeding on it. 
In Proust's "Remembrance of Things Past," Bergotte is the paradigmatic great writer. 
During his last illness, he reads a critic's description of Vermeer's "View of Delft," then on exhibit in Paris. 
Bergotte thought he knew the painting well, but could not recall a particular patch of yellow wall, a patch that was, according to the critic, painted so well as to be, taken alone, like a precious work of Chinese art. 
Propelled by that relentless sense of duty, making an effort that will cost him his life, Bergotte drags himself to see the painting. 
He is unable to detach his eyes from the patch: "This is how I should have written, he says to himself. 
My last books are too dry, I should have given them several layers of color, made my sentences precious in themselves like that little patch of yellow wall."
There are such patches of yellow in "The Actual": Harry's recollection of Amy's raccoon coat and "the smell of animal musk released from the fur by the warmth of Amy's body when she unfastened those buttons"; how, in the limousine, "when she shrugged, the soft breasts in her sweater added weight to her shrug"; Harry's simple conclusion that "of course, she was no longer the beauty she had been. 
Her face had begun some years earlier to lose its fullness. 
The sense of her chin today could be completed only if you traced it back to its earlier form. 
I had no one but myself to blame for what I had missed. 
Besides, I hadn't absolutely missed it."
"The Actual" is not a young man's piece of fiction, and our expectations for it must be adjusted accordingly. 
It is instead something far more rare: the work of a great master still locked in unequal combat with Eros and Time.
