
Eight years after she won the first Olympic race-walking competition for women as a Chinese athlete, Yueling Chen hoped to win another medal, this time as a United States citizen, at the 2000 Summer Games in Sydney, Australia.
However, China has protested her participation as an American, and given the citizenship requirements of the Olympics, it appears that Chen will have to watch the Sydney Games as a spectator.
Chen, who competed for China as Chen Yueling but prefers the Western listing of her name, obtained her American citizenship on April 12. 
Last month in Sacramento, she finished second in the 20-kilometer (12.4-mile) walk at the United States Olympic track and field trials, which conditionally qualified her for the Sydney Games in September.
However, an athlete who has competed in the Games for one country must wait three years to compete for another country after gaining citizenship in the new nation. 
This rule is meant to prevent Olympic athletes from playing musical chairs with their citizenship.
A waiver can be granted, and frequently has been, but the Chinese track-and-field federation has declined to issue one. 
Tuesday, without explanation, the Chinese Olympic Committee notified the United States Olympic Committee that it supported the Chinese track federation's decision.
The International Olympic Committee indicated yesterday that it would not get involved in this or other similar cases, saying it was a matter for the Olympic committees of the United States and China to decide. 
"We don't arbitrate these cases," said Franklin Servan-Schreiber, an I.O.C. spokesman.
Barring I.O.C. intervention, the case appears to be closed, said Mike Moran, a spokesman for the U.S.O.C. 
Earlier this year, even after United States Olympic officials traveled to Havana to plead their case, Cuba denied to grant a waiver to Angel Perez, a canoe-kayaker who had become a United States citizen.The I.O.C. did not intercede in that case.
"I think that's the end of it," Moran said last night. 
"I don't think we have any wiggle room."
One senior I.O.C. official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, left some small opening, saying that China might be wise to reconsider its position, considering that Beijing is bidding on the 2008 Summer Games and might not want to anger the United States. 
Beijing lost by two votes to Sydney to become the host city of the 2000 Summer Games.
"It would be useful for the Chinese to approve that transfer," the I.O.C. official said. 
"America is a powerful country and can always be helpful. 
People remember things like this. 
Good faith and good form shown when things are delicate could make a difference. 
Everything is important when you are bidding."
The Chinese and the American Olympic committees enjoy cordial relations, Moran said. 
Earlier this year, the Chinese granted waivers for three athletes who had become American citizens, two table tennis players and a badminton player, he said. 
The difference is that Chen has represented China in the Olympics and the others have not, Moran said.
Chen is the first Chinese woman to win a gold medal in track and field, and is perhaps the most successful Chinese athlete ever to attempt to compete for another country, which may explain China's reluctance to grant her a waiver.
"She is clearly higher profile because of her past success," Moran said. 
"That may be it."
Now living in Escondido, Calif., the 27-year-old Chen said that China's refusal to let her compete for the United States was "unbelievably unfair to me."
In a statement issued through her agent, Derek Boosey, Chen recalled the words of the French baron, Pierre de Coubertin, who founded the modern Olympics and said the most important thing was to compete.
"That's all I want to do," Chen said. 
"I just want to compete."
Chinese Olympic officials could not be reached for comment.
At the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain, Chen won the inaugural 10-kilometer (6.2-mile) walk for women in a controversial decision after the Russian walker, Alina Ivanova, crossed the line first, only to be disqualified for technical violations. 
Race walkers must keep one foot on the ground at all times. 
Three years earlier, Chen had set a world record in the 10-kilometer walk in 43 minutes 52.1 seconds. 
After she won in Barcelona in 44:52, a statue of Chen was erected in her home town of Taeling, in Liaoning province.
In 1993, Chen immigrated to the United States, receiving a green card as an alien with extraordinary ability, and Chinese athletic officials did not protest the move, she said.
"I had done all that I could for China," she said. 
"I had won a gold medal, and I no longer wished to compete."
She attended two universities in California and became fluent in English. 
She changed her mind about competing and wanted to enter the 20-kilometer walk, which is making its debut for women, in Sydney.
