
With the race to win the bid to stage the 2000 Olympics in its final days, China took a different tack today in responding to continued criticism of its human-rights policies.
A Chinese spokesman here to bolster Beijing's bid for the Summer Games made an emotional appeal for understanding his country's policies.
"It's not fair," said the spokesman, Wu Jianmin. 
"The Chinese Government cares a lot about human rights. 
We have an old saying: You have to look at the forest, not the trees. 
In other words, you have to look at the whole picture, not just part of it."
 
Unique Answers
Wu said China's population growth, which has more than doubled from 500 million in 1949, created unique problems requiring unique answers.
"Imagine if one day chaos occurred in China," he said. 
"The population would start fleeing the country. 
There would be no peace in Asia or the world. 
So when China cares about stabilityI, it's not in its self-interest."
Wu made his remarks in fluent English, while at previous news conferences he spoke in Chinese through a translator. 
He also spoke without notes, compared with earlier, carefully prepared written statements.
The change in tone and approach appeared aimed at enhancing Beijing's image as Thursday's vote by the International Olympic Committee neared. 
The head of the I.O.C., Juan Antonio Samaranch, reminded members to make that vote "in complete freedom, true to your conscience and fully aware of the consequences."
Beijing remains one of the favorites. 
The other candidates are Sydney, Australia; Manchester, England; Berlin and Istanbul, Turkey.
"The competition will be very close between these cities of equal merit," Samaranch said. 
"Everything has been done to insure that the I.O.C. members can make their choice, completely independent of pressure."
While the competition to be host to the 2000 Games will be the main business considered at this session, other Olympic business proceeded, including the formal nomination of Salt Lake City as the United States city bidding to host the 2002 Winter Olympics.
And the organizing committee for the Atlanta Olympics in 1996 gave a progress report.
The Atlanta group said it had signed a seventh company -- Matsushita, the parent of Panasonic electronics -- as a $40 million sponsor. 
They also said preparations for the Games were on schedule.
The Atlanta group also said that early rounds of men's and women's soccer would be played at four sites outside Georgia -- Legion Field in Birmingham, Ala.,; Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington; the Orange Bowl in Miami and the Citrus Bowl in Orlando, Fla.
They also proposed that the soccer finals be played at the University of Georgia's 86,640-seat Sanford Stadium in Athens, Ga., rather than at the new Olympic Stadium in Atlanta. 
The Olympic Stadium is designed for long-term use as a baseball park and could not easily be adapted for international soccer, said Bob Brennen, a spokesman for the Atlanta committee.
