
Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, said today that coaches, doctors and trainers should be punished along with athletes who test positive for banned substances.
The head of the Chinese Olympic Committee agreed with Samaranch, acknowledging the possibility that officials were involved in providing muscle-building steroids to 11 Chinese athletes who were banned in a doping scandal after last month's Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.
In his first public statements since the Chinese athletes were suspended, Samaranch said in an interview that the sanctioning of coaches and trainers who aid athletes in using illegal drugs "is the next step we must take."
"Sometimes you have athletes who are less than 20 years old," Samaranch said. 
"Those athletes are surrounded by people maybe telling them to take this drug or telling them they are vitamins, for example. 
The punishment must go not only to the athletes, but to the people surrounding the athletes."
That all 11 of the banned Chinese athletes -- 7 swimmers, a hurdler, a cyclist and 2 canoeists -- tested positive for the same banned substance has led many in the Olympic movement to doubt the credibility of Chinese achievement and to theorize that its sports system is built on the institutionalized use of drugs.
The substance found in urine samples of the 11 athletes was dihydrotestosterone, a steroid that was previously undetectable.
The athletes recently caught brings the total to 36 Chinese athletes who have tested positive for banned substances this year.
"They have their doubts, yes, but the doubt is only a doubt," said Wei Jizhong, secretary general of the Chinese Olympic Committee. 
"If they have evidence that the Government or the Olympic committee or the national federations organize this use, perhaps the doubt, yes. 
But for the time being, nobody can show evidence."
Wei added: "From our side, we have also doubts. 
Why?
Why?
We have seven swimmers. 
We have to work together and find out and combat all kinds of use of doping."
Wei said the Chinese Olympic Committee has taken three steps:
*Increasing testing in and out of competition.
*Increasing education about doping.
*Establishing a permanent agency to oversee anti-doping matters.
All 11 of the recently banned athletes have denied "use or intentional use" of drugs, Wei said. 
The Chinese Olympic Committee is investigating whether doctors, coaches or other officials aided the athletes, he said, adding that he did not believe that national sporting federations were involved.
Other officials involved should be punished if proof can be found, Wei said.
The Chinese have maintained that drug use is a matter of individuals, not an institutional process. 
Asked if he believed that were true, Samaranch replied, "I don't know."
Samaranch said he had no regret in making a statement before the latest suspensions that "I'm sure Chinese sport is very clean."
"For me, all the athletes, all the national Olympic committees, are clean until they are guilty," Samaranch said. 
Prince Alexandre de Merode of Belgium, president of the I.O.C. medical commission, said in an interview that he did not believe that drug use in China was a program instituted by high officials in government or sport.
"I believe it is used by some athletes," de Merode said. 
"I don't believe it is systematic -- 80 or 90 percent is completely wrong."
