
Ma Junren, the controversial coach of China's female distance runners, was removed from the Olympic team along with six of his athletes following suspicious results in domestic drug tests, Chinese officials said today.
A total of 27 Chinese athletes have been withdrawn from the Sydney Games for reasons that include failed drug tests, injury and illness, He Zhenliang, a member of the International Olympic Committee's executive board from China, said in an interview.
The official Xinhua news agency quoted a representative of the Chinese Olympic Committee as saying there were "multiple reasons" for the dismissal of Ma and his runners.
"Some of them are dropped due to suspicious blood test results," said the representative, He Huixian.
A representative for the Chinese track and field federation told The Associated Press in Beijing that six of seven runners that Ma trained had been removed "because of blood tests."
The most prominent of the runners was Dong Yanmei, the former world record-holder in the women's 5,000 meters.
Chinese officials have not said exactly how many of the 27 removed athletes had failed drug tests. 
Yesterday, they acknowledged that seven rowers had tested for high levels of red blood cells, an indication of the use of the endurance drug EPO, which stimulates the production of the oxygen-carrying corpuscles.
A test for EPO will be used for the first time at the Sydney Games. 
He, the I.O.C. delegate, said the athletes who tested positive were dropped for two reasons. 
One, China is seeking to be host for the 2008 Summer Games and wanted to avoid the potential embarrassment of athletes, being caught cheating here. 
Also, China has made a strong effort to curb cheating after more than three dozen Chinese athletes tested positive in the last decade, He said.
"Everything is related," He said of the dismissals. 
"I think it was a good decision the part of the Chinese Olympic Committee. 
It will protect the health of the athletes and will assure that the contributions of the Chinese to the Games will be clean."
Thirteen Chinese coaches and officials have also been withdrawn from the Olympic team.
The withdrawal of the Chinese athletes -- 14 in track and field, 7 rowers, 4 swimmers and 2 kayakers -- is significant, considering that only 48 doping suspensions have been carried out at the Summer Games since testing began in 1968. 
Ma's dismissal confirmed the suspicions of many American runners, who remained skeptical that the record-shattering performances achieved by Chinese women could have been fueled only by diets of turtle soup and worm fungus, as Ma claimed.
"Regrettably, this casts doubt on the performances by all his athletes," said Craig Masback, the chief executive officer of the United States track and field federation.
Ma had a complicated and often contentious relationship with Chinese authorities and his own runners. 
Chinese women shattered world records at 1,500, 3,000 and 10,000 meters in 1993 and came to be known as Ma's Army. 
His runners were peasants from Lianong Province who were subjected to brutal training methods, including running up to a marathon a day. 
But the women later mutinied.
Wang Junxia left Ma before she won the 5,000 meters at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, claiming that he took a Mercedes-Benz the runners had earned by winning the 1993 world track and field championships and that he had treated them abusively in training.
In a centralized sports system, Ma also clashed with the state authorities by seeking unauthorized corporate sponsorship for a training center. 
His runners were prevented from participating in the 1997 world championships and the 1998 Asian Games.
Ma made a comeback after the Chinese women fared poorly at those Asian Games, but his career appears now to be in jeopardy. 
"He's a good coach, but he's sometimes very controversial, bad tempered, cunning," He said. 
"But there was no retribution against anyone."
Instead, Ma has come to represent what Chinese officials say is a doping problem that exists in the provinces but is not state-sponsored. 
Contact with coaches from other countries and prize and sponsorship money allowed in China's market economy has "been a lure to the bad mind of some coaches and athletes," He said.
American runners said today that they welcomed the deterrent created by the EPO test.
"This is what people have been asking for," the distance star Adam Goucher said. 
"I hope this will scare people into being clean."
