
China said today that it was ready to sign a United Nations covenant protecting political and civil liberties, in a move to head off criticism of its human-rights record.
"The Chinese Government is preparing to sign the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights," Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said at a news conference. 
"The Chinese Government has always attached great importance to international covenants on human rights."
China is anxious to avoid censure at a meeting of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights that is to open in Geneva on Monday.
The European Union, citing progress on human rights in China, agreed not to sponsor a resolution this year critical of Beijing's record. 
But the United States has said it could throw its weight behind a critical resolution.
Last month, a European Union delegation visited China for discussions and workshops that focused on legal changes China would need to make to subscribe to the United Nations political covenant. 
Topics covered police torture and detention without trial.
Pressing China to sign the pact has become one of the chief targets of European Union diplomacy.
The European Union has been criticized by human-rights groups and politicians for its decision to let China off the hook in Geneva. 
Member nations are now anxious for concessions from Beijing.
The political covenant covers freedom of expression and religion, assembly, participation in public affairs and elections, freedom of movement and equality before the law.
In its annual human-rights report, the American State Department said there was progress in Beijing's protection of fundamental freedoms but that serious abuses remained.
Amnesty International said in a report this month that despite human rights concessions, little had changed in practice in China. 
The report said thousands of Chinese had been detained without trial, and that trials were "grossly unfair."
It said torture was widespread.
Mr. Qian's pledge during the National People's Congress was the latest in a series of high-profile gestures by Beijing to polish its human rights image, still tarnished by the 1989 army crackdown on pro-democracy protesters in Beijing.
Beijing late last year released a jailed dissident, Wei Jingsheng, on medical parole and has invited the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, to visit.
In February, three clerics from the United States arrived in China at the invitation of President Jiang Zemin to investigate religious worship.
Washington has backed resolutions criticizing China in Geneva each year since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
But Beijing has always mustered enough support to quash the moves, and critics say the resolution has become an empty exercise that only fuels China's anger.
 
--------------------
U.S. Praises Beijing Move
WASHINGTON, March 12 (Reuters) -- The United States today hailed China's decision to sign the rights covenant, and hinted that Beijing might escape American censure at Geneva next week.
The State Department spokesman, James P. Rubin, said the Chinese announcement would have a "significant impact" on whether Washington would sponsor a resolution critical of China, but that no decision had been made.
"Clearly, this is a step forward." he said. 
"It's the kind of step on human rights that the world has long called for."
"By announcing its intention to sign the covenant, China has indicated in more concrete terms than ever before that it accepts the universality of human rights," Mr. Rubin said.
      
