
I WANT LAOGAI TO become a word in every language," said Harry Wu, the Chinese dissident, to Gerald F. Seib of The Wall Street Journal.
After a stretch of 19 years in labor camps for being a troublemaker -- that word is the title of his new book -- Mr. Wu found refuge in the United States. 
He returned four times to China to document conditions in the camps, where prisoners are "re-educated" doing menial work in fields and factories; on his last trip, he was arrested and became a cause celebre for two months until his release.
Why does he want to publicize the Chinese word laogai, which rhymes with "now-guy"?
(It means "reform through labor," a phrase that seems to suggest healthful exercise but is a euphemism for "humiliation by being forced into menial labor for no pay."
According to Charles Laughlin, who teaches Chinese literature at Yale, "The word is particularly applied to intellectuals who are sent to labor camps located in isolated areas in the countryside.")
Perhaps because he understands the power of a word to define and then become a rallying point for an international protest.
When Alexander Solzhenitsyn wrote "The Gulag Archipelago" in 1973, his investigation of the network of Soviet prison camps made famous the acronym for Glavnoe Upravlenie ispravitel'-no-trudovykh LAGerei, meaning "chief administration of corrective labor camps."
The word-picture of an archipelago -- a sprinkling of islands in a large sea -- combined with the acronym suddenly brought into geographic focus what had been an amorphous idea of prisons everywhere. 
After that, "the Gulag" -- no archipelago needed -- became the word-symbol of Communist oppression.
That is what Harry Wu is seeking with laogai. 
By making famous the unfamiliar word, he seeks to dramatize the discomforting fact of slave labor. 
Political scientists have no difficulty with that -- many human rights activists urge him on -- but linguists wonder if any Chinese word lends itself to adoption in the West. 
(One that has is coolie, the Anglicized spelling of kuli, found in both Chinese and Urdu, meaning "low-paid worker," used mainly in English now in the phrase "coolie wages."
Another is gung-ho, originally taken by U.S. marines in 1942 to mean "work together" and now meaning "enthusiastic," which comes from gonghe, a clipped form of the Chinese words for "Chinese Industrial Cooperative Society.")
Another word appearing in articles about campaign finance scandals called "the Asian connection" (a play on the 1971 movie "The French Connection") is guanxi, pronounced gwahn-shee. 
This means "the network of personal, familial and commercial relationships used by East Asian men to advance their interests," and is being applied by muckrakers to the network of political and business associations in Little Rock, Washington and Jakarta, Indonesia. 
Headline writers have called this "the Asian connection," and those who insist that all scandal bear the -gate suffix slug it "Indo-gate" or (after the Lippo Bank) "Lippogate."
Although the term guanxi as used by Asians has a benign connotation as the interplay of favors, jobs and status among the upwardly mobile, its use by Westerners carries the clear connotation of bribery, political fixing and general corruption.
Stuffing Stockers
Last-minute thoughts on books for holiday giving of interest to language lovers:
Writing on the Job, by John C. Brereton and Margaret A. Mansfield (Norton, $19.95): "Hostess is fine for a woman giving a party, but a woman with a television or radio talk show is a host."
This pocket guide to business writing and editing is chock-full of examples of how to write memos, fliers, interviews -- even letters that can be sent by snail mail.
Grow Your Vocabulary by Learning the Roots of English Words, by Robert Schleifer (Random House, large paperback, $13), has a very long title, but it daringly describes what is inside. 
I missed this when it came out last year, but have just discovered how helpful it is in figuring out meanings in a flash. 
(Among "99 phobias" is homilophobia, "fear of sermons.")
"Morals and manners," said Jason Chamberlain to the University of Vermont in 1811, "will rise or decline with our attention to grammar."
Yeah. I found that in the American Heritage Dictionary of Quotations, selected and scrupulously annotated by Margaret Miner and her husband, Hugh Rawson (Penguin, $29.95). 
I like quotation anthologies like this that put famous words in context: "Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, the Continental liar from the state of Maine" was the heckling line in 1884 that drew the comeback from Republicans "Ma, Ma, where's Pa?
Gone to the White House, ha, ha, ha," about Grover Cleveland's fathering a child out of wedlock. 
And we complain about negative campaigning.
Cut and Paste
"To drop her now would almost certainly be criticized by Republicans as a self-protective maneuver by the President," wrote David Johnston and Todd S. Purdum in The Times about Attorney General Janet Reno. 
"Any replacement in those circumstances would be attacked as a political pasty."
That was an inspired updating of the word-figure about cover-up too often expressed as the cliched "fig leaf," I thought, but the word was misspelled. 
In 1954, erotic dancers or strippers started calling the small disks covering their nipples pasties, and the word is always used in the plural, as a single pastie would be in the category of one hand clapping. 
(The spelling ends -ie to differentiate the noun from the adjective pasty, "unhealthily pallid.")
When I offered this praise and correction to Johnston, he sheepishly replied: "The word I meant was patsy. 
It was a typo. 
Never would use a metaphor like pasties in the same sentence with the Attorney General."
From the frying pan into the fire. 
Whenever I use patsy to describe a pushover, as in "the patsy prosecutor," I get letters from Irish-Americans protesting that the word is rooted in Patrick and, like paddy wagon, is an ethnic slur. 
Informed of this dilemma, my colleague turned pasty-faced.
