
Before he was defeated in last year's Republican avalanche, Jim Sasser of Tennessee was one of the most popular Senators, an 18-year veteran who rose to become chairman of the Budget Committee and had a better-than-even chance of becoming majority leader.
Today he was back in a hearing room on Capitol Hill on the other side of the table, telling former colleagues why they should confirm him as Ambassador to China.
And he clearly did his homework for his appearance before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
He telephoned Ruth Graham, the wife of the Rev. Billy Graham and the daughter of missionaries in China, for advice, just as Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican, had told him to.
He studied a book, "The Modern Ambassador," because he knew Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, the Maryland Democrat, would ask about it.
And he read the State Department's cable traffic on the visits to China of Senators Nancy Landon Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican, and Diane Feinstein, the California Democrat.
Like a player who knows his audience intimately, Mr. Sasser praised individual senators for their good work on thorny issues like Tibet. 
And campaign-style, he promised that if confirmed, he wanted "as many senators as possible" to visit him in Beijing.
"There's no greater teacher than the Senate," he told the Senators. 
"I can think of no better preparation for representing the American people in China."
Political appointees, whether close friends of the President or large financial contributors, normally face tough questioning before the Senate deems them worthy of the title Ambassador. 
But today's hearing underscored the political truism that the Senate takes care of its own.
Even Mr. Helms, the committee chairman, who hates China, hates Democrats and hates ambassadors, warmly welcomed the nominee, calling him "Mr. 
Ambassador" and ordering him to "go home and pack."
For two months, Mr. Helms held up confirmation of all ambassadorial nominees in a dispute with the Administration on his plan to reorganize the State Department. 
Although he has allowed the Senate to confirm 15 of them, 18 more, including Mr. Sasser, are awaiting action.
But today Mr. Helms treated Mr. Sasser like a friend. 
"Jim, it's hard for me to say 'Mr. 
Ambassador' or anything formal," he gushed.
Senator Fred Thompson, the Tennessee Republican, was delighted when Mr. Sasser recalled how 30 years ago they drank coffee at Rexall's drugstore in Nashville. 
"It does seem like a long time since we were plotting and scheming in Nashville as young lawyers, drinking coffee because we didn't have any clients," Mr. Thompson said.
For the Democrats, Mr. Sasser's return was bittersweet. 
"We miss you here," said Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut.
"If you recall, Senator," Mr. Sasser replied, "my retirement was involuntary."
"I wasn't going to bring that up," Mr. Dodd said.
After his defeat by Bill Frist, a Nashville Republican, last November, Mr. Sasser took a temporary teaching job at Harvard University and began talking to law firms about practicing law, which he did for 15 years before entering the Senate in the 1976 Democratic surge.
Now the nominee seems to have recovered, and claims to enjoy spending his time mastering Chinese tonal sounds.
"To lose an election is an enormous heartbreak," he said in a brief exchange after his hearing, "and I was very downcast. 
But now to be coming back and hopefully going to China as our Ambassador -- I'm enthusiastic and rejuvenated."
On substantive issues, Mr. Sasser disavowed his past Senate votes to link preferential trade benefits to China to its human rights performance. 
"Every time that issue came up, I was less and less convinced that my vote was the correct one," he said. 
"On my last vote I voted in favor of de-linking."
Mr. Sasser's nomination is so important to the White House that he was introduced by Vice President Al Gore, himself an ex-Senator from Tennessee. 
Mr. Gore's unusual appearance had two goals: to send a signal to the Chinese that Mr. Sasser has a special relationship with the President and to send a message to Mr. Helms that Mr. Sasser should be confirmed quickly.
The United States and China have been without ambassadors since last summer, when relations between the countries deteriorated to the lowest point since the Chinese brutally suppressed a movement for democracy in 1989.
Only Senator Craig Thomas, the Wyoming Republican and chairman of the Foreign Relations subcommittee for Asia, rained on the parade, saying that while he recognized Mr. Sasser's "distinguished career," he felt obliged to question his "policy experience."
One example of an experienced ambassador, Mr. Thomas said, was "Roy Stapleton," an apparent reference to R. Stapleton Roy, the previous Ambassador to Beijing.
