
BY the year 1000, homeowners throughout the world enjoyed a remarkable range of creature comforts: coal stoves in China; crystal tableware in Baghdad; libraries in Ghana. 
All and all, it wasn't a bad time to be alive -- unless, of course, you lived in Europe. 
Peasants there dwelt in filthy one-room hovels heated by an open fire. 
The family, along with the goat, huddled on a single vermin-infested straw mat. 
Not that kings and queens in gloomy castles had it much better. 
Privacy was nonexistent, and the nobility, one historian has written, "didn't so much live in their houses as camp in them."
They spent most of their time on the road, visiting far-flung estates. 
Tellingly, the French and Italian words for furniture at this time -- mobilier and mobilia -- meant "movables."
It would be a while before Europeans settled down.
1005: TWO-TINING -- Mothers-in-law everywhere quarrel with their sons' wives. 
But imagine the consternation of the august Venetian lady whose daughter-in-law, a snooty Byzantine princess, refused to eat with her fingers like the rest of the family. 
She preferred a "golden instrument with two prongs."
Her highness died soon thereafter -- divine retribution for using a fork.
 
1066: SAFE, YES; SYBARITIC, HARDLY -- Home security, of sorts, was introduced in England by invading Normans. 
Donjons, their heavily fortified castle towers, offered protection but no comforts.
 
C. 1110: TWO RMS, DESERT VIEW -- Pueblo Bonito, built by the Anasazi of Chaco Canyon, is an apartment complex, which eventually encompassed 800 rooms capable of housing 1,000 people. 
Its size as a multitenant building was not surpassed until 1882.
 
1165: PLUMBING FIRST, PLUMBERS LATER -- A monastery in Canterbury, England, enjoys a labyrinth of indoor plumbing: pipes, aqueducts, cisterns, reservoirs and a main water tower. 
But regular bathing remains a curiosity.
 
1180: LET THERE BE LIGHT -- English homeowners finally rediscover the windowpane, although the Romans had used glass for windows as far back as 14 B.C. Most homes, however, continue to rely on crude wooden shutters and oiled parchment.
 
1189: SMOKEY THE MAYOR -- In an early example of fire insurance, the first Lord Mayor of London rules that all houses have to be equipped with a ladder and, during tinder-dry summers, a barrel of water by the front door.
 
C. 1200: ENTER SANTA -- Residential chimneys become common in Europe. 
Previously, homeowners had built fires in the middle of the floor and cut a hole in the roof to let out smoke and cinders.
 
1212: FIDDLING WITH THE ROOF -- Heavy duty, low-maintenance tiles replace thatched and wooden roofs in London. 
Housing becomes more permanent and durable, but repairs are a headache.
 
C. 1240: BEDS OF STATE -- Henry III of England commissions the first king-size bed, a four poster with a painted canopy, which soon becomes an emblem of nobility throughout Europe.
 
1255: EARLY WALL-TO-WALL CARPETING -- Eleanor of Castile marries King Edward I of England and begins redecorating, unappreciated, in the colorful, comfortable Moorish style. 
"Even the floor was covered with tapestry," an observer noted. 
"This excessive pride excited the laughter and derision of the people."
 
1259: CLEANLINESS, SORT OF -- Soap, a common household item in the Islamic world, is finally manufactured in London. 
It takes centuries to catch on, as frequent bathing is considered unhealthy (which accounts for the popularity of asphyxiating perfumes). 
As late as the 16th century, Queen Elizabeth I would be considered eccentric for her "frequent" -- that is, monthly -- baths.
 
1300: VANITY -- Glass blowers in Venice craft the first mirrors. 
Though they cast blurred and distorted images, mirrors gradually became indispensable in the civilized home, culminating centuries later in magazines like Self and US.
 
1306: KEEPING THE HOME FIRES BURNING -- Marco Polo discovers that the Chinese heat their homes with long-burning, heat-efficient coal. 
It sure beats manure, fuel of choice in Europe, but it takes a few centuries to catch on.
 
1492: SWING LOW -- Columbus discovers the New World and, more important, the hammock, a hanging bed used by Caribbean Indians. 
Adopted aboard Spanish ships, it eventually found a home on the American porch. 
In time, it begat that instrument of cordial courtship, the porch swing.
 
1509: ART BY THE YARD -- An artisan makes the first wallpaper -- literally, tacky tapestries -- for use at the master's lodging, Christ College, Cambridge.
 
C. 1510: A GOOD NIGHT'S SLEEP -- A French upholsterer devises an improvement to the mattresses of the first half of the millennium, which consisted of little more than straw, leaves, pine needles and a convention of bedbugs. 
His solution is inflatable: the "wind bed," an early air mattress.
 
1519: GLITZ -- Cortes conquers the Aztecs and loots their palaces. 
The conquistadors ship home tons of gold, kicking off a craze for gilt furniture, walls and fixtures unsurpassed until Liberace.
 
1576: SEE SPOT RUN -- The terrier-powered rotisserie was a fixture of the domestic landscape. 
"When any meat is to be roasted," a connoisseur of canines wrote, the dogs "go into a wheel; which they turn round with the weight of their bodies . . . no drudge nor scullion can do the feat more cunningly."
Popular until era of the A.S.P.C.A.
 
1581: COORDINATING -- Queen Elizabeth orders one of the first matching sets of furniture: 19 chairs, 6 high stools, 24 square stools and 11 footstools, upholstered in the same material.
 
1590'S: EVERYTHING IN ITS PLACE -- At last, decent storage: The chest of drawers appears in Italy.
 
1596: ROYAL FLUSH -- Sir John Harington, godson of Elizabeth, installs "a privy in perfection" for the queen that features a primitive flush toilet. 
He later falls out of favor after publishing details of her water closet in the poem "Metamorphosis of Ajax" (the title punning on "a jakes"). 
It fails to replace the chamber pot.
 
1600's: COMFORT -- After centuries of making do with straight-back wooden chairs, the English embrace chairs with wings, or lugs, to block out drafts.
 
1636: BAG, BATH & BEYOND -- Doctor Sanctorius, a physician practicing in Padua, dies before convincing his contemporaries to adopt the "bag bath," a sack filled with water at the neck and voided from a tube at the bather's feet.
 
1638: A TASTE FOR TCHOTCHKES -- Rise of maitres ebenistes -- furniture makers who make cabinets of curiosities for the upper classes to display newfound collections of manmade and natural oddities, from two-headed cows and platypus bills to microscopic engravings. 
Housemaids everywhere throw up their dust rags and cheer.
 
1660's: BAD POSTURE -- The invention of the back stool heralds a new desire for comfort among the hoi polloi, who until now have sat on benches and stools. 
It later will morph into the side chair.
 
1687: ROOM WITH A VIEW -- Bernard Perrot of Orleans, France, patents a means of rolling plate glass, spurring the production of full-size windows. 
The relationship between the inside and the outside of the home is forever changed. 
Alas, Windex will not be invented until 1936.
 
1721: FIRST DESIGN QUEEN -- Madame de Pompadour, the future mistress and adviser of Louis XV, born. 
She will redecorate countless apartments and halls in the neo-Classical style, introducing concepts of privacy, intimacy and comfort that trickle down to the nobility and, eventually, the middle class. 
It is not known whether she takes a straight commission or charges by the hour.
 
C.1730: SHADE -- African slaves arriving in the Southern United States build houses fitted with porches. 
Slaveowners and others quickly adopt the sun-deflecting design to their own homes.
1741: ROBBING THE CRADLE -- First mention of the quintessential American rocking chair, inspired by cradles. 
Europeans never really got it. 
When the travel writer Harriet Martineau visited the United States in the 1830's, she could not help wondering "how this lazy and ungraceful indulgence ever became general."
 
1763: BREAK OUT THE DISHES -- Josiah Wedgwood patents his trademark earthenware. 
It soon becomes the standard domestic pottery in England and abroad. 
Mass produced and relatively inexpensive, it democratized fine dining and undoubtedly led to the first wedding registries.
1775: THE FLUSH, REDUX -- Alexander Cummings, a watchmaker, patents one of the first practical toilets. 
It features a cistern overhead, a valve at the base and a "stink-trap."
Unfortunately, what goes in must come out. 
(Sewers were rare.) A curiosity until the next century.
 
1777: HEAT GETS INTERACTIVE -- Bonnemain, a French architect, installs one of the first central heating systems since Roman times at Chateau de Pecq, with a primitive thermostat to control the flow of air to the boiler.
 
1792: READING AFTER DARK -- William Murdock in Cornwall, England, lights his home using coal gas. 
The first gas utility is formed in 1817; by midcentury, most cities had abandoned oil lamps and candles for the unnatural but vastly superior gaslight.
1797: D.I.Y. 
-- Asher Benjamin pens "The Country Builder's Assistant," one of the first pattern books for homeowners in the United States -- design manuals for do-it-yourselfers.
 
1799: BEHIND THE EARS -- Elizabeth Drinker of Philadelphia writes of the family's innovative "shower bath," noting "I bore it better than expected, not having been wett all over att once, for 28 years past."
Regular showers remained a novelty until the mid-1800's.
 
1804: COMMON CHARGES -- The French Civil Code grants a person the right to own a building or part of a building on land that he or she does not own: the legal foundation of condominium ownership.
 
1820's: ALUMINUM CHIC -- A craze develops among nobles for aluminum plates and cutlery. 
Until chemists discovered how to produce aluminum cheaply and efficiently, it was the must-have metal, selling for $600 a pound (more expensive than gold).
 
1826: FIRST EJECTOR SEAT -- One of the first mentions of spiral-spring furniture, ruining posture once and for all as sitters lounge in what the French called the fauteuil comfortable. 
Provided, of course, the sharp, metal springs didn't poke through and impale the sitter (a common event).
 
1830: NO WORK FOR SHEEP -- Edwin Beard Budding invents the lawnmower. 
Americans, especially, become obsessed with lawns, and by 1870, the detached home with a manicured yard is desirable, thanks to the proselytizing of landscape architects. 
Nature becomes something to contemplate, not fear. 
And children's allowances are never the same again.
 
1831: DOMESTIC DEBT -- The first building and loan associations are formed in Philadelphia, letting people of modest means take out what was, in effect, a mortgage.
 
1833: HOUSING LIGHTENS UP -- The first balloon-frame structure goes up in Chicago, an advance over the heavy-timber frames used since medieval times. 
Allows for cheaper yet more durable homes, made with 2-by-4's and factory-produced nails.
 
1844: COOL IT -- Thomas Masters patents the ice box, an insulated chest to hold blocks of ice. 
Superseded in the next century by electric refrigerators beginning with the Domelre (domestic electric refrigerator) in 1913.
 
1848: NOT FOR SQUARES -- Orson Fowler, a phrenologist and spiritualist, publishes "A Home for All," touting the octagon as a source of health, efficiency and mystical powers. 
Thousands of eight-sided homes are built in the United States before the fever runs its course and homeowners lose their tempers over a lack of square, functional rooms.
 
1854: BUG-FREE ZONES -- A patent is taken out for a "mosquito curtain," netting for a sash window. 
No longer need people face the grim choice of keeping the windows closed and sweating or watching insects beat their last on flypaper. 
It will take 50 years before wire mesh is mass-produced.
 
1857: AN IDEA BEFORE ITS TIME -- Joseph Gayetty introduces commercially packaged toilet paper, but it doesn't catch on. 
People think old newspapers and catalogues do an equally fine job, at no extra cost. 
Finally, in the 1880's, hygiene-conscious Victorians adopt Edward and Clarence Scott's perforated toilet paper.
 
1858: THE CART BEFORE THE HORSE -- Ezra Warner of Connecticut invents the can opener 50 years after the invention of the metal can. 
It replaces the hammer-and-chisel technique.
 
1863: FLOORING THE MASSES -- Frederick Walton invents a flooring of linseed oil, fillers and cast-off cork shavings that's better than wood, cheaper than tile. 
Called linoleum, it has a lifetime of 30-plus years and comes in colors. 
The combination of ingredients happen to have antibiotic properties, too, which will make it popular in nurseries, kitchens and bathrooms.
 
1866: MUSIC TO BATHE BY -- Victorians love folding furniture, but the piano bed takes the prize. 
The piano unfolds to reveal a writing table, chest of drawers, bed, two cupboards for bed linen and a wash basin with jug and towel rail. 
Advertisements helpfully note that "It has been found by actual use that this addition to a pianoforte does not in the least impair its qualities as a musical instrument."
Still, a convertible piano has never graced the stage of Carnegie Hall.
 
1869: CLEANLINESS IS NEXT TO GODLINESS -- Catherine Beecher and Harriet Beecher Stowe publish "The American Woman's Home."
This volume and its imitators advise middle-class Christian readers how to manage a clean, comfortable household.
 
1870: STYLE BY THE GALLON -- Henry Alden Sherwin and Edward Williams concoct the first ready-mixed paint. 
The subsequent rush to brush submerges countless hardwood moldings and panels.
 
1878: CLEAN AND FIT, ALL AT ONCE -- Scientific American describes a shower in which the bather jogs up and down, fueling a treadmill to keep water circulating. 
Almost as absurd as a bicycle shower, the "Velo-douche."
 
1879: BREATHING ROOM -- New York City passes laws ensuring that apartment dwellers have access to fresh air and windows. 
Reformers like Jacob Riis continue to campaign for better conditions, and regulations to be passed in 1901 will mandate minimum room sizes, larger yards, running water and toilets.
 
1882: ON THE GRID -- Thomas Edison contracts with wealthy Manhattanites to provide electricity for their incandescent lamps.Homes cease to be self-sufficient.
 
1884: REVERSE SNOBBERY -- The Dakota on Central Park West is completed. 
Well-heeled urbanites flock to multiple-unit buildings, previously a working-class thing.
 
1886: BEYOND THE PAIL -- Josephine Cochrane, a socialite living in Illinois, loses patience with servants breaking her china and invents the Cochrane Dishwasher, a precursor to the washers in most homes today.
 
1889: ORDERING IN -- George Barber begins shipping the world's first mass-prefabricated homes by rail from his factory in Knoxville, Tenn. 
In 1907, Sears, Roebuck will introduce mail-order homes (with plans, paint, materials and nails) from $595 to a $5,000 mansion).
 
1893: FIRM BUTTOCKS IN A HALF-HOUR -- Exercising at home becomes increasingly acceptable. 
In Germany, Friederich Mayer's climbing machine, complete with a mask and mouthpiece, is the first home stairmaster to simulate high-altitudes.
 
1893: SCIENTIFIC HOME = HAPPY HOME -- National Home Economics Association is founded to teach women how to run their homes more efficiently. 
It pioneers the science of domestic engineering taught in high schools across the nation.
 
1901: THE GREAT SUCK-UP -- Die, dust bunny, die: H. Cecil Booth patents the first vacuum cleaner, a steam-powered monstrosity that sucks almost anything into its greedy nozzle. 
Upper-class women throw tea parties to celebrate the arrival of the men from "BVC."
Booth was soon wiped out by the portable cleaners W. H. Hoover introduced in 1908.
 
1917: UNIVERSAL DESIGN -- Six American manufacturers settle on a standard appliance plug and socket for electrical power, paving the way for the electrification of the home.
 
1918: CURE FOR THE CITY SQUEEZE -- Lawrence Murphy of San Francisco develops his eponymous bed in response to the housing crunch. 
It will superseded by the convertible sofa bed, the Japanese futon and today's inflatable Aero mattress.
 
1920: THE EARS HAVE IT -- Home radios displace the piano and gramophone and become the new focus of family life.
 
1927: MOBILE NATION -- On wheels, for the modern nomad, the Dymaxion House by Buckminster Fuller is the precursor to the less visionary but more affordable mobile homes, Airstreams and the trailer park.
 
1928: KICK BACK -- Edwin Shoemaker and Edward Knobloch build the first La-Z-Boy in a Michigan garage. 
Shoemaker, 90, recently died while asleep in his invention.
 
1929: OPEN, SEZ ME -- Rudimentary smart-house design: Electric garage door opener makes its debut, found on a post outside the newly invented garage. 
The hand-held remote will come in the 1960's.
 
1930's: HOMES ON THE RANGE -- Cliff May designs some of the first ranch homes, the future house of choice for families moving to the postwar burbs. 
Ranch homes were cheap, and as noted, "even a poor architect has a hard time making a spreading, one-story house unattractive."
 
1932: CANNED AIR -- First room air-conditioners go on sale (though most Americans can't afford them), putting the kebosh on the porch.
 
1939: BAD LIGHTING -- Visitors to the World's Fair get their first glimpse of fluorescent lighting, a more energy-efficient means of illumination. 
Inexplicably, bathrooms across the nation are fitted with the flickering, unflattering lights -- and correspondingly, heavy makeup becomes popular.
 
1945: THE NEW BABY SITTER -- Available since 1939, televisions become popular after the war and soon command living rooms as men discover the natural link between La-Z-Boy recliners and Sunday-afternoon football.
 
1946: LEAVE IT TO LEVITT -- William Levitt begins building his eponymous town on Long Island potato fields, using prefab parts and an assembly-line process, with radiant-floor heating, built-in television sets, tiled baths and a "modern kitchen."
Cost: $7,900 or $56 a month for homecoming G.I.'s.
 
1952: PUSH-BUTTON CUISINE -- The Tappan Oven, the first microwave, goes on sale for $1,295 -- and home cooking begins its decline as TV dinner sales soar.
 
1953: PHONE TAG -- Bell introduces the first answering machines. 
Initially popular among doctors, freelance writers and call girls.
 
1964: CHEAP CHIC -- Terence Conran opens his first Habitat store in London, making modern design swing and displacing Grandma's hand-me-downs. 
(Scandinavians had been there, done that, with Ikea, by 1950.)
 
1964: POSTMODERN MAMA -- Robert Venturi designs a home for his mother, Vanna, that rejects the stark functionalism and open floor plans of the modern home in favor of a richer, more allusive -- "postmodern" -- architecture.
 
1965: PLAYPENS FOR PLAYBOYS -- The water bed is developed -- where else?
-- in California. 
After it goes on sale in 1970, comfort, decadence and water level reach new heights.
 
1967: CHAIR OR PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICE?
-- Italian designers produce the transparent blow chair, the first inflatable furniture. 
Beanbag chairs follow. 
Chiropractors can hardly wait.
 
1968: URBAN RETROFITTING -- New York passes the first loft law, encouraging airport hangar dimensions for homes. 
Artists convert old industrial studios only to lose them to space-hungry yuppies in the 1980's.
 
1970: PLAYPENS FOR PLAYBOYS, PART 2 -- Roy Jacuzzi of California develops the Roman Bath, a whirlpool bath for homeowners. 
He follows it up with the two-person Adonis and backyard hot tubs. 
Enter Plato's Retreat.
 
1973: YOU CAN'T BE TOO RICH OR HAVE TOO MANY WINDOWS -- Robert A. M. Stern designs his famous home in Westchester. 
The nouveaux riches quickly anoint him as the homebuilder of choice; postmodern pastiches infest neighborhoods everywhere.
 
1974: ALL FALL DOWN -- The Pruitt-Igoe housing project in St. Louis is demolished after proving a failure. 
It heralds the beginning of the end for high-rise public housing.
 
1975: DEATH OF THE TYPEWRITER -- First mass-produced home computer, the MITS Altair 8800, goes on the market. 
Apple markets its own computer the following year, revolutionizing the home office.
 
1978: RENOVATORS' REVENGE -- Bernie Marcus and Arthur Blank, fired from middle-management jobs, open the first Home Depot. 
A year later, "This Old House" on PBS kicks off a craze for buying up quaint (a k a decrepit) homes. 
Coincidence?
We don't think so.
 
1980'S: SUBURBAN NATION -- A major demographic shift occurs: for the first time in the country's history, the majority of people live in the suburbs.
 
1986: ADOBE, ANYONE?
-- Rizzoli publishes "Santa Fe Style," fueling a run on striped rugs, buckskins and bad, pepto-dismal colored plaster jobs.
 
1990: ERGO, OXO -- The rise of ergonomic design yields the Good Grips vegetable peeler by Oxo International for the arthritic or merely clumsy, with its trademark oversize handle.
 
1990: MARTHA MAKES HER MOVE -- The self-proclaimed, self-invented, ambitious mistress of home-how-to starts Martha Stewart Living. 
And her signature utterance, "It's a good thing," becomes camp scripture.
 
1999: THE DARK AGES, AGAIN -- Our fin-de-siecle hankering for the simple life seems almost medieval: stone walls, coarse fabrics, sleeping platforms, minimalist furniture. 
Time Inc. is starting Real Simple, a magazine aimed at women seeking a more spartan (read: Shaker) lifestyle than Ms. Stewart can deliver. 
All the same, the fascination with simplicity can't disguise the fact that houses are more wired and tech-heavy than ever before. 
So go on, strip things down to the basics. 
But whatever you do, don't disconnect the modem.
 
CREATURE COMFORTS (1492-1741)
 
THE Renaissance gave rise to new notions of house and home. 
Rooms arose with strictly defined functions for sleeping, eating and socializing. 
Locks and interior doors became common, signaling a desire for privacy. 
Increasingly, the home became a sanctuary from the world outside, so much so that a visitor to Delft, in the Netherlands, marveled in 1665 that "in many houses, as in the holy places of the heathens, it is not permissible to ascend the stairs or set foot in a room without first removing one's shoes."
Craftsmen in Persia, India and China jump-started the taste for fine furnishings in Europe with trendy rugs, porcelain and other luxury goods. 
By the late 18th century, new kinds of furniture became popular, too: drop-leaf tables, corner cupboards, china cabinets. 
Many of these pieces were lacquered or featured veneers and inlays, a testament to renewed contact with Asia and the rise of the bourgeoisie. 
Royalty no longer had a monopoly on comfort and luxury.
 
ALL THE MODERN CONVENIENCES (1763-1893)
 
THE Industrial Revolution did more than transform the economy: it irrevocably changed the way people lived. 
A surfeit of cheap mass-produced housewares came within reach of the bourgeoisie. 
Wills show that many upper-middle-class households had upward of 600 towels and pieces of linen. 
People in Europe and the United States went from living in crude candlelit dwellings, warmed with open fires, to spacious homes with indoor plumbing, central heating and electricity. 
Rooms quickly filled up with tokens of the new prosperity: upholstered furniture, down mattresses, heavy curtains and arrays of useless bric-a-brac. 
The era gave rise to stylistic chaos, as designers churned out objects "inspired" by Egyptian, Oriental and Moorish traditions. 
The Victorians encased inventions like telephones, gas lamps and radiators in Gothic packaging, softening the blow as technology entered the home. 
Such excesses bowed, inevitably, to the clean lines and functionalism of modern design.
 
BACK TO THE FUTURE (1893-1999)
 
LIFE'S dramas -- birth and death, especially -- moved out of the home and into the hospital. 
But while the average home ceased to be the setting for such rituals, it became a showcase for technological sophistication: computers; exotic materials like reinforced concrete, plastic and plywood; and irresistible labor-saving devices. 
In stylish circles, it also became a staging ground for modern designs as varied as Frank Lloyd Wright's creations and the boxy functionalism of Bauhaus. 
Never mind that Wright's flat roofs leaked, or that Marcel Breuer's chairs made you fidget: they fixed your gaze on the future. 
Pop's playfulness dominated in the 60's; in the 80's postmodernism winked at the past. 
But at the end of the century, all that seems like an interregnum. 
Modernism reigns again.
