
On the first day of the Senate hearings on campaign finance practices, Senator Fred Thompson, the chairman of the investigating committee, dropped a bombshell.
"High-level Chinese Government officials crafted a plan to increase China's influence over the U.S. political process," Mr. Thompson, a Tennessee Republican, declared in his opening statement.
"Our investigations," he added, "suggest that it affected the 1996 Presidential race."
This week, Mr. Thompson's committee wrapped up its examination of illegal foreign political contributions and prepared to move on to other topics. 
The five weeks of hearings have included copious examples of shady fund-raising practices and many instances of money from abroad being slipped into American campaigns last year.
But the hearings have not produced a shred of public evidence to substantiate Senator Thompson's charge of Chinese influence.
Mr. Thompson has never backed down from his opening statement. 
He has been unable to document the extent of Chinese influence, he suggested at a news conference last month, because so many important witnesses have refused to appear at the hearings and because the evidence that exists is classified and cannot be made public.
People should not expect every charge to be bolstered by a signed confession or a smoking gun, Mr. Thompson said.
"This is a Congressional inquiry," he said in Thursday's session of his committee, the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee. 
"It is not a trial. 
We do not have a standard of guilt either in terms of criminal purposes beyond a reasonable doubt or a civil trial, where the preponderance of evidence is the standard."
The purpose of his investigation, he continued, is "just simply laying the facts on the table -- the good, the bad, the indifferent -- and if there is a jury here, it is the jury of the American people who ultimately decide the significance of this and what the true facts are so that there can be some accountability."
Mr. Thompson has a point that his hearings have been hampered by the refusal of the most important witnesses to cooperate.
Many, including John Huang and Maria Hsia, have asserted their Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination. 
Mr. Huang was the Democratic National Committee official in charge of fund-raising among Asian-Americans in the campaign. 
Ms. Hsia first suggested that worshipers at a Buddhist temple donate money to the Democrats in connection with Vice President Al Gore's visit to the temple.
Others, like Yah Lin Trie, who raised and laundered hundreds of thousands of dollars for the party in illegal contributions from abroad, and members of the Riady family of Indonesia, longtime financial backers of President Clinton, have left the United States and are outside the reach of the committee's subpoenas.
But these people either have no relationship with the Chinese Government or their connection is so slight that there is little reason to believe that the donations they were involved with came from Beijing.
As for the classified material, senators from both parties who have reviewed this evidence have concluded that the Chinese probably did have a plan to become involved in American politics and may have actually tried to carry out the plan in some Congressional races.
But there is no evidence, said Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, expressing the unanimous view of Democratic members of the investigating committee, "that it was aimed at the Presidential race or that it affected the Presidential race."
What the evidence produced by the committee did prove was that in their frenzy to raise money last year, Democratic agents, especially Mr. Huang and Mr. Trie, raised and laundered hundreds of thousands of dollars in illegal donations from abroad.
The source of the money was overseas commercial interests who had been persuaded by Mr. Huang and Mr. Trie that they could buy influence by donating money.
No evidence was submitted that President Clinton or Vice President Gore knew of these donations. 
But Mr. Huang and Mr. Trie had an unusual amount of access to the White House. 
So did Johnny Chung, a California businessman who gave $50,000 to a Presidential assistant inside the White House. 
The source of the money may have been foreigners.
Still, the Republicans were unable to find any suggestion that the Government's foreign policy was altered because of a campaign contribution.
All the money the Democrats have been able to identify as having come illegally from abroad -- $1.6 million, according to the Senate committee's accounting -- has been returned.
Considerable evidence was produced indicating that when he was working at the Commerce Department and at the Democratic National Committee, Mr. Huang remained in close contact with his former employer, the Lippo Group, the international conglomerate run by the Riady family.
At the Commerce Department, Mr. Huang had access to classified information of considerable interest to Lippo, and he regularly used a private office across the street from the Commerce Department to make telephone calls and send faxes.
But there was no corroboration of the assertion by Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas, that Mr. Huang and perhaps others were "high-placed industrial spies."
When the Democrats had their turn to produce evidence, they showed that Haley Barbour, the Republican Party chairman during 1994 and 1996 election campaigns, had solicited money from a Hong Kong businessman that wound up in the party's coffers and was used in the election campaign.
With $2 billion raised and spent on Presidential and Congressional campaigns last year, the illegal foreign contributions, unseemly as they may have been, were such a small proportion that they could not possibly have had much influence on the outcome of the elections.
No one on the committee has tallied the total of such contributions. 
It is probably less than the panel's $4.3 million investigative budget.
Initially, the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, which is conducting a parallel investigation of campaign finance practices, had planned to emphasize illegal foreign donations. 
Indications this week were that, given the experience of the Senate committee, the House panel might change its sights.
The House committee plans to begin hearings later this month. 
The chairman, Representative Dan Burton, Republican of Indiana, is telling his colleagues in a letter to be distributed on Monday that the focus of the hearings will be: "Were existing campaign finance laws obeyed or defied?"
Will Dwyer 2d, a spokesman for Mr. Burton, said that staff members of the Senate and House committees were working on arrangements so that their hearings did not compete with one another.
Senator Thompson's committee will turn its attention next week to the operations of the Democratic National Committee, and the star witness is expected to be Donald L. Fowler, who was the party chairman during last year's election campaign.
Later this month, the hearings will deal with how the White House used coffees with the President and overnight stays in the Lincoln Bedroom as fund-raising devices.
A question still open is whether Harold M. Ickes, who was the deputy chief of staff in the White House during President Clinton's first term, will be called to testify.
Mr. Ickes, who operated as the chief political officer in the White House and who took meticulous notes and kept detailed files, probably knows more than any other potential witness about what President Clinton and Vice President Gore did and did not do during the scramble to raise campaign money.
But the Republicans running the hearings are chary of what Mr. Ickes would say on the witness stand. 
In a sworn deposition, Mr. Ickes told interrogators that he had studied and learned many lessons from the re-election campaigns of Ronald Reagan and George Bush. 
He tried in many instances, he said, to duplicate their tactics for raising money.
