
SOMEWHERE in the Turkish highlands this summer, a camper will bed for the night with a Chinese-made tent and sleeping bag, courtesy of a Turkish sporting goods wholesaler that bought hundreds over the Internet from a Chinese company earlier this year. 
It is the kind of transaction that many people hope is the beginning of a revolution for China's formidable economy.
The conditions for revolution are ripe: China is relaxing central government control over its vast export machine, and the Internet is linking that machine to buyers worldwide. 
Furthermore, e-commerce is cutting through China's archaic distribution system, a fragmented, multilayered realm that harks back to the nation's feudal past. 
The government is also bringing the country's growing online population new services, from Internet auctions to electronic matchmaking.
But there are many barriers, both cultural and technical. 
And for all the talk of the Internet's rapid spread, only a fraction of the country is wired. 
Of those, only a fifth has shopped online. 
And more than half of the online shoppers did so only once or twice in 1999, according to government surveys. 
The chief concern among consumers is the security of online transactions.
Part of the problem is that debt has always been scorned in China, and collection is a challenge in a country that still has only rudimentary rule of law. 
The nation's banks recently began issuing true credit cards, but they are rare. 
And while many people have debit cards that draw directly from their bank accounts, few trust using the cards online.
So it will be a long time before China's e-commerce sector can support more than a few big companies. 
The nation's Ministry of Information Industries predicts that online transactions will reach $42 million this year, more than six times last year's total. 
That is far from enough to go around for the 1,100 consumer-oriented e-commerce Web sites in the land.
Here is the state of e-commerce in China for business-to-business, business-to-consumer and consumer-to-consumer sites:
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS -- trade is the most promising of China's online efforts because the country has never developed a national distribution system, despite the centralized administration of China's state industrial conglomerates. 
Instead, following Mao Zedong's mandate that regions be self-sufficient, production was localized -- nearly every province had its own textile industry, tobacco factory, brewery and even steel mill. 
Selling products from one province to the next often required going through Beijing. 
Meanwhile, the state-owned foreign-trade corporations monopolized foreign trade.
The situation is not much better now. 
The right to export is still controlled, and state-owned corporations continue to dominate foreign trade. 
Domestic distribution, meanwhile, remains fragmented. 
But e-commerce presents a way to cut through the bureaucratic thicket.
Several business-to-business Web sites are providing the conduit that China's traditional distribution system lacks. 
Sites like MeetChina.com and Alibaba.com go further, bringing China to the world. 
Even China's state trade companies are exploring the cybertrade routes because they are concerned that the growing number of private companies licensed to export will outmaneuver them.
From a blue cubicle in a white-tiled building in northwestern Beijing, Rao Qinfu types into the Alibaba site the specifications for an industrial ice-making machine designed for fisheries. 
The mandate from his employer, the China National Technology Import and Export Corporation, is to see whether the Internet is a workable marketing tool, and if so, to train the company's sales representatives how to use it.
Mr. Rao, 28, is an eager Alibaba convert. 
"It's free and you get quick feedback because it's one of the services with lots of people online," he said. 
The site is a sort of industrial clearinghouse that draws together buyers and sellers from 186 countries and regions worldwide.
But Alibaba is not without fundamental problems. 
Mr. Rao says that because the site is free, few customer inquiries are serious, and some are from snooping competitors. 
After six months, Mr. Rao has not sold anything other than the 1,600 tents and 700 sleeping bags to the Turkish wholesaler.
Jack Ma, Alibaba's founder, says his main goal is to be the premier business-to-business site for China's smaller exporters, who cannot afford to go abroad in search of customers. 
And China's Ministry of Information Industries rates it as the top such company in China. 
Investors, who include Goldman Sachs, the Softbank Corporation of Japan and Investor A.B. of Sweden, have pumped $25 million into the site. 
Peter Sutherland, the former director general of the World Trade Organization and the chairman of BP Amoco, recently joined Alibaba's board of advisers.
The money has allowed Mr. Ma to move the operations from a cramped apartment in Hangzhou, near Shanghai, into offices in Shanghai, Hong Kong and Silicon Valley, where he has hired software engineers to keep Alibaba technologically abreast.
BUSINESS-TO-CONSUMER -- companies are the most common type of e-commerce start-up here. 
The idea is sound: because of China's byzantine distribution system, online sales theoretically give anyone with a Web site national reach. 
And direct sales cut out the multiple intermediaries who help inflate the price of China's consumer goods.
At 8848.net -- whose name, derived from the height of Mount Everest in meters, reflects the company's lofty goals -- Chinese customers can buy books, software and computers. 
But in a country rife with counterfeit goods and shoddy merchandise, China's look-and-feel shopping habits are hard to overcome. 
Tan Zhi, 8848's president, speaks frequently at universities, hoping to engender online shopping habits among China's plugged-in generation. 
"We have to change people's way of thinking," Mr. Tan said from his office in Zhongguancun, Beijing's high-technology district.
Helping to bring about that change involves flawless execution. 
As any good marketing executive knows, once bitten, a new customer may stay shy forever. 
So the company has built a cavernous "fulfillment center" in northwestern Beijing, where staff members roller-skate down warehouse aisles loaded with books, software and computer accessories. 
The skaters gather requested items onto a conveyor belt that delivers the goods to the packing department, where delivery trucks are waiting.
Logistics is the biggest challenge for companies like 8848, which came under early criticism for unreliable delivery by a subcontractor. 
Now the company relies on the national postal service to deliver goods and collect money for cash-on-delivery orders, which is how most people pay despite the company's agreements with several banks to clear their customers' transactions online.
Still, business is slow. 
At the fulfillment center recently, one employee skated unsteadily down an aisle as the conveyor belt sat quietly. 
The company's transaction volume in September was nearly $1.2 million and rose to $1.5 million by November, but the company stopped providing figures to the public at the end of last year. 
It says that growth remains high, but that the company's recently introduced business-to-business service accounts for most of the transactions these days.
CONSUMER-TO-CONSUMER -- e-commerce is probably the most speculative of China's online arenas. 
Dozens of local online auction sites, for example, have cropped up, though few generate enough activity to qualify as real businesses. 
Part of the problem is trust; the kind of mutual confidence that makes the transactions of eBay, the American online auction site, work is rare in China. 
Word of eBay's recent trouble with scams has made the Chinese more wary.
Eachnet.com, the country's largest auction site, has solved that problem by creating local sites that encourage transactions by people in the same city who can meet before exchanging cash. 
The total value of transactions settled on the site averages around $2.5 million a month; 40 percent to 50 percent are completed when the buyer and seller meet -- a higher percentage than Eachnet's founder, Shao Yibo, expected.
About 23,000 items are listed on the site, including 800 cellular telephones and an occasional apartment. 
Still, while Eachnet eventually wishes to charge users a "success" fee, it currently makes nary a penny from those deals. 
Instead, it would like to make money by renting space on its site to other e-businesses looking to attract online customers.
"We're a service company," says Haiyin Tan, the chief operating officer. 
And she defends the viability of the business-to-consumer e-commerce on which her company's near-term business ultimately depends.
As in the United States, few of these companies are profitable yet. 
And many of the start-ups are expected to disappear once their venture capital lifelines run out. 
But Mr. Ma of Alibaba bristles at the question of when e-commerce in China will make money.
"If you plant a radish, you don't keep digging open the hole to see how it is doing," he said.
