
During Wei Jingsheng's years in prison, he often played a dangerous game.
Despite his untold suffering, his long stretches of solitary confinement and his hunger strikes, and even when his teeth fell out and his head ached, Mr. Wei regularly wrote to China's senior leaders to tease and ridicule them.
In a humorous and deeply impertinent manner, he challenged China's leaders to live by their words. 
He invoked his rights under China's Constitution, like free speech. 
He suggested that elections be conducted, rather than faked.
Quoting Communist Party classics, Mr. Wei, ever full of subtle suggestions and tart political observation, identified and made fun of the defects in authoritarian rule. 
It was like asking for more punishment.
"His tragedy did not simply befall him," wrote Andrew J. Nathan, a professor of Chinese studies at Columbia University, in the preface to a collection of Mr. Wei's letters published this year. 
"He created and shaped it."
Mr. Wei seems a relentlessly active man, even when incarcerated, as he was for 18 years. 
In his letters, the record of his time in prison, he stubbornly but politely turned down the urgings of family members to keep his head down and stay out of trouble, like ordinary people. 
But Mr. Wei was not ordinary.
"Wei Jingsheng (pronounced WAY JING-SHUHNG) is a natural-born hero," said Liu Qing, a longtime friend and fellow activist. 
"The desire and impulse to accomplish great things burn in his veins."
Mr. Wei was born to a pair of mid-level Communist Party officials in 1950 and was well-schooled as a child in Beijing. 
He grew up believing fervently in Communism and the flawless leadership of Mao Zedong.
While Mr. Wei was in high school, however, an era of political fanaticism called the Cultural Revolution broke out, in 1966. 
Most schools were closed. 
Mr. Wei became a Red Guard and traveled all over the country, trying to "foment revolution."
Unlike many people of his generation who later complained that their lives were ruined by lost years of education, Mr. Wei maintained that he learned far more from the upheaval than he ever would have in school.
"I still feel that whatever the turmoil may have cost my generation in formal schooling, we made up for it in experience," Mr. Wei wrote in his short autobiography. 
"Those chaotic years forced people to abandon the superstitions and prejudice that had dominated their minds for so long and made them begin to scrutinize their own attitudes and beliefs."
As Mr. Wei was reevaluating his own attitudes, and trying to see the world objectively, his travels brought him face-to-face with the reality of China, a nation dominated by poverty. 
The more he saw, the more Mr. Wei began to think that the Communist Party was a greater force in creating poverty than in alleviating it.
In his autobiography, Mr. Wei described a pivotal memory from his youth that came on a train ride where, as the train pulled into one station, hordes of young children begging for food approached.
Mr. Wei was shocked to see teenaged girls in rags, and some with no clothing at all, but covered only with mud and soot. 
Ignoring objections from fellow passengers, who argued that beggars must be class enemies or their children, Mr. Wei insisted on handing his biscuits out the window to the children.
"As I distributed them to the outstretched hands, I noticed that passengers at other windows were now briskly passing out all kinds of food to the beggars as well," Mr. Wei wrote, discovering the power of setting an example.
But it took years before he had a chance to try to put that into action.
After serving three years in the People's Liberation Army, and as an electrician at the Beijing Zoo, Mr. Wei joined the crowds of young people around Beijing's Democracy Wall, which for a few months in 1979 became a vibrant forum for political discussion.
Mr. Wei seemed to ignite a flame when he posted a long essay, called "The Fifth Modernization: Democracy."
Arguing that China would never be able to fully modernize without political as well as economic reform, Mr. Wei used language that was so simple and direct that it inspired countless posters.
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, allowed the Democracy Wall to flourish for several months to voice discontent with China's authoritarian system of Government, but once it had helped him edge aside rivals for power, he ordered it closed down.
In March 1979, as rumors swept the dissident crowd that a crackdown might be coming, Mr. Wei was characteristically defiant, writing a wall poster that accused Deng by name of being a dictator, an action that many believe earned him the enmity of Deng. 
Arrested within weeks, Mr. Wei was sentenced that year to 15 years in prison.
For the next 14 1/2 years, Mr. Wei was a prisoner of China's labor camps, spending long periods of his sentence in solitary confinement. 
His fiancee, a Tibetan named Ping Ni, agreed to end their engagement.
Despite the abysmal conditions in remote camps such as the Tanggemu Farm in western Qinghai province, Mr. Wei kept up a steady stream of protest letters to Chinese leaders, later assembled and published in the book, "The Courage to Stand Alone: Letters from Prison and Other Writings" (Viking, 1997).
In 1989, after the crushing of student-led protests in Tiananmen Square, Mr. Wei wrote to Deng calling him "precisely the idiot to do something foolish like this."
In 1993, as Beijing campaigned for the 2000 Olympic Games, China's leaders decided to release Mr. Wei six months before the end of his term. 
Again he ignored warnings not to meet foreign reporters or to write about political issues.
In March 1994, Mr. Wei agreed to meet John Shattuck, the American Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, a move that infuriated the authorities. 
Mr. Wei was taken into custody again the following week. 
In November 1995, he was tried on charges of attempting to overthrow the Government, and was sentenced to 14 years.
Beijing's common wisdom had it that Mr. Wei would never be released as long as Deng was alive. 
When Deng died last February, talk inevitably began about whether Mr. Wei might be freed. 
It is a small irony that Mr. Wei was released within weeks of President Jiang Zemin's trip to the United States. 
Mr. Wei was jailed for the first time in 1979 just after a trip by Deng, the last previous state visit by a top Chinese leader to the United States.
