
President Clinton pressed for the dissident Wei Jingsheng's freedom from prison last month while meeting in Washington with President Jiang Zemin of China, White House officials said today. 
But they insisted that he made no deals for Mr. Wei's release, and had received no promises of action from Mr. Jiang.
In discussions leading up to the summit meeting with Mr. Jiang, one Administration official said today, "We made clear that human rights generally and this case particularly were a priority that had to be addressed if the relationship is to progress."
As a result, said another official, who also spoke on condition of anonymity, "the Chinese understood the importance of this issue to us, and had indicated for some time that a medical parole was a possibility."
The White House clearly regarded the Chinese move as a response to American pressure.
"We have spent an enormous amount of time -- the President has himself -- encouraging just this action," said Erskine Bowles, the White House chief of staff, in an appearance today on the CBS News program "Face the Nation."
In response to a reporter's question in Kuwait, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said of the Chinese Government's action, "It's not a gesture, it's a very important act to release him."
And on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," Samuel Berger, the national security adviser, called Mr. Wei's release "a very happy development" and today "a very happy day."
But those comments were as close as the White House came to gloating about the release as a sign that Administration policy toward China was succeeding. 
One aide to Mr. Clinton said that such behavior would serve only to aggravate the Chinese Government.
That kind of public caution -- an acute sensitivity to Chinese officials' perceived fear of being seen as capitulating to American pressure -- has been a theme of the Clinton Administration's approach to China on human rights. 
At the time of the summit meeting, officials declined to name the dissidents whose freedom Mr. Clinton had sought in his private meetings, saying that publicly identifying them could cause the Chinese to dig in their heels.
The Administration learned several days ago that Mr. Wei was to be paroled, an Administration official said, but agreed not to discuss the impending release until Mr. Wei was out of China. 
Mr. Clinton was informed by aides of Mr. Wei's release on Saturday evening, shortly before going to dinner with his host here, the producer Jeffrey Katzenberg, and such Hollywood notables as Kevin Spacey, Tom Hanks, Barry Diller and David Geffen.
But until this morning, the Administration was silent about the release, refusing even to confirm that it had taken place.
On his trip to and from church this morning, Mr. Clinton made no public comments about Mr. Wei or anything else. 
He then spent the day relaxing with his daughter, Chelsea, before two fund-raising events this evening, leaving it to his spokesman, Joe Lockhart, to provide the tersest of official statements regarding Mr. Wei: "President Clinton welcomes China's decision to release Wei Jingsheng on medical parole. 
Mr. Wei left China on Nov. 
16 and flew to the United States to seek medical treatment."
Mr. Lockhart said that Mr. Clinton looked forward eventually to speaking with Mr. Wei "at the appropriate time."
