
Just try to find a news release or an earnings report from a major United States consumer-products company that does not cite international growth as the panacea for future profits.
There are compelling reasons for companies to seek happiness "offshore," as American chief executives like to say, mainly that revenues and profits are modest at home and in much of the industrialized world, while spending on consumer goods is rising significantly in many other parts of the globe.
In the United States, intense competition in many product categories and a rise in private-label and store brands are taking their toll on profits.
And in a time of low inflation and consumer fickleness, American companies can no longer raise profits by routinely raising prices. 
After years of restructuring to raise the bottom line, some companies are in danger of "cutting into muscle instead of flab, if they're not careful," said Terry Bivens, an analyst at Donald & Company Securities.
To help fuel their profit engines, United States companies are aiming for double-digit growth in developing markets. 
But these days, going global is really the "duh" strategy: everybody is there already. 
And trying to Americanize the world is not such an easy layup.
For starters, foreign competitors are becoming leaner and meaner as they imitate American companies' compulsion to downsize, said Nomi Ghez, an analyst for Goldman, Sachs.
"The trend that started in the United States is now expanding into European companies," Ms. Ghez said. 
"They are becoming more shareholder oriented as they learn the new language of shareholder value."
Moving into foreign markets can prove difficult for newcomers from the United States. 
For example, distribution can offer daunting logistical challenges in places where mom-and-pop stores, not Wal-Marts, are the norm. 
The optimum delivery vehicle may have two wheels rather than 18, as in China.
Then there are the cultural differences. 
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation had to conduct expensive market testing before introducing its Pink Panther cartoon mascot in Europe. 
The worry was that Hollywood's bumbling French detective, Inspector Jacques Clouseau, protagonist of the "Pink Panther" movies, might be perceived as insulting to Europeans. 
They did not take offense.
And local taste preferences dictated to Pepsico Inc. that it remove the cheese from its Cheetos in China: the snack-food equivalent of removing, says, the cola from Pepsi-Cola. 
And so, the Chinese were given a choice between cheeseless Cheetos with a teriyaki taste and Cheetos with a butter popcorn flavor.
Finally, as always in foreign ventures, a company could use a little luck. 
Upon arriving in China, Pepsico's Cheetos team happily discovered that the Chinese characters "qi duo" (pronounced CHEE dwaugh) meant "new surprise" instead of - well, some phrase "that might offend people," a Pepsico spokesman said.
