
CHINA's economy may be coming to the end of its wild ride.
The background is still a little scary: Beijing lives in an uncertain political climate, the gray economy has grown so large and unwieldy that no one knows its actual size and the danger of high unemployment looms like a cloud that could break into rain anytime.
Yet the foreground looks surprisingly upbeat. 
The Government's efforts to get its eye-popping high growth rate under control began showing results last fall, and inflation is coming down, too.
Best of all, it looks like in 1996 China might be able to pull off its anticipated "soft landing" -- a gradual, rather than sudden, drop in its growth rate to about 10 percent, a place it hasn't been since 1991.
"We're pretty optimistic," said Joan Zheng, an economist who follows China for J. P. Morgan in Hong Kong. 
"We believe things will perk up slightly this year."
Perk up, however, is a relative term. 
With China's real gross domestic product in double digits for 8 of the last 12 years, economic growth has needed anything but perkiness. 
Rising to 13.6 percent in 1992 and 13.4 percent in 1993, economic growth eased to a more manageable 11.8 percent in 1994 and to 9.8 percent in the first nine months of 1995.
When Ms. Zheng looks ahead, she is pleased with what she sees. 
Exports and foreign investment are robust, and the declining growth rate is not cutting into domestic consumption. 
She expects growth to move along at 10.3 percent in 1996, avoiding the sharp fall many economists feared when the central Government began an austerity program in 1993.
The last time China saw an economic slowdown, in 1989-91, production and consumption crashed, with the gross domestic product falling from 11.3 percent in 1988 to a relatively meager 3.9 percent in 1990.
This time, the drop should be less jarring, and that is no small achievement.
A year ago, many economists laughed at Beijing's goal of reducing inflation to 15 percent, mostly because China's unwieldy economy seemed almost beyond the control of the nation's leaders. 
But by the time November's retail price index came in at 9.2 percent, compared with 26.5 percent for November 1994, inflation was estimated to end the year at precisely 15 percent.
That has taken some pressure off China's central bank, the People's Bank of China, which has been trying to execute a tight credit policy since 1993.
In China, "tight credit" does not just mean adjusting the discount rate or the issuing of Government bonds, but ordering state banks to severely cut the number and amount of loans it allows. 
Not having a working monetary system, said Edward Chan, head of China Research for Standard Chartered Securities in Hong Kong, "means you have to control credit with quotas."
One of the peculiarities of China's politically dominated economy is that the state industries with the most political clout get the loans, regardless of how well they perform, which has contributed to their unusually heavy debt load.
When China's economic policy makers gathered for a conference in Beijing last month, Wu Bangguo, the Deputy Prime Minister, acknowledged that the debt-to-asset ratio at state industries had climbed to 80 percent. 
The conference ended with a familiar call by the Government to "deepen reform" of state enterprises, a vague process that has been going on for years with minimal success. 
So it is state-owned industries that, despite the optimism among economists, make the long-term outlook for China cloudy.
Many economists agree that China should allow a far greater number of its state-owned industries to go bankrupt or be bought by collectively owned and privately owned companies that are succeeding. 
Only 28 percent of state-owned industries make a profit, according to a recent survey.
Yet leaders are afraid of unemployment, and they don't want to risk turning loose large numbers of urban workers. 
So far, employment has maintained precedence over efficiency.
Looming over all big political decisions, of course, is the frail health of the paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who is 91 years old. 
In such an environment, hard choices are rare and stabilityII is prized.
Yet the struggle to succeed Mr. Deng has been under way for some time. 
If he dies in 1996, with the economy essentially on track, it is unlikely that a sudden change in policy would affect the economy significantly.
For the first time since allowing foreign investment in 1978, China is not clamoring for it, having received close to $35 billion in actual investment in each of the last two years.
The executives of foreign companies might have groaned in late 1995 when it became clear that many of the tax incentives they had enjoyed would be revoked in 1996, but overall foreign investment is not expected to drop precipitously in 1996. 
If it does, however, leaders have said it would help them to keep inflation under control.
At the same time, the frenzy of building activity in China's coastal cities that pushed the national growth rate in fixed-asset investment to 58.6 percent in 1993, began to fall closer to earth -- to 27.8 percent in 1994 and to an estimated 20 percent in 1995.
"As long as credit control is loosened, I suspect that things will continue to look up," Ms. Zheng said.
