
Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last. 
The decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries is one big engine of growth. 
Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.
For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of recession. 
Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment, emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.
China, a favored destination for foreign investment, slowed down its unrelenting growth last year to 11 percent, a still-formidable rate that strained the capacity of aging industries and power grids. 
Japan, no longer the growth model for Asia, tried to climb out of its prolonged slump, with growth of barely 1 percent in 1994.
Political developments rattled countries like Mexico, where the peso plummeted after being freed to float against the dollar. 
Eastern Europe continued to slough off old Communist habits. 
But in Russia, the best economic news may have been that growth dropped off only 8 percent in 1994, compared with double-digit declines in the previous two years.
Trade liberalization became an international byword, notably with the North American Free Trade Association, now a year old. 
But frontier barriers were also lowered within Europe and Latin America, even as Washington's trade frictions with Japan and China festered. 
The European Union expanded to 15 countries. 
And the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade transformed itself into a sleeker new World Trade Organization.
China has dazzled the world with its economic performance in the last two years, but its economic foundations are creaking. 
And the deteriorating health of Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, has become an obsessive concern for anyone trying to gauge where the country's markets and economic changes will go in 1995.
Growth in 1994 was 11.5 percent after two years of 13 percent annual expansion, yet questions persist about the health of the banking system and the state-owned industrial sector.
Foreign investment continues to flood in, with $57 billion pledged and $22.72 billion actually in place, an increase of 49 percent over that of 1993.
The Communist Party leadership says that structural changes deferred in 1994 will be resumed in 1995, with the emphasis on building a social security and unemployment insurance system to catch workers falling out of the "iron rice bowl" of lifelong employment in state enterprises. 
The next stage is arguably the most difficult because it will result in the layoff of millions of workers at a time when unemployment is already projected to reach 268 million in the next six years.
But China's economic reformers face daunting challenges. 
There is much contention over how to apply the tools of bankruptcy and privatization to China's aged industrial structures.
The Communist Party seems intent on preserving a large state sector through invigoration with foreign capital, but skeptics about this policy abound. 
State-owned factories continue to soak up more than 70 percent of all investment and 80 percent of all bank loans, while contributing only 43 percent to the gross value of industrial output.
The income deposited in the banks as savings by private and collective enterprises, which have become the most productive parts of the economy, are flowing back out as loans to subsidize state factories.
Real growth in China's gross domestic product is projected to slow to about 10 percent in 1995, but even this may be illusory since inventories are piling up in many industrial sectors.   PATRICK E. TYLER
