
The White House released a trove of internal documents today showing that President Clinton approved the Chinese launching of an American satellite last February after his top staff advised him that the economic and diplomatic advantages outweighed the opposition of Federal prosecutors.
The prosecutors had warned that the approval would jeopardize their investigation into the satellite maker's earlier, unauthorized help to China's rocket program, the President was told in the memorandums.
The documents, demanded by Congress, were made available to the news media today by the White House, which argued that they showed that the President, while aware of the risks, approved the launching on the basis of policy debate and not because the chairman of the satellite company, the Democratic Party's largest personal contributor, was pressing hard for a decision.
"I think the decision was the correct one," Mr. Clinton said in remarks in the White House Rose Garden, where he came to talk about the highway bill that passed Congress today, but was clearly prepared for questions on China. 
It "was based on what I thought was in the national interest and supportive of our national security," he said.
The President said the Justice Department's concerns were evaluated and balanced against the views of all the other participating departments, who "concluded that, on balance, we should go forward."
But Republicans questioned the President's decision and promised further inquiries. 
They said a preliminary review of the 394 documents the White House released raised troubling questions about Mr. Clinton's decision to overrule Justice Department objections to a Presidential waiver to allow the launching.
"There's no question there were plenty of red flags at the time," said Representative Christopher Cox, the California Republican who will head a House select committee examining the China issues.
The documents paint a fascinating portrait of the intense struggles surrounding Mr. Clinton last February as he weighed whether to allow the satellite launching and ignore the pleas of prosecutors and the probable outrage from some in Congress.
A top State Department official had warned White House staff members that the satellite company, Loral Space and Communications, engaged in "unlawful" and "criminal" activity by providing valuable help to the Chinese rocket program.
And the chairman of the company, Bernard L. Schwartz, combed a White House dinner on Feb. 
5, looking for Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, to plead for a decision on the satellite launching, a decision worth tens of millions of dollars to the company.
As it all played out, with the company arguing it needed an immediate decision, the senior White House staff were concluding that the President's broader strategy of engaging China should not be endangered by blocking the launching.
"We believe that the advantages of this project outweigh this risk, and that we can effectively rebut criticism of the waiver," said the memorandum to Mr. Clinton, dated Feb. 
12, 1998, and signed by Mr. Berger, Larry Stein, the Congressional liaison, and Daniel K. Tarullo, assistant to the President for international economic policy.
"The project is in the national interest," the memorandum said, "because the development of China's civil communications infrastructure will promote access by Chinese citizens in remote areas to people and ideas in democratic societies."
In addition, it said, "the current project also will help maintain the competitiveness of U.S. satellite exporters in a most important satellite market."
The President's top advisers warned him in the memorandum that his approval might be seen as letting Loral's space subsidiary "off the hook on criminal charges for its unauthorized assistance to China's ballistic missile program."
But they also said it would be unfair to "penalize" Loral by denying a license "before they have even been charged with any crime."
On Feb. 
13, Loral's lobbyist, Tom Ross, pleaded with Mr. Berger for a "prompt decision" and mentioned how Mr. Schwartz "had intended to raise this issue with you" a week earlier at the dinner for Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain "but missed you in the crowd."
White House spokesmen noted that Mr. Ross's letter was dated the day after the staff memorandum to the President recommending approval of the launching.
On Feb. 
18, the President approved the deal.
Mr. Schwartz was the largest personal contributor to the Democrats last year and has donated almost $1 million since 1995. 
His name is not in the memorandums sent to the President for his approval.
Mr. Ross, Loral's vice president of government relations, said today that he "considered it perfectly proper for me to make an inquiry on the timing of the issue."
He said it would also have been proper for Mr. Schwartz to have asked for a prompt decision because "there is a distinction between that and demanding a favorable decision."
The documents were made available to the House International Relations Committee on the eve of a long holiday weekend. 
The committee requested them on May 7 after a story in The New York Times disclosed the President's decision despite the objections of Justice Department officials. 
A week later, it was also disclosed that a China aerospace executive funnelled almost $100,000 from the Chinese military to the Democratic Party in 1996, according to an account by a Democrat fund-raiser, Johnny Chung, who is cooperating with investigators after pleading guilty to campaign-related bank and tax fraud charges.
The chairman of the House committee, Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, Republican of New York, said today that the documents raised "some troubling questions that will have to be pursued," and that the committee was awaiting further documents from the White House and other agencies.
The Justice Department is also weighing whether to investigate the President's approval for Loral, and if so, whether it should be done by its own campaign finance task force or an independent counsel, law-enforcement officials said.
The new documents complicate that decision because two senior Justice officials have played dual roles: advising the White House against Mr. Clinton's approval for Loral and deciding now whether to investigate that approval.
Today's release of documents comes as Mr. Clinton's policy on Chinese satellite launches is caught up in a cross current of diplomatic, legal and political issues.
In a month, the President is going to China, where he hopes to improve space cooperation with Beijing. 
But the House of Representatives this week may have upset his summit plans by overwhelmingly adopting amendments that ban future exports of American satellites to China.
Republicans said such exports may jeopardize national security by giving China the ability to learn space technology that can improve its ballistic missile capabilities.
The Clinton Administration argues that stringent safeguards insure that national security is protected and that American satellite companies need to maintain their competitiveness in an important global market, points made in the memorandum to Mr. Clinton. China, which offered low-cost services, launches about 10 percent of American satellites.
At the center of the debate is the criminal case that prompted prosecutors to express their concerns to the White House. 
In the spring of 1996, Loral officials helped the Chinese investigate why a rocket carrying a Loral satellite exploded. 
The company acknowledged that it turned information over to the Chinese without telling the Government.
The President was told by his advisers that Loral "acknowledges that an unauthorized transfer of technical information took place but Justice has not decided whether it will take criminal action against" the company.
"Justice believes that a jury would not convict once it learned that the President had found" the latest Loral satellite launching "to be in the national interest," the memorandum stated.
As a result of sanctions imposed after the killings at Tiananmen Square in 1989, satellites can be exported to China only through a Presidential waiver demonstrating that the launch is in the national interest.
Loral maintains its officials did nothing wrong. 
A Loral fact sheet released this week said that all its scientists did was an analysis that confirmed the findings of Chinese scientists.
But the State Department's top defense trade regulator, Will Lowell, told a White House lawyer that Loral "went beyond analysis to telling cause of failure and how to prevent," according to the lawyer's notes of the conversation.
Mr. Lowell also told the lawyer that he thought Loral's behavior was "criminal" and "unlawful," but he added that even though the company was "likely to be indicted," it was "hard to pull the plug" on a license without an indictment.
The cost of delaying approval for Loral -- which might have cleared up the question of whether the company would be indicted -- was estimated by White House aides at $4-6 million, the documents show.
In the end, the concerns of regulators like Mr. Lowell and Justice Department prosecutors from the criminal division were given less weight than the views of top-ranking political appointees and the diplomatic and commercial imperatives.
On Feb. 
13, White House counsel Charles F.C. 
Ruff wrote a memorandum to Mr. Berger, the National Security Adviser, noting the failure of the highest officials at the Justice Department to weigh in on the satellite decision. 
And curiously, the documents released today contained no written communications from anyone at the Justice Department.
"The department had every opportunity to weigh in against the waiver at the highest levels and elected not to do so," Mr. Ruff wrote, adding that Mr. Berger could himself balance "the national security and criminal justice interests."
Mr. Berger already had. 
A day earlier he and other top advisers recommended that the President go forward with his approval.
Meanwhile, the Justice Department, despite its earlier concerns, is proceeding with the investigation, officials said.
