
IN the 1980's, the Asian money that fueled scores of conspiracy theories in America was all Japanese. 
The sale of giant American icons -- Rockefeller Center and Columbia Pictures, the Seattle Mariners and much of downtown Los Angeles -- gave rise to dark warnings that decisions about the country's economic future would be made in Tokyo, not New York or Washington.
Exactly how this power would be exercised was always left a bit vague. 
Would executives at Sony kill movie scripts about the Emperor's role in World War II or about the dark side of corporate life in Japan?
And would Nintendo, the new owner of the Mariners, ship home-run hitters back to Osaka, where power-hitting is in scarce supply?
In the short retrospect of seven years, the questions now sound even more paranoid than they did then. 
The Japanese took a multibillion-dollar bath on most of their investments. 
If anything, they exerted too little control over their acquisitions, especially in Hollywood, and it cost them dearly.
It seems almost laughable these days to think of the United States as an imminent "techno-colony" of Tokyo, a phrase slung around with great abandon in Silicon Valley until Japan plunged into recession.
 
 
 
The New Bogeyman
Yet the underlying fear that struck such a chord in late 80's, a fear that Asian economic powerhouses were using their great wealth to buy power and influence in America, has cropped up anew. 
Now, the money is largely from ethnic Chinese, but -- and the distinction is important -- not from China itself.
The conduit for most of the money was John Huang, a Democratic National Committee fund-raiser who helped conceive and execute a carefully drawn plan to tap a rich vein: the Asian-American community. 
Mr. Huang appealed to the aspirations of a group eager to have a political voice equal to its accomplishments in American society, and he focused his efforts on those he knew best: the prosperous Chinese-Americans living in the suburbs of Los Angeles and New York.
As long as the donors were citizens or legal residents, those contributions were perfectly legal. 
But in racing to reach an ambitious $7 million fund-raising goal, he quickly raked in more than $1 million in clearly illegal donations from the wealthy precincts of Taipei, Bangkok, Jakarta and other outposts of the Chinese diaspora.
Now, in the public mind, the legal and the illegal have melded under the imprecise rubric of "Asian money."
Just as Japan's investments touched a nerve about American economic impotence, the ethnic Chinese money has fed into today's anxiety that Greater China poses the next great challenge to America, economically and militarily.
This shift in fear from Japan to China is nothing new -- that pendulum has swung many times in the American mind, back to the late 19th century. 
John W. Dower, a historian at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, noted that "as a nation we can handle only one Asian bogeyman at a time, and these days Japan is down and China is up as the country with the greatest potential and the greatest potential menace."
 
 
 
Murky Motives
But sometimes the smoke can mask some real fire, and the Democrats' problems clearly have elements of both. 
"In one sense, we've seen this cycle before," said Representative Robert T. Matsui, Democrat of California, who was 6 months old when he and his parents were placed in a World War II detention camp for Japanese-Americans, during an era when many Asians on the West Coast wore signs that said "I'm Chinese" for fear of being caught on the wrong side of the pendulum. 
"But this is a particularly difficult case, because there are legitimate issues to be debated here and a lot of questions no one has answered. 
And still, you'd be deaf if you didn't also hear the tone of racism that's running through a lot of this."
The key question, of course, is what kind of return on investment Mr. Clinton's biggest campaign donors -- who were usually the foreign contributors whose money has since been returned -- were expecting. 
So far, there is no evidence of a single policy or trade dispute that changed course after one of Mr. Clinton's now-famous kaffeeklatsches with Asia's rich and famous, though every new disclosure of a meeting sends investigators and journalists scurrying to figure out what Mr. Clinton's visitors really wanted.
For example, no one yet understands the real motives of the Riady family, the ethnic Chinese owners of the Indonesia-based Lippo Group, who gave Mr. Huang a $700,000 goodbye present when he left Lippo in 1994 to take a mid-level job in the Clinton Commerce Department. 
Did they seek intelligence about American Asian policy?
Influence from a bureaucrat with regular access to the President?
Or, as many suspect, were they simply using their many pictures with the President and their connections in Washington to create an image back home that could be exploited to profitable advantage?
 
 
 
Double Standards
There are also a host of subsidiary mysteries, including whether it was greed or ignorance that led the White House, on the recommendation of a Chinese-American restaurateur-turned-entrepreneur from Little Rock, Ark., named Charles Yah Lin Trie, to allow the head of China's state-owned arms manufacturer into a campaign-organized meeting with Mr. Clinton about Asia policy. 
The White House says it had no idea then that the businessman ran the arms operation, or that he held a senior political post in the Chinese Government (a denial that does not instill great confidence in the vetting of Presidential visitors).
There is little doubt that some of the frenzy surrounding Mr. Clinton's meetings with big donors and their Asian business-leader friends has been fueled by the fact that many of the White House visitors have hard-to-pronounce names and run conglomerates few in America have heard about. 
It's hard to imagine the Washington press corps getting too excited about a White House dinner invitation to the chief of Airbus Industrie, even though the European consortium's profitability -- like the Lippo Group's -- hinges on major issues of trade policy (including China policy) that are decided in the Oval Office. 
But bring in the Thai-Chinese chief of Ban Chang, the huge Thai conglomerate and one of the largest investors in China, and suddenly accusations fly.
In the last few weeks, though, even some Asian-American business leaders admit to wondering whether they -- with the Democratic National Committee's direct encouragement -- raised the flag of "Asia bashing" too quickly. 
"No one in the Asian-American community can say this publicly, but in private a lot of the talk you hear is that there are some real problems with the way access was being sold," said one Asian-American banker, who insisted, of course, that he couldn't talk publicly.
But questions of prejudice aside, Americans and Asians clearly hold radically different views about where global power lies. 
American suspicions of "Asian money" these days are partly rooted in the sense that American jobs are still flowing across the Pacific. 
Very few people in America may have heard of the rich entrepreneurs whom the President was entertaining at election time, but many share a gut sense that somehow these Asians are pulling the strings of the world economy, building plants in Southern China using family connections (and bribery) that American firms could never match.
The soaring American trade deficit with China, which is quickly overtaking that with Japan, is often cited as proof that this is a battle the United States is losing. 
In this view, the Asian money flowing into the nation's political system is intended to spread that web of influence -- much like the Japanese investment in the 80's.
But Asian executives at the summit meeting President Clinton attended in Manila last November hardly flaunted their power. 
They worry about the future of Hong Kong when it reverts to China on July 1, wonder if China and Indonesia will descend into political chaos after their current leaders die, and maintain that America is in command of the world economic system. 
They talk about the hidden goals of Washington's trade policies in the same tones that some in Washington talk about Lippo's hidden goals in China. 
And if Washington gets into a prolonged spat with Beijing over human rights, arms proliferation or the pirating of American movies and videos, China's unfettered access to its biggest market, the United States, could be cut off. 
And that would crush ereryone's plans to export from their new base in China.
So if it costs an Asian company a few hundred thousand dollars to keep lines of communication to Washington open, well, that's fine. 
After all, that's a fraction of what is regularly paid to keep a provincial governor happy in southern China, or to keep friendly politicians in office in South Korea.
In America, however, it is unclear whether they are getting their money's worth. 
Perhaps, like the Japanese in the 80's, they will soon decide this is a bad investment. 
The reality of life in Washington is that many of the policies sought by Asian business executives -- including separating China's human-rights record from trade -- are generally also sought by American global giants like Boeing, I.B.M. and Bechtel.
Of course, American and Asian corporate interests often diverge. 
But for now, it's still hard to figure out exactly what the Asian executives are buying, beyond intelligence, some nice pictures for the office wall and a lot of publicity they now wish they didn't have.
