
Summertime, with all France ready to head off on vacation in le grand depart -- but will anybody be around for la rentree in September?
Ominous signs are everywhere. 
It's the end of the second millennium; the moon is about to blot out the sun all across a swatch of northern Europe on Aug. 
11, and apocalyptic traffic jams are about to make the French sorry they all insist on starting their five-week annual vacations on July 14, the Gallic Fourth of July.
But France is also the birthplace of Michel de Nostre-Dame, better known as Nostradamus, and he had dire predictions for 1999.
Nostradamus had dire predictions for just about every year since his death in 1566, at least for those who find ways of reading them into his sometimes Delphic verse -- people like Paco Rabanne, the fashion designer.
"From mid-July to after the 11th of August," Mr. Rabanne told Le Figaro's weekly magazine last month, "I am recommending to all my friends to stay at least 60 kilometers from the capital."
Nostradamus, by Mr. Rabanne's reading, had foreseen space travel and predicted that the battered Mir space station would crash down onto Paris and leave much of it looking like Hiroshima in 1945.
In a country where book publishers seem willing to slap out any paperback at all as long as a celebrity's name is on the cover, that was enough to make Mr. Rabanne a best-selling author this year, with a book called "1999, Fire From the Heavens," published by Editions Michel Lafon.
Since the book was written, though, Russia has decided to keep Mir up in the heavens, at least through next January, so perhaps it will be the fire next time. 
But with at least 10 books on Nostradamus still on the shelves, Mr. Rabanne's has plenty of company this summer.
What makes this year especially portentous, and sent Mr. Rabanne into Chicken Little mode, is a Nostradamus quatrain that could be translated from 16th-century French this way:
In thousand nine-hundred ninety-nine, seven months,
A king of terror will come from heaven
To revive the great King of Angouleme,
Setting Mars to reign before and then.
According to Jean-Charles de Fontbrune, a Nostradamus scholar, the King of Angouleme originally meant Attila the Hun, whose advance into Gaul in 451 was supposedly stopped near the city of Angouleme in west-central France.
Nowadays, as Mr. de Fontbrune sees it, the phrase must refer to China, and Mars, the god of war, was much in evidence in Iraq and later Kosovo through the first six months of 1999.
A horrified frisson went through Paris in May, therefore, when a United States plane mistakenly bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, an act that threatened to bring China into NATO's war against Yugoslavia -- real Armageddon.
"Nostradamus predicted it!" a wealthy real-estate speculator in the tony 16th arrondissement exclaimed in horror, before heading off as Mr. Rabanne recommended to his country house a safe distance from Paris.
"If by the 30th of June, 'seven months,' President Clinton has not stopped hostilities in Yugoslavia," Mr. de Fontbrune warned, "the Chinese and the Russians are going to intervene."
As it happened, Russia's diplomatic intervention helped persuade President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia to accept NATO's conditions -- perhaps Mr. Milosevic knew that Attila the Hun had also razed Belgrade -- and the bombing stopped before "seven months" arrived.
As for whether Mars will reign after this month, you don't have to be Nostradamus to predict that Kosovo will not be humanity's last war. 
Scholars who take Nostradamus seriously as the historian and poet he was say he sometimes had to write in elliptical terms, because the Renaissance was a capricious and dangerous time. 
In France people were being massacred by the thousands in religious wars for what was considered blasphemy.
Seen in this light, the verse about 1999 takes on a quite different meaning. 
Louis Schlosser, author of a biography of Nostradamus, thought he was referring to 1559, not 1999, and to the death of King Henry II of France that July.
Roger Prevost, a French scholar, explains it differently. 
The king of terror in the first two verses, he says, is a French pun on Geoffrey (Geoffroi rhymes with effroi, literary French for fear or terror), a reference to Geoffroi or Godefroi de Bouillon, a Crusader who conquered Jerusalem in July 1099.
The great King of Angouleme, then, is simply Francis I of France, known as Francis of Angouleme and King of France from 1515 to 1547. 
Nostradamus, the King's loyal subject, was just paying tribute.
In Mr. Prevost's book on the subject, "Nostradamus, Myth and Reality: A Historian in the Time of Astrologers," published this year by Editions Robert Laffont, he suggested reading all these verses not as prophecies but as fascinating glimpses into a bygone era and milieu.
As far as July 1999 is concerned he wrote, "when this book appears we'll be about to find out."
