
The Communist Party's flagship newspaper made a rare reference today to the 1989 democracy movement in Tiananmen Square, calling the violent crushing of those demonstrations essential to the protection of national stabilityI and economic progress.
The editorial in People's Daily, "Unswervingly Maintaining Social StabilityI," cited the NATO attack on the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade last month as evidence that "hostile forces in the West have never abandoned their scheme to ruin China."
History has demonstrated, the editorial added, that the "firm and resolute suppression of the political turmoil in Beijing" in 1989 protected "national independence, dignity, security and stabilityI and insured the sustained, healthy development of economic reforms and opening to the outside world."
"China must steadfastly avoid letting a disturbance created by outside forces spark internal chaos," said the editorial, the latest installment in a campaign mounted after the embassy bombing, to paint Western human rights concerns as a plot to undermine China's progress.
Oddly, the English-language version of the editorial distributed by the official New China News Agency omitted the direct references to the demonstrations in 1989.
On the surface, life goes on as normal here and elsewhere in China. 
But there are many signs of official nervousness as the June 4 anniversary of the crackdown on the student-led demonstrations approaches.
Some 80 democracy advocates around the country have been detained, at least temporarily, by the police in the last month, and 28 remained in custody today, according to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, a small watchdog group in Hong Kong. 
The detainees included seven people in the southern city of Hangzhou who had planned to commemorate the 1989 demonstrations and were held today, the information center said.
In Beijing, in luxury hotels and some private compounds housing foreigners, CNN service on cable television has been temporarily cut off, apparently because the channel is transmitting numerous programs on the legacy of the demonstrations and their suppression. 
But almost no Chinese have access to CNN, anyway.
In another action that largely affects foreign visitors, Hong Kong and foreign newspapers delivered to hotels here and in Shanghai have been arriving with articles about China cut out by Government censors. 
But journalists and diplomats with subscriptions received complete nonexcised copies, as usual.
One popular Chinese-language Internet chatroom, at www.sohu.com, announced that it was shutting down for 10 days, ostensibly to "improve the system," but possibly under pressure to avoid discussions about the 1989 crackdown in which army troops killed hundreds of civilians.
Tiananmen Square itself, where hundreds of thousands of students and others chanted and camped, has been closed at least through the month, officially for renovations in preparation for the 50th-anniversary celebrations in October of the Communist victory. 
But extra police officers are in the streets, and hundreds of people involved with the 1989 movement have in recent weeks received visits or calls to warn them not to speak with foreign journalists or to engage in disruptive activities.
      
