
THE tenants living in a year-old apartment building called the Bristol in the Flushing section of Queens include a 26-year-old registered nurse free from the parental nest for the first time, a 45-year-old teacher who left her husband as well as her apartment when she moved to the Bristol with her two young children, and a Chinese astrologer.
The astrologer is Yung Yuan Lai, 63, who moved into a fifth-floor, two-bedroom apartment with his wife, Mei Chu, and two children in their 20's. 
Astrology is an honored profession in China, Mr. Lai noted, although 30 percent of his clients are Americans or other non-Asians.
Those proportions are close to those of the demographics at the Bristol itself, a 60-unit building at 138-49 Barclay Avenue, near Main Street. 
The Bluestone Organization, the builder-owner, says that 60 percent of the tenants are Asian, mainly of Chinese descent.
The more important tenant characteristic from a housing perspective is that 80 percent of the tenants are middle-income. 
As a 1990's housing product in New York City, the Bristol is a rare specimen -- a new rental apartment house outside Manhattan. 
It was built with tax-exempt bond financing, a method typically used only in Manhattan, where market-rate rents are high enough to permit the project to support low-income occupancy. 
Twenty percent of the tenants must be low income under this "80-20" program.
But now New York City has come forward with a new housing loan program, which, if successful, should generate about a dozen new middle-income apartment buildings outside prime Manhattan locations. 
Unlike the 80-20 program, it has no requirement for partial low-income occupancy. 
From the reaction of builders and lenders it could provide the impetus for construction in such locations as Flushing and Forest Hills in Queens, Park Slope and Carroll Gardens in Brooklyn, and Manhattan Valley and East Harlem in Manhattan.
The program is run by the city's Housing Development Corporation, a state-chartered public benefit corporation that provides financing for multifamily housing within the city. 
It was announced in late October, just before the mayoral election. 
Richard T. Roberts, who is chairman of the board of the corporation as well as Commissioner of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, called the program a model for future city assistance to new multifamily construction.
The financing, which will come from long-term taxable bonds, will not impinge on the capacity of city agencies to promote economic development through tax-exempt borrowings. 
And, since H.D.C. bonds have an AA rating from Standard and Poor's, the housing will get the benefit of interest rates somewhat lower than current conventional mortgage rates.
In addition, the development corporation is prepared to offer a direct low-interest loan for each apartment built to further help make the apartments affordable. 
This subsidy is expected to average $15,000 an apartment and be offered at 1 to 3 percent interest over the term of the loan, which may be as long as 35 years. 
The amount will vary depending on the location of the project and the rent-generating capacity of the market in that area.
Eligible projects will be those with at least 20 apartments, produced either through new construction, the substantial rehabilitation of an existing residential building or the conversion, on an as-of-right basis, of an existing nonresidential building. 
In Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx or Staten Island, the property can be in any location where multifamily development is permissible. 
In Manhattan the site must be north of 110th Street in the case of new construction, or north of 96th Street in a rehabilitation.
The income limits on renters -- or buyers if the project is done as a limited-equity co-op -- are the same as those that apply to Mitchell-Lama middle-income housing, last produced in the late 70's. 
In households of one or two persons, annual income can be as high as seven times the annual rent, or as much as eight times the annual rent for larger families, up to a maximum of 250 percent of median income in New York City, or $118,500 for a family of four at present.
There are also rent or carrying-charge limits -- $800 for a studio, $1,050 for a 1-bedroom, $1,350 for a 2-bedroom and $1,750 for a 3-bedroom. 
A family earning as little of $40,000 a year might be able to afford a $1,000-a-month 1-bedroom apartment, paying 30 percent of annual income as rent. 
But the income limit for eligibility would be much higher, $84,000 a year. 
Because of the sites that are likely to developed, most tenants will probably be at an income level well below the maximum theoretically allowed.
TO get the program started, the Housing Development Corporation has set aside $15 million, which at an average of $15,000 a unit would finance about 1,000 new middle-income housing units. 
The money comes from the corporation's reserves built up from housing-finance operations, said Barbara Udell, president of the Housing Development Corporation, and if they are used successfully a second phase will follow.
Charles A. Brass, the corporation's vice president for development, said that preliminary responses from builders who have worked with city programs in the past has been positive. 
"We're basically looking for housing for families earning from $35,000 to $75,000 a year," Mr. Brass said.
The challenge for builders, several of them said in interviews, will be to find sites at low enough prices that are capable of attracting tenants who can pay, say, $1,300 a month for a 2-bedroom apartment. 
Most hopeful are those situations where builders already hold the property and are close to feasibility already.
"It's geared toward places where the market is at $1,300 to $1,600 a month and not many neighborhoods have that," said Ronald Moelis, a partner in in L & M Equity Ltd., a developer based in Larchmont, N.Y., that has participated in various city-assisted housing programs.
"If you can find a renovation project you might have a better shot at making the numbers work than in new construction," said Barry Zelikson, director of development at Sparrow Construction Company in the Bronx, another builder.
Michael D. Lappin, president of the Community Preservation Corporation, a major citywide construction lender, predicted the program would provide an opportunity for smaller, efficient builder-owners. 
"This could produce some affordable housing," he said.
For multifamily housing, that would be progress. 
Private multifamily housing production outside Manhattan has been nil in the 90's, said Frank P. Braconi, executive director of the Citizens Housing and Planning Council, although 20,000 units were created by city-assisted rehabilitations of vacant buildings, typically for low-income occupancy. 
The council's figures are compiled from city agencies. 
The Department of City Planning, which also reports on housing completions, has not yet released any data for the post-1995 period.
For builders generally, the biggest problem will be finding sites at a low enough cost in neighborhoods capable of attracting people able to pay $1,200 to $1,500 a month in rent. 
Typically, even when such sites exist owners tend to raise the asking price for land once a new subsidy program becomes available, again throwing feasibility into question. 
But sometimes builders already own the land. 
"We've had a site in Park Slope for 12 years where we could do 50 units as of right," said David Gaunt, a principal in Premiere Management and Development Company, based in Manhattan. 
"It's hard to pencil out a rental project. 
We're doing an evaluation now to see if this new program will work for us."
One likely user is the Bluestone Organization, the builder-owner of the Bristol in Flushing and nine other rentals in Queens and Great Neck, L.I., over the last 30 years. 
"We have a site in Forest Hills where we think it will work," said Harold Bluestone, a principal in the organization. 
"I can't disclose the location yet."
