
AN EMPIRE OF WOMEN
By Karen Shepard.
262 pp. 
New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
$24.95.
What should a mother do or be?
How much does an artist owe her family?
Given that every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way, would such households flourish or deteriorate if men were removed from the picture?
These are among the inconvenient questions raised by "An Empire of Women," Karen Shepard's delicate yet searing first novel. 
As it opens, Cameron Arneaux is driving from Manhattan to rural Virginia with her mother, Sumin, and a 6-year-old Chinese girl called Alice. 
Alice's mother is Cameron's best friend from graduate school. 
She has since lost her visa and returned to China, but still wants her daughter to be raised in America. 
The only solution is to grant Cameron temporary guardianship of Alice until the visa problem can be worked out.
Cameron's destination is the cabin where she was photographed as a child by her French-Chinese grandmother, Celine, in a notorious series of portraits. 
Celine's reputation rests on three books of photographs: of Cam at ages 1, 6 and 12. 
Like Sally Mann's work (which Shepard has acknowledged as an inspiration), Celine's family portraits are sexually provocative. 
"A 12-year-old in heavy makeup wears a traditional Chinese silk dress. 
It is several sizes too large. 
She holds the excess fabric bunched at her hip. 
Beneath the dress, she is naked."
In another, she touches herself. 
The images also have a political edge. 
In one photograph, 6-year-old Cam, wearing only the jacket from a Red Guard's uniform, has been asked by Celine to spread her legs. 
To further incriminate political torturers, Celine photographs her naked daughter cruelly bound to a tree: "She looks over her shoulder . . . almost to the camera. 
The rope goes around her wrists and forearms in X's, like the straps on Roman sandals."
Sumin is the result of Celine's affair with a Chinese painter, a disposable male never told of the pregnancy. 
Cam has likewise been deprived of contact with (or even much knowledge of) her father, a Japanese man who briefly served as her grandmother's assistant. 
Alice's father, too, is "nowhere to be found."
Though fatherless, Cam has been spoiled, relying on her looks and Celine's checkbook to make her way in the world. 
"Every so often, it bothered her that she depended on that money. 
It didn't bother her enough to make her do anything about it," perhaps because of all the time she spends "looking like she had spent no time at all thinking about how she looked."
While Cam is a striking example of young, bitchy cool, in Celine the author
has created a cryogenic empress of self-absorption, and the reader cannot take his eyes off her. 
Not since the seven-foot-tall hairless Judge Holden in Cormac McCarthy's "Blood Meridian" have we met a figure of such magisterial narcissism. 
"You are not a mother," Celine tells her granddaughter. 
"I did not raise you to be a mother. 
You're a model; the vessel of viewers' feelings, not the caretaker of those feelings."
When her daughter threatens to expose a mortifying secret, Celine chides her: "Don't pursue this. 
It's ugly. 
It's pointless. 
And it's beneath even you."
How did this woman acquire the touch of dry ice?
Shepard provides several hints. 
"Her pregnancy had been trouble-free, but her labor and delivery so agonized that she still hadn't fully forgiven her daughter."
Celine is given to wondering how photographers like Julia Cameron (for whom she named Cam) accomplished what they did with "all those children" around them. 
As for herself: "First and foremost, I was un imagier. 
Maternity found time when it had to."
For her daughter, "there would never be the knowledge of what it was to be desperate over an image. 
There was no passion, no unadulterated dedication. 
. . . Her passivity filled me with contempt."
Cameron, Celine's pet, has become a painter -- or at least obtained an M.F.A. 
-- but what she's focused on now, at the age of 24, is a child. 
Because of her physical beauty, "men thought that going out with her would be more magical than it actually turned out to be."
And without a man with whom to conceive a child, she becomes so neurotically attached to her new maternal role that she schemes to keep Alice and her mother on separate continents. 
All three Arneaux women, in fact, prove almost psychotically ruthless in their need to be loved by this child, regardless of what might be in Alice's best interests.
Because of Celine's stature as an artist and her kowtowing to the Chinese government after the Tiananmen Square bloodbath, she has the leverage to determine whether Alice's mother gets her visa renewed, as well as the money to finance whatever makeshift family might be forced into being. 
To enhance the suspense, Shepard front-loads her novel with a dossier on each of the women, followed by neutral third-person accounts of their week at the cabin and italicized descriptions of Celine's photographs.
Celine's sections are told in a frosty first person, allowing her to reflect on her girlhood in China and Paris. 
She recalls in graphic detail Chiang Kai-shek's massacre of Communist-led union members in 1927 and, more intimately, her mother's bound feet, with their broken toes folded "under the sole."
She reports overhearing her French grandmother speak to her father about the distress caused by mixed-blood offspring. 
"You must not," she demands, "have any more children."
Certainly not girls, is the clear implication. 
When her father fails to protest, Celine decides her life's course: "I would make them both crumble under the iron evidence that I was someone who could belong anywhere."
At the dinner to celebrate Celine's 75th birthday, Cam asks her mother and grandmother, "Did you want sons?"
Celine avoids the question. 
And she refuses to answer at all when Sumin asks rhetorically, "What do you call those people so absorbed by one thing that everything else is up for sacrifice?"
Un imagier, we are left to conclude.
In a tautly condensed narrative encompassing disparate time periods, the author's lapidary prose is tainted now and then by an overuse of the pluperfect tense, and the sheer number of feminine pronouns leaves a few referents unclear. 
Yet Shepard (who is herself Chinese-American, and the granddaughter of the writer Han Suyin) has ably portrayed how obsession with female beauty can disfigure not only families and individuals but cultures and governments. 
Drawing on the weight of mixed blood, of Celine's battle against being the wrong class and sex, Shepard delineates the pathology of movements like the Cultural Revolution as well as the mind-bending challenges facing those who would balance parenthood with the making of art.
The novel's brief final chapter is shocking but feels inevitable, as the story makes ironically tangible the disappointment felt in many Chinese families when a daughter arrives, not to mention the seething resentment of those unwanted girls. 
When Celine presents Alice with a gift of carved jade, to confer upon her "the strength, the good fortune, the luck that our ancestors wished only for boys," we begin to understand how they feel.
