
On the salmon-colored carpet of the delegates' lounge of the United Nations, beneath the enormous tapestry of the Great Wall that the Chinese Government sent as a gift in 1974, the Ping-Pong table seemed a little incongruous. 
So did the pairs of middle-aged men and women in shorts or sweatsuits doing paddle-to-paddle combat, engaging in forehand slams and backhand chops to the applause of well-dressed onlookers. 
So, against that backdrop, did Henry Kissinger.
But to those who gathered there Thursday evening to celebrate one of the more remarkable chapters in diplomatic history, the scene was a perfectly apt reminder that in 1971, an American table-tennis team visited China and thawed relations between two stubborn superpowers that had been frozen in rigid enmity for more than 20 years.
The American visit (which the Chinese reciprocated by coming here a year later), brought two cultures face to face for the first time in a generation, and not without mutual astonishment. 
But more important, it initiated the era of what became known as "Ping-Pong diplomacy."
Three months after the 15 American table-tennis players and officials returned home, Mr. Kissinger, then President Richard M. Nixon's national security adviser, traveled to Beijing (the city formerly known as Peking) for talks with the Chinese Prime Minister, Zhou Enlai. 
That October, the Communist Government of the mainland took China's seat in the United Nations from the Nationalist Government on Taiwan; the following year, President Nixon made his own celebrated trip to China, meeting with Zhou and the Communist Party chairman, Mao Zedong.
At the United Nations Thursday night, Mr. Kissinger, speaking in his signature deadpan rumble, recounted for the 200 or so guests -- who included several table-tennis luminaries and Tricia Nixon Cox, one of the former President's daughters -- a little of the history in which he played so central a role.
By the time the Chinese invited the American team, he said, he and President Nixon were already involved in back-channel negotiations to hold talks between the two nations.
Indeed, Zhou had already extended the invitation for an American emissary to visit Beijing, but the Americans had been dilatory in responding. 
The Chinese, he suggested, must have thought the Americans needed prodding, so they took advantage of the fact that the American table-tennis team was playing in a tournament in nearby Japan to send a signal.
"I think Zhou Enlai thought Westerners were slower than the Chinese in mental perception, and didn't think we had understood the message," Mr. Kissinger said. 
"So just as we were drafting a response to the message we had received, we heard he had invited the Ping-Pong team."
Beyond the history being celebrated, Thursday's event, which was organized by the National Committee on United States-China relations, was an occasion for laughter and reminiscing, if not exactly nostalgia; it was more like amazement at what can transpire in a mere quarter-century.
"Everything was different from anything I'd ever seen," said Tim Boggan, an American player, recalling his arrival in Beijing. 
After a wine reception and a few speeches, Mr. Boggan had changed from a jacket and tie into a sweatsuit, and was jogging in place in anticipation of playing a mixed-doubles exhibition. 
"The streets were different," he said. 
"The food was different. 
The people, of course, were different. 
The bicycles were different."
Connie Sweeris, an American who also played in an exhibition Thursday, was 23 when she went to China in 1971; she said she had been basically unaware of the significance of the visit until it was over.
"When we came out, it was news all over the world," she said. 
Ms. Sweeris, who now runs a preschool in Grand Rapids, Mich., still remembers that at dinner one night, out of politeness more than inclination, she drank a toast with a beverage apparently popular in China.
"After I drank, they poured some out of the glass, and lit it up," she said. 
"That was interesting."
To this day, she has no idea what she had been drinking.
The Chinese, more than the Americans, remembered apprehensions.
"I knew they would be unlike any other games I'd ever played," said Zheng Minzhi, 51, speaking through an interpreter. 
"I knew their significance and my responsibilities. 
I knew I was not only there to play, but more important, to achieve what cannot be achieved through proper diplomatic channels."
She had also been nervous. 
"I knew nothing about the country or the people," said Ms. Zheng, who now runs a cultural exchange program in Shanghai. 
"What would I say to them?
What would they say to me?
But all these concerns vanished as soon as we met."
It was in late March 1971, when both the American and Chinese teams were playing in the world championships in Nagoya, Japan, that the Chinese extended their surprise invitation. 
Barely two weeks later, the nine American players, four officials and two spouses were in Beijing. 
It seems today like an unremarkable gesture, but it was a landmark moment. 
Relations between the two nations had been nearly stone silent since 1949, when Mao and his Communists drove the Nationalist followers of Chiang Kai-shek from the Chinese mainland.
"As I told the U.S. 
Table Tennis association officials at the time," said Bill Cunningham, who in 1971 was serving in the American Embassy in Tokyo as a "China watcher," " 'the number of people who are going with you to China is greater than the aggregate number of Americans who have been to China since 1950.'
"
The visit was not without its political and cultural clashes. 
One member of the American team, who had been born in South Korea, decided, out of loyalty to his homeland and family, not to make the trip. 
John Tannehill, a 19-year-old from Ohio, declared, much to the embarrassment of the United States, that Mao was "the greatest moral and intellectual leader in the world."
And Glenn Cowan, a long-haired Californian, also 19, who walked China's streets in tie-dyed blue jeans, asked Zhou what he thought of American hippies.
"Youth wants to seek out the truth, and out of this search various forms of change are bound to come," Zhou replied.
But there was little to clash over on Thursday. 
And indeed, Mr. Kissinger, a longtime advocate of American trade with China, declared during his remarks that "all we need now is a Ping-Pong team to give the enterprise a human touch and break down the encrusted debate."
Of course, the Chinese, still the world's best players, have never been much at risk at the Ping-Pong table with the Americans. 
Most of those who visited China in 1971 admitted that even though they lost their matches -- which were against local teams, not the national team -- they felt the Chinese had taken it easy on them, letting them win a few games.
Thursday night, after several good-humored exhibition matches between the older rivals, four members of the current Chinese national team, including Deng Yaping, the women's world champion, and Liu Guoliang, the 1996 men's Olympic champion, stepped up to the Ping-Pong table. 
The speed and power of the play was ratcheted up by several orders of magnitude.
The oohs and aahhs became more audible, just as they had been in 1972, when the Chinese team made its return visit to the United States and played Ping-Pong at the United Nations. 
The New York Times covered the event then, saying "the most sustained applause and loudest shouts of admiration were during the games the Chinese played against one another."
Some things don't change.
