
American business is rushing into China, and Marilyn C. Grant, 56, who drives a forklift for a fishing reel company, is being left behind.
The Zebco Corporation, Ms. Grant's employer, began moving much of its fishing reel production to China at the end of June. 
Though the company has been under pressure for a long time, the move came just a few weeks after the House passed a measure that would end cold war restrictions on trade with China. 
Most of Zebco's 240 workers will eventually lose their jobs, and Ms. Grant, who has worked at the company's stone headquarters plant in Tulsa for 25 years, expects to be one of them.
"I thought this only happened to other people, and now it's about to happen to me," Ms. Grant said. 
"We're just another company moving over there."
In promoting permanent normal trade relations with China, which the House approved in late May and the Senate is expected to vote on in late July, President Clinton predicted an "almost incalculable" increase in exports of American goods to China. 
But critics say the move also seems likely to encourage exports of some American jobs.
China agreed to open its markets to join the World Trade Organization and to get permanent trading rights in the United States. 
That should make it easier to sell American-made products there. 
But as China modernizes and loosens controls, its lure as a manufacturing base, which has been growing since the early 1980's, is also proving irresistible to many multinationals.
International trade is not a zero-sum "you win, I lose" game, and most economists say that even if some people lose their jobs, the United States reaps big advantages from trade and foreign investment -- like greater productivity, higher corporate profits and cheaper spincast reels. 
But while those substantial benefits are diffused among a vast number of people, the recipients are not celebrating as much as Zebco's workers are seething.
"Our government just handed our jobs to a Communist country," said Brenda McCoy, 50, a Zebco assembly-line veteran who wore a T-shirt to work that bears an image of two Chinese police officers choking a Chinese labor activist. 
"It just makes you feel angry and helpless."
The Chinese claim to have invented the modern fishing device more than a millennium ago by spooling line onto wicker reels. 
But it was the Zero Hour Bomb Company of Tulsa that invented and patented the spincast reel 50 years ago, with line spinning off the end of a stationary spool and remaining, famously, backlash free.
Now called Zebco, the company is a classic American success story. 
Its nearly fool-proof reels helped make fishing perhaps the nation's most popular leisure activity. 
They carry a "Made in America With Pride" logo.
Even in the last decade, as it had to fight competitors that paid much lower hourly wages to workers in Asia, Zebco remained the dominant fishing tackle brand. 
Though Zebco once tested production in Mexico, it pulled back when its Tulsa workers proved they could produce more reels in less time with fewer defects.
The dike finally gave way this year, however. 
With most of Zebco's competitors having already set up fishing tackle plants in China, allowing them to undercut Zebco's prices at Wal-Marts everywhere, Zebco began a year ago to explore the possibility of moving its own lines to China. 
The company found that it could commission Chinese factories to produce and deliver reels to the United States for one-third less than it could make them at home, company officials said.
Zebco decided to make most of its low-end reels at factories in China. 
For now, it will continue to produce more expensive reels in Tulsa, though union officials say the company has put them on notice that it is searching for further ways to lower labor costs, including the possibility of shifting the remaining reels to China, too.
"We made valiant efforts to keep production in the United States," said Kathryn J. Chieger, vice president for corporate and investor relations at the Brunswick Corporation, Zebco's parent company, in Lake Forest, Ill. 
"We just had a flood of product coming from Asia at prices we could not meet."
Even so, the layoffs, which began on June 27, left Zebco's unionized workers, who are mostly women, perplexed and angry.
Sitting in a dimly lit Transport Union Workers hall, the air soured by cigarette smoke and the tables stacked with copies of protest literature that workers distributed at a recent anti-China trade demonstration, Kristie L. Cater said she had expected to retire in the job.
"They kept telling us we were members of the Zebco family," she said with angry sarcasm. 
"I guess they just forgot about that."
As assembly-line factory jobs go, Zebco offers ordinary pay but solid benefits, including Christmas gifts of stock certificates. 
Workers returned the loyalty. 
Turnover was low. 
Some workers also became avid anglers, showing off Zebco's reels at bass and crappie fishing tournaments.
For Linda Allen, 41, an assembly-line supervisor since 1976, work was literally a family affair: her mother and grandmother preceded her in the job.
Those ties started to unravel last year. 
When company executives visited Qingdao, a city in northeastern China, to inspect factories, word leaked out. 
Then, earlier this year, the company pushed assembly-line workers to raise their output by at least 10 percent a month, and China became a cattle prod.
"When we don't get quota, it is another day closer to China taking our jobs," read a Feb. 
3 memorandum from the company that was circulated among employees. 
"So today China won by 45 points."
Ms. Chieger of Brunswick said such memos were intended to show workers what they were up against in terms of competitors that had factories in China.
Still, the shop floor fell into stunned silence one March afternoon when the president of the company read a brief statement as first-shift workers finished their day. 
Zebco was moving some production to China. 
Many of those listening would lose their jobs. 
Zebco reels no longer commanded an "adequate profit," the statement said.
The explanation offended Ms. Grant, the Zebco forklift driver.
Ms. Grant has gray hair and delicate manners. 
As she speaks, her eyes dart about the living room of her A-frame house, which is decorated with porcelain figurines and homemade quilts. 
Only her strong shoulders reveal the heavy lifting she does each day as a Zebco receiver.
"They have never said they don't make a profit," she said. 
"It's that word 'adequate.'
They're going over to China because of greed."
Just a few years from retirement, she said she had begun looking for a new job. 
Tulsa's economy is relatively strong, and she found one prospect. 
But if she got the job -- she worries that a touch of arthritis might hurt her chances -- she would lose her quarter-century seniority and $1.50 of her current $10.63 hourly wage, she said, money she needs to make payments on her secondhand Jeep.
Ms. Cater, 37, a mother of two, said that after she learned of her layoff on the assembly line, she told her 17-year-old daughter to check out community colleges in Tulsa; the higher-priced Colorado school she had been considering was now out of reach.
"I had some savings put away, but that's going to disappear," she said.
At least in theory, the recent steps China has taken to open its markets should be good for American factory workers and farmers by making it easier for companies to export goods to that nation.
But as union leaders argued when they tried unsuccessfully to block the China trade bill in the House, many leading United States companies are like Zebco: they face competitive pressure to save money by producing in China -- often exporting back to the United States -- rather than making goods here to sell in China.
The United States has been losing manufacturing jobs for decades, of course, and dire warnings about the hollowing out of the economy seem a little hyperbolic during the longest expansion in the nation's history. 
Most economists believe that the trade boom of the last decade -- more exports, cheaper imports and the reallocation of jobs to more productive parts of the economy -- forms a central pillar of the 1990's expansion.
Moreover, although the Clinton administration often listed exports as the headline benefit of broadening trade with China, the real advantage for United States companies is probably enhanced rights of investment and ownership there. 
Phone, Internet, bank and insurance companies can buy larger stakes in Chinese counterparts and set up operations in more cities under the terms of China's entry to the World Trade Organization. 
Most companies try to crack the difficult China market by setting up local operations, often using those plants as export production bases as well.
That means that the push into China is not limited to low-wage assemblers. 
Cisco, Intel, Eastman Kodak and Motorola are among the multinational companies that have lobbied Congress to grant China permanent normal trade relations even as they have expanded their manufacturing operations in China, according to a survey by the United States Business and Industry Council, which has been critical of Clinton administration trade policies.
Over all, exports to China will probably grow. 
But the volume of imports is expected to grow even faster. 
The United States International Trade Commission, a government agency, predicts that American exports will increase 10 percent a year if China opens its markets as promised. 
But it also sees China's appeal as a manufacturing base rising fast, bolstering China's exports to the United States by 7 percent annually. 
Since imports from China already exceed exports to China by a wide margin, the gaping $62 billion trade deficit is likely to widen rather than contract.
The way many workers see it, America loses.
Asked whether the United States was better off with cheaper fishing reels or job security for Zebco workers, Ms. Grant reflected for a moment.
"People might like buying things cheaper," she said. 
"But there's a price. 
They're going to wake up one day and find that nothing's made here."
