
In 1986, when John Huang arrived in Los Angeles as the chief representative of one of Indonesia's wealthiest families, he brought Asian-American business leaders some advice: with skillful organization and well-targeted campaign contributions, they could gain influence to match their new wealth.
Early this year, after an undistinguished career in banking and a brief, frustrating stint as a Commerce Department official, Mr. Huang returned to California and heeded his own counsel. 
He became one of the most successful fund-raisers for the Democratic National Committee, tapping Asian-American sources neither party had called on.
And now Mr. Huang, 51, has found himself, and his cause, at the focal point of far more attention than he ever imagined. 
He is at the center of Republican attacks over foreign contributions to the Democrats -- including an illegal $250,000 donation from a South Korean company that was later returned -- and his own party has suspended him from any further fund raising until an investigation is completed.
Interviews with Mr. Huang's colleagues and competitors in recent days suggest that in each phase of his career he has been a man with two missions: to increase the political influence of Asian-Americans and to aid his patrons, the Riady family of Indonesia, which controls the Lippo Group, a major financial powerhouse in Southeast Asia. 
What is being questioned now is where the one role ended and the other began, and who this highly regarded member of the Chinese-American community has really been serving by cultivating influence in Washington. 
Republicans have called loudly for an independent counsel. 
Some Asian-Americans have been quietly asking whether Mr. Huang's activities, no different in many respects from those of any other political fund-raiser, are being regarded suspiciously because he is Asian-American.
The Republican Presidential candidate, Bob Dole, is arguing that Mr. Huang -- who was naturalized as an American citizen 20 years ago -- was an agent of foreign influence. 
"We cannot allow the political influence of any American to be outweighed by foreign money," Mr. Dole said. 
But the picture of Mr. Huang's career that emerges from the interviews is more complex. 
At the Commerce Department he sat in on none of the important strategy meetings about Asia -- but he did show up in the Oval Office for private meetings between President Clinton and James Riady. 
So far there is little sign that any Government policy -- affecting Indonesia or the Riadys' far-flung business interests -- was changed because of Mr. Huang. But there is evidence that in his drive for donations, Mr. Huang at a minimum skirted the legal limitations on fund raising and ignored the cardinal rule of campaign finance: Know the real source of your contributions.
Mr. Huang himself has remained out of view and the Democratic National Committee has deflected all requests for interviews with him. 
Appearing on CBS' "Face the Nation" yesterday, the chairman of the D.N.C., Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, was pressed on when Mr. Huang would answer questions in public. 
"I'm certain that it will be done," Mr. Dodd said, but later seemed to hedge a bit, saying, "We'll try and make him available to you."
Mr. Huang was born in China, but raised in Taiwan, where he served in the air force before attending the University of Connecticut in 1969. 
In 1972 he started working in banking, first in Washington, then in Louisville, Ky., and Memphis. 
He moved to Hong Kong, and soon jumped to the banking operations run there by the Lippo Group, the Riadys' business empire. 
Then he joined the Worthen Bank of Little Rock, Ark., in which the Riady family held a large stake, before he was moved to Los Angeles in 1986 to help run the Lippo Bank, a small institution owned by James Riady, who had worked in Little Rock, where he became friendly with Bill Clinton. 
Mr. Huang quickly established himself in Los Angeles -- in part by using the Lippo Group's name and money -- as a prominent member of the Asian-American community and a member of numerous civic organizations.
"He always had this vision that the Chinese-American community had not been active enough in politics and that our interests were being ignored," said Charles Woo, the chief executive of P. C. Woo, which produces Megatoys. 
"He always said that with donations of money the political establishment would pay attention to us. 
I admire him a lot for that, and so did a lot of other people."
Among the issues Mr. Huang concentrated on were immigrants' rights and helping Asian-American businessmen build networks that would increase their influence.
Mr. Huang's career at Lippo Bank, which has four branches in California, was conspicuously less successful than his efforts in politics. 
The bank has had run-ins with regulators for poor management, bad loans and discriminatory lending practices. 
And its performance has been desultory at best. 
Lippo Bank lost $3 million last year, and in its best year, 1993, it earned just $1 million.
"If James were here they would have grown substantially," said Len Rushfield, the executive vice president of a consulting company in Los Angeles and a friend of James Riady, the son of the Lippo Group's chairman and its No. 2 official. 
"John's focus was different. 
It was not so much on making the bank a bank, it was representing the Lippo Group here."
 
At Commerce: Quiet and Frustrated
In its early days, the Clinton Administration, already critical of Indonesia's treatment of dissidents in East Timor, threatened to terminate Jakarta's special trade preferences unless it improved its record. 
The Riadys saw a role for themselves as intermediaries between the Administration and the Indonesian Government. 
By late 1993, working through Mr. Huang, Administration officials said, James Riady was pressing to meet the key members of the Cabinet who had a voice in the decision, including United States Trade Representative Mickey Kantor and Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown. Lower-level trade officials had already seen Mr. Riady in Jakarta; Mr. Kantor said last week that he and his deputy, Charlene Barshefsky, refused, as did Mr. Brown.
Soon thereafter Mr. Huang decided to seek a job at Commerce; some Riady family associates say he was "placed" there, but none of his colleagues can recall who proposed him as deputy assistant secretary for international economic policy.
The one official who does recall pressing senior Commerce officials to hire Mr. Huang is Maria Haley, a friend of President Clinton's and of Mr. Huang's from Arkansas, who helped place several Asian-Americans in the Clinton Administration. 
"You help the people who bring you to power," Ms. Haley, now a director of the Export-Import Bank, said in an interview last week.
Mr. Huang's handwritten financial disclosure report shows that the pain of taking a pay cut for a Government job was eased by a farewell gift from the Riady family: $788,750 in "salary, bonus and severance" from Hip Hing Holdings, a Riady-family property firm in Los Angeles.
At the Commerce Department Mr. Huang recused himself from issues affecting Indonesia and his former employer. 
But if he had hoped to delve into the major initiative of the department -- a focus on the "Big Emerging Markets" of China and the rest of Southeast Asia -- he was soon disappointed. 
His office was not involved.
By all accounts, most of Mr. Huang's tasks were administrative -- personnel issues, budgets, preparing Congressional testimony for senior officials. 
"He was incredibly quiet," one of his superiors recalled last week. 
"This is a guy who never asked to go to a meeting, never overtly sought to involve himself in policy."
The exception to that rule was dealing with Taiwan: Mr. Huang's office was asked to take up the problems of American companies seeking to get a piece of a major nuclear project there, chiefly because China would react badly if the same officials dealing with Beijing were also visiting Taipei. 
He visited Taipei twice.
Mr. Huang held a "Top Secret" security clearance, but appears not to have had access to truly sensitive material about China, the role of corruption in major deals, and intelligence analysis of foreign governments and companies.
But at least once during his tenure at Commerce Mr. Huang found himself in the Oval Office -- on Sept. 
13, 1995, with James Riady. 
Bruce Lindsey, the deputy White House counsel, who also attended the meeting, called it a "social visit."
Soon thereafter Mr. Huang asked Mr. Lindsey for help getting a job at the Democratic National Committee. 
By early December he was packing his desk at the Commerce Department.
"The man was frustrated by his lack of involvement in matters he thought were in his purview and the best use of his background," said one senior official, recalling Mr. Huang's comments as he left the department.
 
The Fund-Raiser: Busy in California
By early January, now a vice-chairman of the D.N.C. for finance, Mr. Huang was back in California, holding meetings in San Francisco's Chinatown and telling supporters he wanted to raise more than $3 million in Asian-American contributions for the Presidential campaign. 
"We have to bring ourselves into the political arena and let the rest of the country as a whole understand the role Asian-American communities are playing and will be playing in the coming century," he said at one meeting on Jan. 
8, according to local press reports at the time.
To reach that goal, Mr. Huang appears to have violated election law on at least one occasion. 
He brought in a $250,000 contribution from the United States' subsidiary of a South Korean company called Cheong Am, a maker of electronic display boards. 
But its American subsidiary has generated no revenue, and taking money from a foreign company -- even if it is funneled through an American unit -- is illegal. 
When The Los Angeles Times reported the contribution, it was given back. 
The company's Los Angeles office has since been cleared out and its chief, John Lee, who met Mr. Clinton briefly at a fund raiser after making his contribution, has not been seen for some time.
Mr. Huang and Maria Hsia, a prominent Los Angeles immigration consultant with whom he had worked on Democratic events in the 1980's, put together other major California projects: a big fund raiser this summer in Century City, attended by Mr. Clinton, and another fund raiser attended by Vice President Al Gore at a large, Chinese Buddhist Temple in Los Angeles on April 29.
The event at the temple has raised a number of questions. 
The temple is tax-exempt, and that status makes it legally questionable for political fund raisers. 
After recent press reports the Democratic Party announced that it would reimburse the temple for the $15,000 the event cost.
Moreover, a lawyer for the temple, Peter Kelly, a former chairman of the California Democratic Party, confirmed that a nun from an affiliated temple in Texas reported last week that she had been handed $5,000 in cash and then asked to write a check to the party to conceal the real donor's identity, a clear campaign finance law violation. 
The temple is investigating, he added.
Officials at the Hsi Lai Temple also confirmed that some monks and nuns made donations, but said they possessed the means to do so from teaching and lecturing. 
The temple has also been popular with other Democratic politicians, including Representative Patrick J. Kennedy of Rhode Island, the son of Senator Edward M. Kennedy. Representative Kennedy visited twice this year in what the temple says were nonpolitical meetings.
The Riady family has not contributed to the D.N.C. for several years, records show; James Riady is no longer living here, and thus is barred from contributing.
One question facing the Federal Election Commission now is whether the Riadys' acted through proxies. 
Arief Wiriadinata is often referred to by Republicans as a "gardener" -- he appears to be a landscape architect -- and his wife, Soraya, is the daughter of a now-deceased founder of the Lippo Group with close ties to President Suharto of Indonesia. 
They contributed more than $400,000, in a series of gifts, earlier this year, including nearly $300,000, that were apparently made after they left Virginia and returned to Jakarta. 
The legality of that contribution is now one of several under investigation.      
