
LATE in the day on April 6, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson showed up at the White House with some bad news for President Clinton: The leakage of nuclear secrets from America's weapons labs was far worse than anyone thought. 
The Chinese -- whose Prime Minister was on his way to Washington -- may have obtained computer codes that are the key ingredient for simulating nuclear weapons explosions.
It was the kind of chilling discovery that would make for a good Washington thriller. 
But real life is more complex. 
In a speech the next morning, Mr. Clinton said Americans do indeed have reason to worry about China, but not only a muscular China with the latest weapons technology. 
Americans have as much to fear, he argued, from a weak China whose ailing banks and bankrupt enterprises could undermine the world economy.
"If we've learned anything in the last few years from Japan's long recession and Russia's current economic troubles, it is that the weaknesses of great nations can pose as big a challenge to America as their strengths," Mr. Clinton said. 
"So as we focus on the potential challenge that a strong China could present to the United States in the future, let us not forget the risk of a weak China, beset by internal conflicts, social dislocation and criminal activity, becoming a vast zone of instability in Asia."
It was the starkest moment yet in what has emerged as the central foreign policy conundrum in Washington: In an age when your military adversary can also rank among your biggest trading partners, and when your military allies double as your fiercest economic competitors, does America want weak global neighbors or strong ones?
That question is increasingly the subtext of daily debate here, fracturing the Democratic and Republican parties across unusual lines, trapping lawmakers and pundits in circular arguments about where America's true interests lie. 
It helps account for the crazy-quilt of American foreign policy. 
And the problem is made more complex by the fact that the world stage is crowded by weak states -- countries that are jockeying for global influence while struggling to keep from drowning in debt, self-doubt and rising unemployment.
The Japanese, once masters of the art of converting old-fashioned capital into political capital, have watched their global influence decline faster than the price of an office building in the Ginza. 
While Russia tries to flex old muscles in the Balkans, it is submitting to the humiliation of having the International Monetary Fund micro-manage its economy. 
(Last week, spurred by fears that Moscow is feeling dangerously alienated from the West, the I.M.F. finally committed to $4.5 billion in new loans for the nearly insolvent Government, just enough to stave off national default for another year or so.)
The Chinese spies who may be tinkering with the nuclear codes are probably thankful for the fact that, unlike millions of others who toil for the state, their jobs are going to be around for a while. 
And then there are the Europeans, who are slogging through a war in Yugoslavia just at the moment that their economies are slowing and their new currency, the Euro, has fallen 10 percent. 
This was supposed to be the year the continent focused on becoming the next great economic superpower, linked by a single currency and a huge market. 
Instead, one European finance minister visiting Washington last week moaned, "We're spending all our political energy on a 600-year-old problem."
"It's an extraordinary moment that perhaps we haven't seen since the '20's, or at least since the days of the Marshall Plan," said Kenneth Courtis, the chief Asian economist for Deutsche Bank. 
"You have the world economy flying on one engine -- the United States. 
And almost everyone else is dealing from a weak hand."
You would think this would leave Washington filled with joy, and often it does. 
After all, that single engine still has its afterburners lit: The Government reported Friday an astounding 4.5 percent annual growth rate in the first quarter, once again beating virtually every forecast. 
It's hard to imagine any country threatening America's sole-superpower status for decades. 
It's even harder to recall that only a decade ago Washington was still preoccupied with Japan's buying spree in Hollywood and on Wall Street, and wringing its hands about the successes of Asian-style capitalism. 
But the celebration of American supremacy sometimes obscures the far more complex risks of managing world affairs amid global economic and political fragility. 
And the truth is that Washington is still a lot more comfortable containing an easily identifiable enemy than managing a system where cracks on one side of the globe can radiate to the other.
Part of the problem is that weakness comes in many forms. 
There is Russian-style weakness, an inability of the state machinery to make the country function, to keep control. 
Whatever temporary pleasure Americans derived from watching the Russian military threat fall apart has been tempered by the fear that economic chaos has put its nuclear expertise up for sale. 
"During the cold war we knew that Russia's nukes were under strict control, but we were terrified of the people controlling them," said Michael Mandelbaum, a Johns Hopkins University professor who has written about the new challenges of managing a global system in which leaders are overwhelmed by the forces around them. 
"Now the fear about Russia is that nothing is under anyone's clear control -- not the taxation system and not the atomic-industrial complex."
And then there is Japanese-style weakness, a subject President Clinton will be carefully dancing around on Monday as Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi arrives for an official visit. 
In Tokyo the problem isn't a collapsing state; it's a chronic inability to get political consensus, whether the issue is bolstering security in Asia or remaking the world's second-largest economy.
Mr. Obuchi will be arriving with the news that the lower house of Parliament has finally passed legislation that would allow it, in theory, to act like a real ally of American forces should a military emergency break out in the Pacific. 
But the bill was stripped of several key elements, including one that would let Tokyo participate in enforcing international sanctions, and the Pentagon still fears that if North Korea lashes out, Japan may sit on its hands.
OF more immediate concern is whether Japan's seven-year recession is finally ending, as the Japanese insist. 
If not, Japan's troubles could choke off Asia's fragile recovery and force the United States to continue taking in a wildly disproportionate amount of the world's exports. 
Sooner or later, that will cost American jobs, which is why Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin warned again last week that America's soaring trade deficits are "not politically sustainable."
But in Japan's case, as in Russia's, Washington has few levers to pull.
In fact, Washington is never quite sure with whom it should be negotiating. 
Mr. Obuchi has scant control over the pace of Japanese reforms. 
That power is in the hands of the country's scared corporate heads, its much-criticized bureaucrats and its workers, who are terrified by the rising unemployment rate and know that they have few options if they lose their job.
If Boris N. Yeltsin was once committed to reforming the Russian economy, he has given it up. 
It is notable that ever since Russia's currency devaluation and default on some of its debt last August, the Clinton Administration has cut back on providing free advice about the wonders of making the transition to a market economy. 
"It would only stoke their resentments further," one senior State Department official said. 
"We're wiser to shut up about reform."
But at least there is some agreement in Washington that a stronger Japan and an economically stable Russia are in the country's interests. 
Raise the subject of China, and it's a different story. 
On Capitol Hill these days, China is once again a power to be contained.
The revelations of nuclear espionage bolster the arguments of conservatives who say the Clinton Administration has been blinded by big business and big donors, and that it buried the evidence of transgressions at Los Alamos because they threatened the policy of engagement. 
Add their voices to those of human rights groups who are horrified by China's recent crackdowns, unions that fear trade deals, and Taiwan supporters who want more protection from the mainland's missiles.
At the other end of the spectrum are Mr. Clinton and many of America's China experts, who see 100 million jobless wandering the Chinese countryside, failing state-owned enterprises and insolvent banks that -- at the Government's insistence -- keep those enterprises afloat. 
And there are Russia-like symptoms: arms proliferation, the rising power of organized crime, a military in business for itself.
The theory of integrating China into the World Trade Organization -- the deal President Clinton walked away from earlier this month -- is that it would help the Chinese pull off the feat that the Russians couldn't. 
It would force China to deal in a Western legal system, to open up, to let a billion Web users bloom.
A nice theory, but the reality is that Washington wants China, like Russia, to be strong on Washington's terms. 
Washington wants to encourage Chinese economic strength and discourage military strength; it wants nations to independently find their own way to a market economy -- as long as it runs strictly according to Western rules. 
In short, Washington wants strong economies run by leaders who will shrink their military power and act weakly beyond their borders. 
But Washington is not likely to get what it wants.
