
Racing to expand a growing investigation, Congressional Republicans have filed more than 77 requests seeking information from an assortment of Federal agencies, the Democratic National Committee and the White House regarding questionable fund raising by the Democratic Party.
The requests have mushroomed into one of the most sprawling Congressional investigations in recent times and could spill into next year. 
The Republicans have already asked for information ranging from the Administration's conduct of foreign policy in Asia and control of sensitive intelligence information to the regulation of the Lippo Bank, the California bank run by John Huang, the Democratic National Committee official at the center of the inquiry, and his Indonesian associates.
The Congressional investigators have gone to every agency they think could have been helpful to the business and political interests of Mr. Huang and his Indonesian and American associates. 
The committees seek thousands of Government records, like telephone logs, office diaries, immigration records about the Indonesians and Secret Service records of White House visits.
But the Republicans say that most of their requests have gone unanswered.
Although the investigations will continue beyond Tuesday's elections no matter who retains control of Congress, the direction and the scope of the investigations could change if the Republicans hold onto Congress. 
Should the Democrats retake Congress and retain the Presidency, Congressional Republicans would have much less power to get executive branch information.
"Lippo Bank needs to be hoping that the Democrats capture control of the House and Senate," said Senator Christopher S. Bond, a Republican from Missouri who has been actively seeking information from a variety of Federal agencies.
Michael D. McCurry, the White House spokesman, acknowledged that some legitimate issues had been raised that needed to be explored by Congress. 
But he said the Republicans had demonstrated an excessive zeal over the last year, turning reasonable avenues of inquiry into personal attacks on President Clinton.
"There has been a calculated effort by Speaker Newt Gingrich and the Republicans to use the investigative apparatus of Congress to undermine the executive branch," Mr. McCurry said.
But Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said the issues raised by the various investigations were vitally important because they included the possible influence of campaign money in setting foreign policy. 
Mr. McCain said he "doubted very seriously" that these issues would be thoroughly explored if the Democrats controlled Congress.
No matter who controls Congress next year, Mr. Huang and the Democrats will face two more narrowly focused reviews of fund-raising activities that have begun in recent months at the Justice Department. 
Attorney General Janet Reno announced on Thursday that she had begun the process of deciding whether to appoint an independent counsel to investigate some fund-raising issues. 
In June, the Justice Department began to examine whether the United States liaison in Taiwan was involved in soliciting campaign gifts from foreign businessmen.
What has made so many different Republican-controlled committees interested in Mr. Huang is the unusual path his career has taken. 
Mr. Huang, 51, was born in China and educated in Taiwan and the United States. 
He has been an executive of Riady family banks in Asia, Arkansas, New York and California.
With the help of the Riadys, a family controlling a $12 billion empire that centers on holdings in Indonesia, Hong Kong and China, Mr. Huang landed a job at the Commerce Department in 1994.
He left his Government post early this year and joined the Democratic National Committee. 
As a vice chairman earning $60,000 a year, he has raised millions of dollars for the party, much of it from Asian-Americans, and $425,000 from an Indonesian couple associated with the Riadys who lived briefly in the United States.
Many House committees are seeking information from the Clinton Administration. 
The main inquiries from the Senate have come from members of the Banking Committee.
On Friday, Senator Lauch Faircloth, Republican of North Carolina and a member of the Banking Committee, wrote to Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin. Mr. Faircloth asked for Government records of a Federal investigation in the early 1990's about "money laundering at Lippo Bank."
The letter did not spell out the details of the Federal investigation, but officials who have seen some records and insisted on anonymity said investigators had found evidence of 900 separate transactions in 1989 and 1990 in which $7 million was transferred from Lippo to the Hong Kong Chinese Bank, another institution controlled by the Riadys.
The records were said to contain evidence that no Federal currency reports, required for cash transactions of more than $10,000, had been filed on the hundreds of cash transfers from Lippo to 13 Hong Kong accounts held in fictitious names.
Mr. Huang was a senior executive of Lippo Bank in 1990, and in the mid-1980's, he served as a vice president of the Hong Kong Chinese Bank.
No prosecution ever resulted from the investigation, and top executives at the two banks said in recent interviews that they had no knowledge of any illegal activity.
Investigators are also interested in two telephone message slips found in Mr. Huang's office at the Commerce Department from Ken Quincy, the chief of the compliance and enforcement section of the Division of Compliance and Consumer Affairs at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
During the early 1990's, Mr. Quincy was a senior regulator who reviewed a number of Federal examinations of the Lippo Bank.
The messages were left for Mr. Huang on the eve of an important F.D.I.C. examination of the bank in 1995. 
Mr. Quincy said he had no recollection of ever leaving the messages or of having any conversations with Mr. Huang.
