
Throughout the ideological and cultural worlds, Chinese are again testing the limits, and mostly getting away with it. 
Bold films, plays and books are appearing, newspapers are virtually becoming readable, China's foremost rock-and-roll star is back onstage, and sex and democracy (in that order) are again on the agenda.
The kind and gentle face of Communism, a young woman in a silk blouse who is the anchor for the evening news, has been opening the broadcast in recent weeks with a smile and a greeting that is startling in what it leaves out: "Good evening, viewers."
In one of those signals that the ideological winds have shifted, that the cultural world is opening up, she and the other news anchors have abandoned the previous greeting, "Viewers and comrades, good evening," which the hard-liners have insisted upon for three years.
"Comrades" is not just a word in China but a storm signal. 
Whenever it is hoisted, it is a warning that the cultural commissars are on patrol. 
When it is dropped, people know they can have fun again.
"The Government's lightening up," said a Chinese journalist who has been in political trouble for most of the last few years. 
"We can breathe again."
The novelty of having interesting or entertaining things to do has a political dimension as well. 
A few years ago, when the hard-liners were at the apex of their power, most ordinary workers and young people in towns around the country did not feel so much repressed by Communism as bored by it.
When pressed about the reasons for their alienation, they did not mention the lack of a vote so much as the lack of decent entertainment. 
The problem with the newspapers and television, in the minds of many people, was not so much that they lied but that they were so excruciatingly dull.
 
Soaps and Tractors
Now that is changing. 
Romantic soap operas appear on television to supplement the documentaries on fine tractor factories. 
At the cinemas, Hong Kong kung fu films have replaced propaganda movies about gallant Communist Party officials dying young.
Some of the new books and newspaper articles are about politics, including careful calls for more democracy, but the taboo that artists and audiences are breaking with the greatest zeal has to do with nudity and sex.
"Nudity" declared the Culture Ministry newspaper in a huge Chinese character superimposed over a photo of a Western woman's partly uncovered torso. 
The accompanying article was a sober discussion of the lack of nudity in Chinese films, but the photo could scarcely have been more out of place in a newspaper that until recently was a bastion of orthodoxy.
"We're now trying to reform the newspaper and push it onto the market system," said Zhang Zuomin, an editor. 
"Of course there may be a few problems here and there. 
But our direction is the right one."
Theaters in both Beijing and Shanghai have experimented with partial nudity on stage, but in Shanghai a couple simulated love-making behind a glass panel and in Beijing an actress wore flesh-colored underwear. 
In the southern city of Shunde, which has never been renowned for either culture or restraint, a floor show features a young woman disrobing under a strobe light for what purports to be an artistic shower scene.
 
Banned but Profitable
Pornography is banned in China and yet is hugely profitable, so publishers have been searching for excuses to peddle lurid material. 
A company in the central city of Wuhan seems to have hit the jackpot with a cheap booklet whose cover is a pastiche of tiny photos of naked buttocks and breasts.
"Selected Cases of Young Women Molested Around the Nation," the headline reads in bold red characters. 
A one-paragraph preface explains that the publisher's purpose is to alert women to the dangers of rape and sexual abuse. 
The next 75 pages provide examples.
"The cultural environment reflects the fact that the overall political atmosphere is more relaxed now, and the economy is doing well," said He Xin, a social critic who is identified with the hard-liners and now appears to be trying to refurbish his image. 
"Sure, the opening may generate some problems, but that's O.K. 
The scale of the problems is very small."
Controls over films have been eased, and Chinese viewers have finally been able to see the movies of Zhang Yimou, the Chinese director whose productions "Judou" and "Raise the Red Lantern" were banned at home while being nominated for Academy Awards in the United States.
Moreover, young film makers are learning that they can largely ignore the authorities. 
When a veteran Chinese actor returned recently to Beijing from an extended stay abroad, he marveled that young people were putting together rock-and-roll films without ever getting approval from anyone.
"That never used to be possible," he told them in awe.
 
Dancing in the Aisles
Cui Jian, China's best-known rock musician, was allowed to hold a large concert in Beijing at the end of December for the first time in several years. 
Every seat was taken, and the fans cheered and shouted and danced as the police watched stonily from their seats; just a couple of years ago, a man who tried to dance at a rock concert was dragged off by the police.
The authorities last month allowed Chinese to operate private ham radio stations for the first time, and discos and karaoke bars are sprouting throughout the country. 
Newspapers are starting weekend entertainment sections, and the afternoon tabloids in particular are writing about crime, scandals and pop stars.
Occasionally they even publish news. 
The Communist Party has had to warn the New People's Evening News in Shanghai three times in the last few months about its new-found enthusiasm for publishing scoops.
"Journalism is changing extremely rapidly," said a Chinese journalist who is reporting about changes in the newspaper industry. 
"Plenty of publications will lose their subsidies this year, so all of a sudden they're scrambling for readers. 
They'll never be the same."
