
In a radio message beamed to China on Saturday, Pope John Paul II offered a hard-nosed bargain to Beijing: recognize papal authority over China's Catholics in return for the Vatican's acknowledgement of the country's officially sponsored church.
If accepted, the Pope's offer would represent a major departure for the Chinese authorities, who have long resisted any foreign intrusion into their affairs and who maintain rigorous controls on the country's millions of Catholics.
The Pope's challenge to China was made on the eve of a huge open-air mass today marking World Youth Day that attracted so many people -- Philippine estimates ran to four million -- that the Pope himself found his way to the Mass site in Luneta Park here blocked.
Vatican officials said the crowds thronging the streets were so huge -- even by the standards of papal Masses -- that the Pope had been unable to leave the Papal Nuncio's residence, where he is staying
Philippine authorities finally used a helicopter to transport the Pope, who seemed unfatigued and rosy-cheeked as he began the Mass after an 80-minute delay. 
The size of the crowd was apparently a record in the 17-year history of this Papacy.
"This is an excess of success," said the Papal spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls.
Another spokesman, Archbishop John Foley, said he has attended papal Masses dating to to John Paul's first in Poland 1979 and "I have never seen anything to match the numbers" of the Mass today.
The Pope's radio message to China involved Vatican policy toward the officially run Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association, which does not permit Catholics to recognize the spiritual supremacy of the Pope and rejects the Vatican's right, exercised in most other countries, to appoint bishops.
For its part, the Vatican does not acknowledge the Patriotic Association, which it calls schismatic, and supports clandestine worshipers among China's often-persecuted Catholics who recognize papal authority.
The issue may come to a climax at the Mass today. 
Five priests from the Patriotic Association have asked to join the Pope to celebrate the Mass with him -- a move that would imply Vatican recognition of the official Chinese church.
But in a message to China sent by the church's Manila-based Radio Veritas on Saturday, the Pope insisted on what he called "sincere acceptance of the unchanging principles laid down by Christ for his church."
"Particularly important among these principles is the effective communion of all the parts of the church with her visible foundation: Peter the Rock," he said, evoking Roman Catholic belief in the Pope as the successor of St. Peter.
Dr. Navarro-Valls told reporters that local church authorities here would insist "where necessary" that priests co-celebrating the Mass with the Pope declare allegiance to him.
It was not clear Saturday whether the representatives of the Patriotic Association had agreed to the demand.
The Vatican's aim is to open the way for a new relationship with Beijing on its own terms to permit Catholic missionaries to evangelize in the huge nation. 
At present only 3 percent of Asians profess Catholicism, most of them in the heavily Catholic Philippines. 
The Pope has made impassioned pleas here for a broader effort to gather souls.
Chinese Christians registered with the Beijing authorities number some eight million, three million of them Catholics, according to Chinese estimates. 
The Vatican says it is aware of three million to five million Chinese Catholics but says the number could rise dramatically if restrictions on worship are removed.
For several years, the Vatican has been training what it calls a task force of more than 40 missionary priests to evangelize in China if they are allowed to do so. 
The Pope is to visit them here today.
Dr. Navarro-Valls said Saturday that two groups of Catholics from clandestine churches recognizing papal authority had arrived in Manila from China to join the World Youth Day celebration.
The Pope's visit to Manila, which started Thursday, is part of an 11-day tour that will take him on to Papua New Guinea, Australia and Sri Lanka. 
It is by far his most arduous voyage since a broken leg last April forced him to cancel trips to Belgium and the United States. 
His slow recovery from hip replacement surgery has obliged him to walk with a cane.
While his schedule has been reduced compared with earlier papal voyages, the Pope put in a busy working day Saturday, holding a long open-air Mass in the morning before meeting with Filipino bishops, visiting Radio Veritas and going on to a three-hour prayer vigil with some 450,000 young people.
As they sang, he swayed in rhythm with them, and waved a large candle in tune with the songs, seeming unfatigued and in good spirits. 
But he slumped heavily as he returned to a papal throne after embracing youthful delegates.
"Very good young people," he told the crowd Saturday night as the ceremonies drew to a close. 
"Incredible, but it is true. 
Very good young people."
And, taking his walking cane, he used it to wave to the crowd before him.
