
Two former presidents and an array of senior officials from Democratic and Republican administrations rallied today with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore at the White House to urge Congress to approve a landmark China trade bill.
Speaking at a ceremony in the ornate East Room, Mr. Clinton intensified his lobbying in advance of the House vote, now likely on May 24 or May 25, to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.
"If the Congress votes against it, they'll be kicking themselves in the rear 10 years from now, because America will be paying the price," Mr. Clinton told scores of invited dignitaries.
Statesmen, scholars and military chiefs, including former Secretaries of State Henry A. Kissinger and James A. Baker 3d, whose public service spanned nearly 50 years in some cases, stood with Mr. Clinton in warning of the consequences of defeat.
"A negative vote in the House or Senate would be catastrophic to American agriculture, electronics, telecommunications, autos and countless other products and services," said former President Gerald R. Ford.
Critics of the measure, which would allow American companies to benefit fully from a market-opening agreement that would pave the way for China to enter the World Trade Organization, say it would sacrifice lawmakers' influence over Beijing's record on human rights and religious freedoms.
Former President Jimmy Carter acknowledged that China had fallen short in those areas, but cautioned against rejecting the measure. 
"There's no doubt in my mind," Mr. Carter said, "that a negative vote on this issue in the Congress will be a serious setback and impediment for the further democratization, freedom and human rights in China."
Sandwiched between Mr. Clinton and the former presidents in turns at the microphone, Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, appeared reluctant to give his full-throated endorsement. 
His words sounded like support. 
But his subdued tone suggested the pains that Mr. Gore has taken to avoid alienating a pivotal ally, organized labor, which opposes the accord.
"It is right for American jobs, it is right for the cause of reform in China, and I believe it will move us closer to the strong and stable world community that we all seek to create," Mr. Gore said.
With just two weeks left before the vote, the White House and its allies on Capitol Hill say they are still 10 to 15 votes shy of the 218 needed for passage. 
About 30 Democrats and roughly as many Republicans remained officially undecided, and the presentation today was aimed at pulling both camps down off the fence.
Mr. Clinton said opponents -- an unlikely coalition of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans -- were unwittingly doing the bidding of the measure's foes in China, the owners of state-owned enterprises and reactionary military leaders.
"It is truly ironic when you look at who's against this in China to see that some of the most progressive people in the United States are basically doing what they want them to do in opposing this agreement," said Mr. Clinton, who may visit a Democrat's district in Minnesota or Ohio on Friday to champion the proposed lower tariffs for American farmers.
In their own news conferences, opponents warned that normalizing trade relations would only reward China's bellicose government. 
"Regardless of the administration's trade objectives, the reality is that China prepares for war," said Representative Duncan Hunter, a California Republican.
In a bid to sway uncommitted lawmakers, Representatives Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, and Doug Bereuter, Republican of Nebraska, announced a bipartisan plan to create a commission to monitor Chinese human rights and require protection against a surge in Chinese imports.
One undecided Republican, Phil English of Pennsylvania, said, "This will make my decision a lot easier."
But Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, said provisions on labor and imports would cost Republican votes on the floor.
But without some sort of bill to address labor and human rights issues, Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, a top Democratic vote counter, said, "this will be a real problem for us."      
