
The Clinton Administration imposed punitive tariffs today on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods, the largest trade sanctions in American history, and warned of further action if the Communist Government continued to refuse to crack down on rampant piracy of American software, movies and music.
The decision to impose 100 percent punitive tariffs on goods ranging from silk blouses to cellular telephones was met almost immediately by an angry Chinese announcement of tariffs against American goods.
The confrontation comes at a particularly delicate moment in Chinese-American relations, with disagreements brewing on human rights and arms control, and with China's 90-year-old paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, reported to be seriously ill.
But after several meetings at the White House in recent days on the deteriorating relations, Administration officials decided that despite the delicate transition of power presumed to be under way, they could not justify delaying the sanctions any longer. 
Through the first 11 months of 1994, the United States imported $36 billion of products from China while exporting $8.5 billion of goods there.
Each country said its penalties would take effect on Feb. 
26. The delay, a common practice in cases of trade sanctions, is intended to assure that goods shipped before the retaliatory tariffs were announced would not be affected.
The delay also provides a chance for further talks; last February, the Chinese struck a deal in a textile dispute on the day when previously announced sanctions were to take effect. 
But some trade officials speculate that the unsettled state of the Chinese leadership makes such last-minute bargaining less likely.
American consumers will be among the first victims of the trade dispute, as they are any time the Government decides to set a tariff to harm the sales of another country's goods. 
Under the rules published today, for example, the United States Customs Service would be required to put a $100 tax on every $100 Chinese-made bicycle imported to the United States.
Over the last five weeks, however, American officials have been pruning the list of products selected for retaliation, homing in on goods produced in several other nations as well, so that American consumers could choose, for example, a Japanese or British-made bicycle that is not subject to the tariffs.
They have also avoided products on which tariffs would be likely to hurt American business, including two of China's biggest exports to the United States, toys and electronic goods.
Today's action was the culmination of a dispute between the United States and China that has bubbled along for nearly two years, a period in which the Administration said it would no longer link human rights issues to preferential trade status.
The current dispute has begun to eclipse Washington's long-running trade arguments with Japan. 
Last year the American trade deficit with China climbed to $30 billion -- roughly half the size of the deficit with Japan -- and United States businesses say that piracy of American "intellectual property," particularly copyrighted material like movies and music, has contributed to the trade imbalance.
The United States has repeatedly demanded, for example, that China close 29 factories -- many of them state-owned -- that are producing 70 million compact disks and videodisks every year, from illegal copies of Whitney Houston's hit soundtrack from "The Bodyguard" to movies like "True Lies" and "Clear and Present Danger."
Those goods can be found all over Asia, from the streets of Hong Kong to many stores in Tokyo.
At a news conference here today, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, held up bootleg products purchased around Asia, including knockoffs of the latest version of the Microsoft Corporation's personal computer operating system and canned foods bearing the label "Del Monte."
Mr. Kantor said that after 21 negotiating sessions in the last two years, China still refused to crack down on the production and distribution of such products.
"The Chinese know what they have to do," he said. 
"They are the third-largest economy in the world, and they can stop this if they want."
Mr. Kantor said the sanctions were approved by President Clinton.
China also said today that it would suspend negotiations with American auto makers over the establishment of joint ventures in China to build mini-vans and passenger cars. 
Getting American car makers into China, as both German and Japanese manufacturers are expanding their presence there, has been an important economic priority of the Clinton Administration.
Even so, business support for a tough stand has spread in the last month, in contrast to trade sanctions in the past, which have often divided business leaders. 
The chairman of the Ford Motor Company, Alexander J. Trotman, said last week at an economic conference in Davos, Switzerland, that if the company was caught in the middle of a Washington-Beijing trade war, "so be it."
He added, "I think it's a very important question that needs to be addressed."
Mr. Kantor made it clear, however, that the list of affected goods had been shaped with the aim of minimizing the impact on American businesses.
"We have also tried to pick products that are produced by China's state-owned enterprises," Mr. Kantor said. 
While he declined to go into the reasoning behind singling out those businesses, many of those enterprises are owned by the People's Liberation Army and other Government agencies, and their profits have frequently enriched China's leaders and their families.
The decision not to include toys and electronics came after hearings in recent weeks convinced Mr. Kantor's aides that so many toys are now produced exclusively in China that doubling the tariff would harm American retailers and anger consumers. 
"It didn't take a political genius to see that we would be blamed for taking toys out of the hands of little kids," one Administration official said Friday as the final list was being prepared.
In fact, because of a quirk in trade laws, the United States actually ended all tariffs on toys as of Jan. 
1, under the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade approved by Congress in November. 
While China is not a signer of the agreement, President Clinton's decision last year to extend preferential trade status to China mandated that it, too, would benefit from the elimination of toy tariffs.
American officials said today that they did not know how much those tariffs would total, but outside experts said they could compensate for the penalties imposed today and perhaps exceed them.
Administration officials said they excluded most electronic components from the sanctions after American computer makers were told that China was the main supplier of a large variety of cables and circuit boards used in personal computers.
Imposing sanctions on those goods, Mr. Kantor concluded, would only work to the advantage of foreign computer makers. 
But his aides said other items could be added to the list if China refused to reach a satisfactory agreement.
Mr. Kantor acted today under the "special 301" provisions of the 1974 Trade Act, which covers intellectual property. 
The law requires that after an investigation, the trade representative can declare a country's trade practices unreasonable. 
He made that declaration in December, two years after a previous dispute with China on the same subject resulted in an agreement with Beijing to write laws protecting copyrights and patents.
"They passed the laws, and they are well written," Mr. Kantor said in an interview in his office on Friday. 
"They have just refused to enforce them."
Lengthy negotiations were held in Beijing in January that yielded some progress, including an agreement by the Chinese to place a distinctive identifier code on compact disks produced in its factories, so that they can be traced to their point of manufacture. 
But the talks stalled when it came to taking tougher action, and China declined an invitation to continue talking in Washington last week, during the celebration of the lunar New Year.
Administration officials have a variety of theories as to why this dispute is proving so intractable.
The most popular centers on the transition in power in Beijing. 
Several State Department officials say they think the intense focus on Mr. Deng's health has distracted the Chinese leadership. 
They also speculate that some top leaders, mindful of the price they paid during the Cultural Revolution, do not want to be identified as internationalists -- seeking accommodation with the United States -- until it is clear who will dominate China's leadership.
The current dispute is linked to a broader argument between China and the West: whether Beijing is ready for admission to the new World Trade Organization, the successor to the GATT organization in Geneva that has presided over world trade since the end of World War II.
Entry to the World Trade Organization, with the trade benefits that implies, has been a central objective of China's leadership. 
But the United States has stood in the way, saying that until China respects intellectual property and opens its markets, it is not suited for membership.
"We must stand firm," said Representative Philip M. Crane, an Illinois Republican and chairman of the trade subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee. 
"If China wishes to become a member of the World Trade Organization, it must show that it is complying with the rules of the multilateral trade regime."
China's restrictions on American imports are legion, and many go beyond Japan's most protectionist policies. 
Only 10 American films, for example, are permitted to be shown in China each year, a quota that has both political and commercial roots. 
But that restriction has created an enormous demand for bootleg copies of American video cassettes and videodisks, the large, CD-like platters that can store an entire movie.
While the focus of the dispute has been on movies and music, the bigger money may lie in computer software. 
Copies of the most popular American software are available in shops from Beijing through the new economic zones in Southern China at a fraction of their retail prices in the United States.
"One of our negotiators paid $100 for a CD-ROM that had $10,000 worth of American software on it," Mr. Kantor said Friday. 
"And the Chinese told us this was out of their control."
