
VVIVIENNE Tam has not lived here in her home town for 18 years an eternity in the turbocharged life of this Asian metropolis. 
But as she worked the room at the Luk Yu Tea House the other day, putting even the notoriously surly waiters in line, Ms. Tam looked every inch the hardened Hong Konger.
Perhaps that is because she resides in New York City, which is not all that different from home when it comes to brusqueness and type-A personalities.
"Hong Kong is the New York of Asia," Ms. Tam said. 
"I love the speed of Hong Kong people, the way they talk, the mix of two languages. 
Hong Kong is a different kind of China because it's a mix, East meets West."
Ms. Tam, 43, has parlayed the fusion of Asian and Western styles into a successful career as a fashion designer. 
She rented the teahouse on a recent visit here to promote her new book, "China Chic" (Regan Books, 2000), a coffee-table volume of her musings on Chinese style, from the Ming dynasty to Mao.
The book is not little, but with its red cover and reverent discussion of Mao Zedong as a pop-culture icon, "China Chic" seems like a manifesto. 
Indeed, Ms. Tam is laying the theoretical foundation for an expansion beyond her business of designing stretchy gowns for celebrities like Julia Roberts.
Ms. Tam says her style could lend itself to a broad range of merchandise, including cosmetics, skin-care products and home furnishings. 
They could be sold under her name in department stores or in her boutiques.
Is Vivenne Tam out to become a Chinese Martha Stewart?
"When I was writing the book, I wasn't conscious of trying to do that," she replied without missing a beat. 
"But towards the end, people began talking about it. 
It's interesting when you have a label, and other things start coming to you. 
It's the other things that make it interesting."
Ms. Tam is not the first to try to peddle more than clothes with a Chinese motif. 
Yue-Sai Kan, a former television personality who lives in New York and Shanghai, has a line of cosmetics. 
She recently introduced a Barbie-like doll, with Chinese features and her signature red lipstick.
David Tang, the flamboyant Hong Kong merchant, sells umbrellas, wine coasters and picture frames, as well as Mao T-shirts, sweaters and cheongsams, which are form-fitting, traditional Chinese dresses, in his Shanghai Tang boutiques.
Shanghai Tang does a brisk tourist trade in Hong Kong, but New York has been bumpy. 
Its first store -- a 12,500-square-foot glass palace on Madison Avenue and 61st Street -- closed after 20 months because of poor sales. 
A more humble store opened this year three blocks north.
Recalling his troubles, Mr. Tang offered a glimpse of the challenges Ms. Tam may face.
"When I did the Shanghai Tang shop initially, I jumped on the Mao idea, Communist chic, all that stuff, and people didn't understand it," he said. 
"They hardly knew where the Great Wall was."
Ms. Tam's book, written with Martha Huang, a Chinese literature scholar, contains meditations on Buddhism, the aesthetics of the Ming and Qing dynasties and the child's role in Chinese society.
But "China Chic" most comes to life when it discusses the kitsch appeal of Mao and the Communist Party. 
Ms. Tam recounts how in 1994, she and a Chinese artist, Zhang Hongtu, subverted Mao's image by putting a bee on his nose or adding pigtails. 
Ms. Tam stamped the images on T-shirts, jackets and dresses.
"I loved the twist of it," she said. 
"You're not supposed to be wearing it, but you are wearing it. 
That makes it edgy."
The clothing hit a nerve in politically sensitive Hong Kong, where angry pedestrians rapped on the windows of stores that carried it. 
But in New York, Ms. Tam was celebrated as hipper-than-thou. 
"If I had stayed in China," she writes in the book, "I probably would have been a Red Guard."
As it happens, Ms. Tam's family fled the Communists, migrating from the southern city of Guangzhou to Hong Kong a few years after the 1949 revolution. 
Ms. Tam was born in Guangzhou, and initially stayed behind with her grandparents. 
She was later reunited with her parents in Hong Kong, where she enrolled in a Catholic school and dropped her Chinese name, Yin Yok, in favor of Vivienne.
Ms. Tam moved to New York in 1982 after discovering that Hong Kong offered little to a fledgling couturier. 
She sold her first designs out of a duffel bag to Henri Bendel and a handful of Manhattan boutiques.
Now, Ms. Tam said her label generates retail sales of $62 million a year in New York, Hong Kong and several Japanese cities. 
She has no backers and is the sole owner of her company, East Wind Code, which has annual revenue of $30 million. 
Ms. Tam said she would probably announce a distribution deal with a European partner next year, which could add $10 million in annual revenue.
Building even a small fashion empire is all-consuming, but Ms. Tam said "China Chic" was a labor of love for which she had made time. 
The book includes interviews that she conducted with people like Tsui Hark, the Hong Kong filmmaker, and Chan Do Ping, a laborer who erects bamboo scaffolding on skyscrapers.
STILL, Ms. Tam is nothing if not a shrewd businesswoman. 
To sell more than $98 T-shirts and $1,315 gowns, she must broaden her appeal beyond the Madison Avenue set.
When General Motors invited her to design the interior of a 1999 Oldsmobile Alero as part of a special promotion, she jumped at the chance. 
She was also thrilled that the book party in Hong Kong drew filmmakers, writers, and Cantonese pop stars, as well as fashion people.
"People think this book is about my fashion, but it's not," Ms. Tam said. 
"It's about all the things I love: furniture, gardens, spirituality, the body, health, city life. 
I had to cut a lot."
