
Dennis Byrd, walking with a slight limp, the result of his spinal-cord injury almost six years ago, visited his old Jets team today. 
And then he went over to the nearby Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow and spent an hour and a half talking to the paralyzed Chinese gymnast, Sang Lan.
She suffered her injury last Tuesday night while warming up for her specialty, the vault, in the Goodwill Games. 
Byrd spoke to her at bedside through an interpreter. 
Her condition remains critical, but stable, according to a hospital spokeswoman, and she will undergo extensive vertebrae surgery on Saturday, hours before her parents are scheduled to arrive from China.
It was not an uncommon moment for Byrd, whose ability to walk again after being completely paralyzed following a hit in a game has attracted the attention of many people similarly injured. 
He said he writes hundreds of letters a year to those who have neck and spinal-cord injuries. 
But he asked the Jets to arrange a personal visit with Sang.
"She loves Beanie Babies," Byrd said after seeing the 17-year-old. 
"When you go to visit her, she's a doll and she'll break your heart."
In a late-season game against the Chiefs in 1992, Byrd, the club's best pass rusher, was trying to get to the quarterback. 
With his head down, he inadvertently dug his helmet into the chest of a teammate, Scott Mersereau. 
Byrd immediately knew he had been paralyzed, but the Jets' medical staff quickly began a series of procedures on the field, including huge doses of steroids to stem the swelling around the spinal cord. 
Two and a half months later Byrd was able to walk into a news conference and talk about the experience.
"It's an emotional time any time you visit people who have undergone something so traumatic," Byrd said about his talk with Sang.
Byrd had not been around the Jets for more than a year. 
But he wanted to visit the team and its coach, Bill Parcells.
Asked how he would have done under Parcells, Byrd said: "I thought about that quite a bit. 
I would have loved it. 
I always enjoyed playing for someone who is very goal-driven."
Byrd currently works with a foundation he created for children with life-threatening diseases, at P.O. 
Box 90, Owasso, Okla. 
74055.
 
The Wrath of Parcells
Bill Parcells jumped on Kyle Brady, the tight end, who dropped two passes today. 
Earlier this week, Parcells said that Brady was no longer the automatic incumbent, but in a competition with Fred Baxter. 
Brady has maintained that in past years, the quarterbacks did not throw to him enough.
"I keep reading about all your opportunities," Parcells shouted across the field. 
"That's two you missed right there."
 
But How About Interest?
In case you were wondering about that $3.75 million salary advance that Neil O'Donnell has not returned, be assured the check is in the mail.
At least that is what Bill Parcells said today. 
"We expect to receive the check by Federal Express on Saturday," he said. 
Parcells even offered to let O'Donnell's accountant use the Jets' Federal Express number.
O'Donnell, cut last month, was supposed to return the money. 
Over all, he earned more than $60,000 in money-market income since the first of two advances was made in February. 
He earned $15,000 alone since the Jets cut him 30 days ago.
 
Visit Jets, See the World
With players running just a few feet behind him, Petty Officer First Class Sean Carroll, a Jets fan since he watched Joe Namath, held up his right hand and re-enlisted in the Navy on the club's practice field. 
Wearing his uniform, the 32-year-old was sworn in by Commander Moira Flanders Wurzel, who said that the Navy tries to accommodate "re-up" requests at unusual sites. 
Wurzel, who said she has had sailors re-enlist at the World Trade Center and the Statue of Liberty, said this was the first time it has happened on the athletic field.
 
Double Duty
While center Kevin Mawae contends he hates to long-snap for the punters, Bill Parcells may not be so solicitous of his feelings. 
"His snapping could save us a roster spot," the coach said. 
Right now, the Jets use John Hudson exclusively as a snapper.
