
IN a nation where courtesy is often regarded as a sign of weakness, the most startling thing about China's first private bank is that its tellers are polite. 
They smile. 
They say thank you. 
They don't take impromptu tea breaks at their desks while waiting customers look on murderously. 
In another innovation that has people here shaking their heads in wonderment, the bank lends money based on creditworthiness.
"At state banks, it's the state's money, so if you have good connections or if you send the loan officers a gift, then you can get a loan even if your credit isn't so good," said Yang Jiaxing, the private bank's 47-year-old manager and founder, sitting in his small office above his bank. 
"Here it's much stricter. 
We don't have buddy loans, the way they do. 
If you don't meet our requirements, then I won't make you a loan even if you are my friend."
Mr. Yang, an affable man whose name is pronounced Yahng Gee-ya-shing, has lived most of his life at the frontiers of the economically permissible, exploring and mapping the nether world between Communism and capitalism.
For six years now, he has been the thin edge of a wedge, prying open China's byzantine banking system to outsiders. 
Now, a growing number of unofficial banks and financial institutions are emerging -- 45 in this bustling coastal city alone. 
And there are signs that selected foreign banks may eventually be allowed in the domestic banking market.
If the state-run behemoths notorious for their sloth, obliviousness to market principles and discourtesy are shouldered aside, this could be a hugely profitable business.
CHINA'S 1.2 billion inhabitants save an average of 38 percent of their incomes, one of the highest levels in the world. 
The per-capita totals may look low to a Westerner, but the total is enough to make any banker salivate: Government statistics show the Chinese have squirreled away the equivalent of $187 billion -- a figure that is rising by 25 percent a year. 
On top of that, there are unknown sums in underground banks and savings in foreign currency. 
Industrial output soared 20 percent in 1992, meaning demand for loans is huge.
In the West, the modern banking system has been developing since the late Middle Ages, when Florentine merchants began financing the international wool trade -- and helped support the Renaissance.
But in China, the economic revolution of the last dozen years has been achieved in spite of the nation's banking system. 
While economic growth rates are among the highest in the world -- China's gross national product was up 12 percent last year -- the dynamo has been small privately and collectively owned companies that often are unable to borrow money.
That is why Mr. Yang's bank, the Wenzhou-Lucheng Credit Cooperative, was born.
In and of itself, the bank is insignificant, for it has less than $7 million in assets, compared with $100 billion and more for the biggest banks in Japan and the West. 
Yet Mr. Yang serves as a reminder not only of the possibilities that China offers but also of the risks: his experience illustrates the ways in which state-owned companies can try to stifle competitors who nibble at their turf.
Mr. Yang, a former factory worker with only a junior high school education, had always been inclined toward private business. 
Indeed, he founded his first factory, making electrical parts, in early 1976 when the Maoist Gang of Four was calling on all Chinese to "beat back the deviationist wind from the right."
Private factories were just what the Gang of Four had in mind, but Mr. Yang was sheltered to some extent because he lived here in Wenzhou, perhaps the most entrepreneurial place in China. 
Local officials have made a specialty of preaching Communist sermons as their congregations practice something perilously close to capitalism.
Wenzhou's private merchants, frozen out of the official banking system, turned to underground lenders that in some cases were run by criminals. 
In the mid-1980's, a huge Ponzi scheme gathered nearly $100 million in Wen zhou before it collapsed, sending shockwaves through the community. 
More than 100 people either committed suicide in the aftermath or were killed by others who thought they were to blame.
That was when Mr. Yang decided it would be an appropriate time to open a private bank, catering to the merchants. 
There was no legal basis for private banks in China, but the local Communist authorities -- shaken by the tumult caused by the Ponzi scheme -- decided that an above-ground private bank would at least be easier to monitor than the underground variety. 
With $86,000 in capital, some his own and some from two friends, Mr. Yang opened shop in November 1986.
To attract deposits, Mr. Yang paid interest rates one-fifth higher than those state banks offered. 
He also offered late hours, seven-day-a-week banking, courteous service and occasional deliveries of cash to important customers.
"Service is much better at the credit cooperatives," said Cai Yanjiong, an economic planner in Wen zhou. 
"If it's just before closing, the girl at the state bank may tell you to come back tomorrow and wave you away. 
But at the credit cooperatives, they're more patient."
Borrowers too were easy to find, even though Mr. Yang charged rates a bit higher than what was available at state banks. 
He supplies loans to private merchants and small factories that the big banks have ignored, and to reduce the risks, he lends only when real estate is available as collateral, and only up to 60 percent of the value of the property.
He also typically lends money for only four months at a time -- often financing trade or purchases of raw materials that are quickly turned into finished merchandise -- although these loans are often rolled over.
Mr. Yang enjoys a nice interest rate spread: his average payment on deposits is now 7.8 percent annually, while his loans bear an average rate of 15.4 percent.
IT is a chilly January morning, and his warm breath hangs in the frosty air like puffs of smoke. 
Of course, there is smoke as well, for Mr. Yang has a voracious appetite for Zhonghua cigarettes. 
He does not acknowledge the chill, even though he is wearing no outer coat, just a white shirt, red-striped tie and a green-gray suit with the label still sewn on the sleeve -- to insure that customers realize what a fine suit it is.
Irrational loans are perhaps the worst problem at state banks; they have huge portfolios that will never be paid back. 
The best way to get a loan, as Mr. Yang suggests, is to cultivate good guanxi -- connections -- with Communist Party officials. 
Second best is to give the bank managers merchandise "samples," like color televisions, or at least to invite them to lavish banquets with shark's fin soup and mao tai liquor.
"Now clients don't even offer 'gifts' to our lending officers any more," Mr. Yang said. 
"They figured out that a gift doesn't make any difference."
Because state banks are already chock full of bad loans that are rolled over whenever they become due, no one is ever disciplined for adding one more irrational loan to the pile. 
Mr. Yang, on the other hand, docks the salary of his loan officers if they approve a loan that is not repaid.
Mr. Yang and his imitators have attracted a combined $100 million in deposits. 
That caught the attention of the state-owned banks, which used their political influence to try to smother the private institutions in red tape. 
In 1988, for example, the state banks pushed through a regulation banning the private institutions from paying higher interest on deposits. 
The private banks are also banned from opening branches -- even from expanding. 
Mr. Yang's bank is now forbidden to lend more than a total of about $5.5 million. 
So there is no point in attracting additional deposits; there is nothing to do with the money.
On top of that, taxes are virtually confiscatory. 
In addition to a 55 percent tax rate there is a 15 percent levy for transportation and energy, along with various other fees and restrictions on use of earnings. 
In sum, the owners of the bank can pocket only 7.2 percent of the profits.
Mr. Yang said that he was optimistic that rules on private banking would gradually be relaxed and that China's economic revolution would continue to gather steam.
Prodded, he acknowledged the one uncertainty that most Chinese entrepreneurs feel: apprehension about what will happen after the death of Deng Xiaoping, the 88-year-old senior leader under whom the capitalist experiments got under way.
"Everybody feels that nervousness," Mr. Yang said. 
"Things have changed so much in the last few years that I don't think there would be a big problem. 
But we know that there will be change after him, and no one knows what kind."
 
 
INCHING TOWARD INDEPENDENCE
THE first thing to know about Chinese bankers is that they are glorified plumbers. 
Their task is to respond to orders from Communist Party officials and open or close the spigots of credit to state-owned factories.
This usually is antithetical to creditworthiness: if a factory is in long-term decline, manufacturing kerosene lamps or pink sofas that nobody wants, then that is all the more reason to extend a loan so that the factory can meet its payroll. 
It does not matter whether the factory will pay back the loan; the important thing is avoiding labor unrest.
Since the mid-1980's, however, China's handful of state-owned banks has been joined by a growing number of other institutions. 
The Bank of Communications in Shanghai was reactivated in 1986 and at about the same time the Citic (China International Trust and Investment Corporation) Industrial Bank began operating in Beijing. 
Both are controlled by the state, but have a deal of autonomy.
A few regional banks have sprung up, and the Capital Steel Corporation was allowed last year -- on the orders of Deng Xiaoping, the senior leader -- to start its own bank. 
Now every big company in the country dreams of doing the same thing. 
Credit cooperatives have also become ubiquitous, with an estimated 60,000 branches around the country.
Foreign banks have until now been restricted to hard currency transactions, but Citibank and other foreign institutions are thriving in Hong Kong, and are expected to win a large share of the mainland market if they are allowed to attract local deposits.
