
For the mob of mainland Chinese immigrants who massed in the 13th-floor lobby of Hong Kong's immigration tower on Wednesday afternoon, the time for filling out forms or even howling in protest had passed.
After having been turned away yet again by immigration officers in their quest for residency permits, the immigrants doused the lobby floor with a flammable liquid and ignited it. 
The fire raced through the offices. 
By the time a sprinkler system extinguished it, 50 people had suffered burns, several serious. 
Six immigrants were listed in critical condition today.
The eruption of violence flabbergasted people in this normally tranquil city. 
Most had stopped paying attention to the lonely struggle of 6,000 mainland Chinese for the right to settle in the former British colony.
Rebuffed repeatedly by local courts and facing deportation to the mainland, the immigrants were a sad reminder of the awkward ties between China and Hong Kong.
Although Hong Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty under an agreement with Britain in July 1997, the former colony retained much of its autonomy under China's "one country, two systems" formula. 
That included control over immigration, which means Chinese mainland citizens here must have residency permits or they will be sent back home.
As the mainlanders have run out of options, they have grown frustrated and angry. 
On Wednesday, the anger mutated into a desperate attack.
"It's very difficult to control our emotions," said a mainland woman who gave her name as Ngai. 
"We've been here so long. 
We can't work. 
We can't earn a living. 
Even our families in China are now against us."
Ms. Ngai, 26, from Guangdong Province, was not involved in the attack. 
She deplored the actions of her fellow immigrants, which she said did not reflect the vast majority of the immigrants. 
And she fears that the attack will lead to a backlash against mainland Chinese here.
Indeed, the Hong Kong government moved swiftly today to crack down. 
It announced that it would immediately deport 1,000 mainland Chinese who are not involved in legal cases. 
Until now, Hong Kong has treated the mainlanders gingerly, partly for political reasons and partly to guard its reputation for the rule of law.
The police arrested 15 immigrants in connection with the blaze, and Hong Kong's leaders condemned the attack in unusually blunt terms. 
Tung Chee-hwa, the territory's chief executive, called it "brutal behavior, irrational behavior that is unacceptable to all of us."
The showdown between the mainlanders and the Hong Kong government had been brewing for more than a year. 
In December, 50 protesters clashed with the police outside Mr. Tung's office, hurling bamboo sticks and flower pots. 
Last week, 10 mainlanders scuffled with guards and threatened to commit suicide after immigration officers had refused to meet them.
Their frustration stems from a ruling by Hong Kong's high court early last year that granted residency to mainland-born children with at least one Hong Kong parent. 
The ruling opened the door to tens of thousands of mainland Chinese who are the products of cross-border marriages or relationships. 
And it terrified the local government, which said Hong Kong would be inundated by 1.6 million people.
Six months later, at the behest of the government, China's Parliament, the National People's Congress, overturned the ruling by rewriting the parts of Hong Kong's Constitution on which it was based. 
That closed the door to all but 6,000 immigrants, who had already entered the territory.
Hong Kong allowed those people to remain in the territory to fight their cases. 
But the high court recently reaffirmed China's right to overturn its ruling. 
And a series of lower courts have hewed to that line, ruling against the immigrants or refusing to hear their cases.
Officials here said they had been tolerant of the mainlanders, letting them camp for weeks in front of the government offices and protest almost daily at the immigration tower. 
But the rampage could poison the attitude of Hong Kongers toward their mainland cousins.
      
