
In what amounts to a legal genuflection to Beijing, Hong Kong's highest court ruled today that the Chinese government had the right to overturn its landmark decision earlier this year that granted residency to more than a million people from mainland China.
Today's decision, which involved 17 Chinese who were seeking the right to stay in Hong Kong, ignited outraged protests by hundreds of mainland Chinese, who massed in front of the government headquarters. 
The protesters tried to storm the building, pelted the police with bamboo sticks and plastic bottles, and brought out 200 riot police in this usually orderly city.
The protesters were angry because the court rejected the appeal of the 17 Chinese, who claimed they were entitled to live here because they had at least one parent who was a legal resident of Hong Kong. 
In February, the court granted that right, but the decision was nullified four months later when China's legislature reinterpreted provisions of the Hong Kong Constitution on which it was based.
Today's ruling resolves any lingering doubt that Hong Kong's British-style legal system is firmly subordinate to the Chinese system. 
Legal experts and pro-democracy leaders expressed fear that the government could appeal to Beijing to overturn other decisions that went against it.
"My concern is that the Hong Kong government can now do what it likes, provided that the Chinese government backs it up," said Margaret Ng, a lawyer who represented the 17 mainland Chinese.
Government officials welcomed the ruling, though they insisted that Hong Kong would appeal to Beijing only in extraordinary cases. 
They said the immigration case demanded such action because the original court ruling would have thrown open Hong Kong's doors to an estimated 1.6 million people -- straining the resources of one of the world's most densely populated cities.
"The whole world is watching, and China is aware that if it interferes, there will be serious political fallout," said Robert Allcock, Hong Kong's acting solicitor-general.
Other experts, however, said that the reversal of the immigration ruling had already eroded the authority of its highest court. 
Other powerful members of Hong Kong society might seize on the precedent to appeal unfavorable rulings to Beijing.
Several hundred mainland Chinese held a sit-in demonstration at the government headquarters here throughout the case. 
As word of the ruling filtered out this morning, their frustration turned into rage. 
The police said eight people were injured in a melee that started when the protesters tried to enter the offices of Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa.
The police repelled the demonstrators, but not before deploying a wall of riot troops to ring the building. 
Public disorder is so rare in this city here that the riot shields still bore the initials of the Royal Hong Kong Police, a remnant of the British colonial past.
