
ARTHUR W. HUMMEL JR. is far from China these days, but it is never far from his mind. 
The living room walls of his modest red-brick house in Chevy Chase, Md., are covered with the delicate screens and placid clay figurines he collected in China first as a child, then as a teacher, then as an unlikely soldier and finally as United States ambassador from 1981 to 1985.
The hum of nearby traffic is muffled by a thick stand of bamboo he planted alongside his driveway, and he is hard at work translating into English the memoirs of a Nationalist Chinese guerrilla leader.
With the death this month of John S. Service -- the first of the so-called "China hands" falsely accused of being Communist sympathizers and driven from the State Department in the 1950's -- Mr. Hummel, 79, took an afternoon last week to recall an era when his long career as a China specialist was just beginning and he watched paranoia and demagoguery prematurely end the careers of so many others.
It was a fate that struck closer to home for Mr. Hummel than for many of his young colleagues. 
His life before coming to the State Department closely mirrored that of Mr. Service and a handful of other China experts whose careers were destroyed. 
Though about a decade younger, he too was born in China, the child of missionary parents, with a knowledge of the language and culture much deeper than that of his superiors in Washington.
Mr. Hummel joined the State Department in 1950, the year that North Korea invaded South Korea. 
It was also the year that Senator Joseph McCarthy stood up in Wheeling, W.Va., and first announced that he had a list of 205 people "known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and still working and shaping the policy of the State Department."
The climate at Foggy Bottom then was one of circled wagons, but a growing sense of bewilderment and anger, he recalled. 
"There was very little paranoia among those you worked with because everyone felt like it was us against them," he said. 
In fact, one of Mr. Hummel's first jobs was helping Oliver Edmund Clubb, another of the accused China hands, compile documents for his defense.
"But we all discussed it a lot," Mr. Hummel said. 
"Where is it going to go next?
What kind of idiocy can right-wingers be perpetrating next -- maybe domestically, and not just foreign affairs?'
"
Personally, Mr. Hummel had little to worry about. 
He had an anti-Communist credential that even McCarthy would have had trouble tarnishing: during World War II, for 15 months, he had actually fought against both the Chinese Communists and the Japanese with a column of Nationalist Chinese guerrillas.
In his low, gravelly voice, Mr. Hummel does his best to play down any heroic Hemingway plot lines. 
At that point in his life, during his early 20's, he said, he was simply trying to find anything to occupy his time and "get my parents off my back."
He had been born in Shanxi province, west of Beijing, where his father -- a noted Sinologist and later head of the Oriental book division of the Library of Congress -- was then a Congregationalist minister. 
The family returned to the United States when Mr. Hummel was 8, and he struggled for a sense of belonging. 
He said he was kicked out of two prep schools and dropped out ("well, actually, flunked out") of Antioch College. 
He then lived as a self-described "early hippy," working a series of odd jobs -- including factory worker and detective -- before agreeing to go back to China in 1940 to help his father on a book-buying trip.
But his father ended up not going, and on the day the Japanese invaded Pearl Harbor, Mr. Hummel was rounded up and locked in an internment camp along with about 2,000 other foreigners.
"There was no way," he explained, "to ask the Japanese kindly, 'Would you let me go home?'
" So he and a British friend engineered an escape with the help of Nationalist guerrillas concealed nearby. 
He crawled over barbed-wire and walked most of the night and the next day.
HE was 20 and had no military training. 
But he was handed a small Belgian pistol, and he had little choice but to stay and help, harassing Japanese patrols by night and trying to defend a small patch of plains against Communist takeover.
"I don't know why, but I really cannot remember being scared," he said. 
"It all seemed like great fun."
Later, after McCarthy's fall, Mr. Hummel said he liked to joke that he "was too small a fish for him to be interested in, but if he had ever hauled me up for a hearing, I would have said, 'I was fighting Chinese Communist troops in 1944. 
Where were you, Mr. Senator?'
" Through his experience, though, he learned of the corruption of the Nationalist leadership, which later became the refrain of Mr. Service and his colleagues.
Looking back now, Mr. Hummel said perhaps the only shortcoming of many of those drummed out of the State Department was a lack of political sophistication. 
Mr. Clubb, for example, read from his diary during a hearing. 
Senator McCarthy then subpoenaed the whole diary and "went through it with a red paintbrush" to make it appear that Mr. Clubb was disloyal.
As senators only a few miles away wrapped up the impeachment trial of a President, Mr. Hummel recalled those earlier years as a crisis in government still unlike any he has known. 
"We worried not merely about these people," he said, "but about the whole apparatus of government. 
It was a feeling of, 'What the hell is happening?' and 'Thank God,' when it was over."
