
THE faced down the rampaging mobs in the streets of Beijing last spring. 
But it took a lesser adversary to incapacitate James R. Sasser, the former Democratic Senator from Tennessee who has just returned home after three and a half tumultuous years as the American Ambassador to China.
"I had survived thousands of Chinese screaming for my head," Mr. Sasser explained. 
"And then about two days after I get home to Washington, I'm walking down the steps to my house and I step on the cat that my daughter had brought home from China. 
And I tumbled head over heels down a flight full of steps."
Mr. Sasser broke his left arm in the fall. 
It has been only a few days since the cast came off. 
As he takes a seat at a small corner table in a Washington coffee shop, he has to lift his still weak left arm into place with his right hand. 
"It's getting better," he said.
The healing is also under way, he hopes, in the relationship between the United States and China, scarred by the mistaken American bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, accusations of Chinese espionage and tensions over Taiwan.
Mr. Sasser, a courtly 62-year-old politician-turned-diplomat, insists that the violent anti-American demonstrations that trapped him in the embassy in Beijing for four days last May were an aberration. 
The demonstrations were a result of the missile strike in Belgrade, which killed three Chinese journalists.
Mr. Sasser knows that the most striking visual image of his tenure in China may be the widely reprinted photograph of him staring somberly through the jagged remains of a window in the battered United States Embassy compound. 
"I think that is unfortunate," he said. 
"We can't quite forget what happened in May," he said of the embassy siege in Beijing, "but it ought to be put in context."
In the months since the demonstrations, Mr. Sasser said, he has become convinced that senior leaders of the Chinese Government did not encourage the violence and that they were unaware that the police had lost control of the mob outside the embassy.
"They did not know the extent of it," he said. 
"What they were seeing on television -- Chinese television -- were peaceful student demonstrations. 
They weren't seeing the rocks being thrown, the Molotov cocktails."
When a junior Foreign Ministry official finally drove to the embassy, "he got out of his car, and he saw what had happened and his jaw just sort of fell," Mr. Sasser said. 
"The Foreign Ministry just didn't have any idea, I don't think, of what was going on."
The situation became so dangerous that Mr. Sasser ordered that all sensitive papers in the embassy be destroyed, including his private journals, which would have been the raw material for the book he is now thinking of writing. 
"The Marine guards came in and destroyed them, and I couldn't tell them not to," he said.
About a quarter of a mile from the embassy, his wife, Mary, and their 29-year-old son, Gray, were trapped in the Ambassador's residence, facing their own rock-throwing demonstrators. 
It took a frantic call by Ambassador Sasser to his Chinese counterpart in Washington to have the Beijing police protect his family.
Mrs. Sasser, he said, was jarred. 
The Chinese have a saying, he said, "that if you do something they disapprove of, that you've hurt the feelings of 1.3 billion Chinese. 
Well, Mary says that 1.3 billion Chinese hurt her feelings."
Mr. Sasser said he never received a formal apology for the attacks. 
But at a rare private dinner in the home of President Jiang Zemin in the week before he left China, Mr. Sasser said, "He said to me that 'things happened that we did not intend to happen and should not have happened.'
" It was, Mr. Sasser said, "the closest anyone ever came" to an apology.
Despite the recent strains, Mr. Sasser said he was convinced that the Chinese leaders and most of the Chinese people were eager for a good relationship with the United States.
"I came back from China with a very optimistic view about our long-term relationship, and I say that because there were a lot of pro-American feelings there within the leadership," said Mr. Sasser, who is considering joining an international law firm that could use his expertise on China.
"As far as the Chinese were concerned, the Americans were the people they liked the best," he said. 
The bombing "may have a chilling effect on that," he added, but it won't last.
THE road to Beijing began for Mr. Sasser in the back roads of Memphis, where he was the first child born to a Federal agricultural official and his homemaker wife. 
Two daughters followed. 
After Vanderbilt University, the younger Mr. Sasser settled on a career in law and then in Democratic politics. 
He was elected to the Senate in 1976.
Mr. Sasser had been chairman of the Senate Budget Committee and seemed poised to become his party's Senate leader, but he was forced into political retirement when defeated in the Republican avalanche of 1994. 
He does not hide the pain of the defeat. 
"My feelings were hurt," he said.
"The President called me as I was leaving the Senate and asked me if I wanted another job in Government and I said absolutely not," he said. 
"I was tired of being in Government, tired of trying to live on a Government salary. 
And he said, 'Well, how about an ambassadorship?'
And I said, I'm not interested -- except maybe China.'
" The Beijing offer came about 10 days later.
"As soon as I got to China, it felt as if my batteries had been recharged," Mr. Sasser said. 
Despite persistent human rights abuses, he said, China is a much freer, more prosperous nation than many Americans imagine.
"The Chinese are now able to make their own decisions about what kind of job they want, where they want to work, where they want to live," he said. 
"They can travel abroad, they can go into business. 
None of these things were possible in the China of the 1950's or 1960's or even the early 1970's."
"And the Chinese do criticize their Government -- in private," he said. 
"What you can't do is stand out on a street corner and do it."
