
EVERY atrocity spits out a few, the ones who make it through and cannot forget, who are oppressed with the need to bear witness. 
Close your eyes and Harry Wu, the human rights advocate, might be Elie Wiesel. 
Just a few details of time and geography are different.
Mr. Wu was 23 when one of Mao's crackdowns caught up with him, in 1960. 
His father had been a banker in Shanghai; Mr. Wu had been educated by Jesuits. 
Mr. Wu's crime: being a counterrevolutionary rightist. 
He spent 19 years in prison camps.
"They broke my back, they broke my neck, they broke my arm, they broke my leg," Mr. Wu says, in heavily accented English. 
"I was put in solitary confinement, in cement, a case made from cement. 
Six feet long, three feet wide, three feet high. 
A coffin. 
I was 28."
Now Mr. Wu is 61. 
He has been out of the prison camps for 20 years and still the Chinese Government obsesses him. 
He has written three books on his experiences with the Government, the third of which is titled "Troublemaker."
He has made four undercover trips to China to research and document human-rights abuses.
Earlier this month, Mr. Wu posed as a doctor, meeting with two Chinese citizens who reportedly offered to sell him kidneys from prisoners who had been executed in China. 
That meeting, which Mr. Wu videotaped, led to the arrest of the two men by the Federal Bureau of Investigation earlier this week. 
One might argue that it was foolhardy for a man who has been featured on television to do this work, that it might have jeopardized the investigation, but that would be missing the point. 
The point is, Mr. Wu's life was stolen and he wants to do something about it. 
The point is, it's personal with Mr. Wu.
"There are Chinese doctors who say, 'I am sorry about those criminals, but I care about my patients,' " Mr. Wu says, enraged. 
" 'The criminals, they're shot, they die, it's a waste if we don't use them. 
Anyway, they're dead, they don't have rights.'
"
What about the argument that if the organs are used, others may live?
"I'm going to donate," Mr. Wu says. 
"I carry the card in my wallet. 
I think donation is a good thing. 
But look at the law. 
The constitutional code has 16 crimes which carry the death penalty; 9 are so-called political crimes. 
There is no justice, no real attorney system, even today. 
I never had a lawyer, no trial."
MR. WU is also suspicious of the guidelines he says the Chinese claim to follow. 
Their criminal code, Mr. Wu says, gives the Government the right to extract body parts when the condemned give their consent or when their bodies are "uncollected."
" 'Uncollected dead bodies,' what that means?"
Mr. Wu asks, angrily. 
"Take myself. 
When I was labeled as counterrevolutionary rightist, all my family separate from me. 
My mother commits suicide. 
In 19 years, I have one visitor. 
My older brother comes to visit me, first month, that's it. 
They have to separate."
A man in desperate conditions will consent or confess to anything, Mr. Wu says. 
He confessed to crimes he did not commit when he was arrested during the Cultural Revolution -- his captors showed him a room of the dead and bleeding. 
The Jews in the concentration camps sometimes also consented. 
He went to Auschwitz himself, in 1994. 
He saw the evidence.
"The Nazi doctors, they try to find out how save lives if the German U-boat is sinking in the cold water," Mr. Wu says. 
"They use a dog, they use a rat, then the Nazi doctors say, 'Oh, every day, couple hundred Jewish walk into the gas chamber, this is a waste,' O.K.?
Then the Nazi doctor presents himself in front of the Jewish prisoners. 
'Hey, are you willing to come into my lab?
This is a paper. 
Sign it. 
I am not guaranteeing your life, but there is a chance. 
For two weeks, you will have good food. 
Otherwise you will go to the gas chamber.'
"
Mr. Wu came to the United States in 1985 and became a citizen in 1994. 
He still wishes to be buried in China. 
He is married and lives in California, but he is rarely home. 
Last year he had 200 speaking engagements. 
His investigative trips, often carried out alone, have been dangerous. 
On Mr. Wu's last trip to China, in 1995, he was arrested at the border, charged with spying and deported. 
Mr. Wu insists he would have preferred to stay.
"I wanted justice," he says. 
"If they keep me, that means people are aware there is an injustice system."
The Chinese people might not be informed.
"Yeah, there is a chance, the Chinese, maybe only a very small group would know," Mr. Wu says. 
He recites the chant of the ones who are doomed to bear witness. 
"But anyway, if I don't go, who else to go?"
Perhaps Mr. Wu wanted to die?
"I want alive, I want alive much as anyone. 
I lost my life. 
If God say to me, 'Harry, I know you suffered, I wanted to give you a favor, what do you want?'
I want 20 years back. 
It's not possible. 
That's why today I work very hard. 
I am 61 years old. 
I know the time for me is very short."
He snatches up a document in Chinese regarding the use of organs from condemned criminals, so passionate now that his speech becomes rushed, harder to understand. 
He is asked to repeat himself.
"Uncollected body is possible Harry Wu's body," he says, almost shouting. 
"Do you want buy this kidney?
From executed prisoners. 
Who is the executed prisoners?
Maybe is Harry Wu. 
So you want this one?
You don't care?
You just want a kidney?
A part, body parts for yourself?
Explain to me what is so-called uncollected body. 
Explain to me how prisoner have a consent."
