
SANDER M. LEVIN hardly fits the classic free-trade profile. 
He is a liberal Democratic congressman from the Detroit suburbs who proudly owns a 94 percent career voting record with organized labor.
Yet with thousands of protesters in town to demonstrate against the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and what they view as the evils of globalization, Representative Levin will be lucky if he isn't hanged in effigy.
The 68-year-old legislator is fine-tuning a plan that could give wavering House Democrats the political cover they want to vote yes on the biggest trade deal in years, an accord with China. 
If Mr. Levin succeeds, Congress will help hand Beijing a diplomatic coup while opening new markets for American goods but will still keep leverage over China's behavior on human rights, religious tolerance and the environment.
"Members are searching for a way to both keep the heat on China and get the benefits of what we negotiated," Mr. Levin said in his Capitol Hill office, where photographs of Thomas P. O'Neill and Robert F. Kennedy adorn the wall. 
"We have to strive to combine active engagement with constructive confrontation."
For 20 years Congress has gone through the motions of an annual debate and vote to grant China the same trading privileges that Washington gives almost every other country. 
Congress has never refused to provide this plum.
But now China is on the verge of joining the World Trade Organization, and as part of a deal negotiated last fall, President Clinton promised to try to lift the annual review and grant Beijing permanent trading status.
The House will vote just before Memorial Day, but the outcome is too close to call. 
The fate of the agreement rests with about two dozen uncommitted Democrats. 
Passage in the pro-business Senate is considered certain.
Enter Mr. Levin, a senior member of the House Ways and Means Committee, who is one of the fence-sitters and has long wrestled with trade issues. 
He voted against the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 and opposed giving President Clinton fast-track authority to negotiate trade pacts. 
He has voted both for and against granting China normal trading status.
"I'm an activist internationalist who's worked on both sides: expanded trade and expanded issues of trade," said Mr. Levin, who banged on Japan's doors in the 1980's to pry open its market to American automobiles.
Mr. Levin came away from a 10-day trip to China in January convinced that this trade agreement would influence the future of U.S.-China relations for years to come.
"I came back feeling that changes in China are irreversible, but that the direction is not inevitable," said Mr. Levin, who talked to students, artists and intellectuals about how free trade could open up China's repressive society. 
"You have to shape globalization."
Mr. Levin sees himself as an organizer and a problem solver, and set out to steer all sides to a middle ground. 
He has drawn up a plan to monitor China once it joins the W.T.O., and to react swiftly to any violations. 
The proposal sets up a Congressional-executive branch commission to monitor China's behavior on human rights and trade -- the biggest concern of opponents to giving up the yearly review -- and arms it with a quiver of rewards and penalties.
THE plan would also write into law promises China made to the United States to avoid surges of Chinese exports into the American market.
At first, no one on Capitol Hill paid much attention to Mr. Levin's plan. 
But by the time lawmakers headed home last week for a recess and the administration anxiously sought to nail down undecided votes, the idea was catching on. 
Backers say Mr. Levin's plan could swing 10 to 15 votes.
Mr. Levin is not flashy, nor is the low-key, details approach he has used in shopping his plan to about 40 undecided Democrats and Republicans. 
A Democratic colleague once described him as "a pit bull with manners."
"What Sandy is doing is extremely helpful because he's trying to get some accountability over time," said Representative Tom Allen, a Maine Democrat whose vote is up for grabs.
The China trade wars have catapulted Mr. Levin into the limelight somewhat to the chagrin of his party's leaders. 
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House Democratic leader who is strategically neutral on the vote, has been dismissive of Mr. Levin's efforts, choosing to broker his own third way with the White House.
The No. 2 Democrat in the House, David E. Bonior of Michigan, is leading the charge against the deal, and has called Mr. Levin's plan toothless.
In a rare flash of pique, Mr. Levin bristles at that criticism: "It has a lot of teeth in it, and I hope they're sharp and will bite when they need to."
Sander Martin Levin, the grandson of Russian and Polish Jews, was born and raised in Detroit. 
After earning degrees from the University of Chicago, Columbia University and Harvard Law School, he threw himself into the political arena.
Mr. Levin served in the Michigan State Senate for five years, but after two failed attempts to become governor in the 1970's, he thought he was washed up in politics. 
He was assistant administrator of the Agency for International Development during the Carter administration.
But in 1982, Michigan's 12th Congressional District opened up, and Mr. Levin has occupied it ever since, forming the lesser-known half of the Levin brother act in Congress. 
(Mr. Levin's younger brother, Carl, is the senior senator from Michigan and ranking Democrat on the Armed Services Committee.) Mr. Levin and his wife, Vicki, have four grown children.
For Mr. Levin, who worked one summer at a Dodge auto assembly plant, the China pact brings his trade career full circle: "My feeling on trade is that it's more than the humdrum of tariffs. 
A key part of economic life is rolling up your sleeves on a daily basis to work it out and to avoid the extremes."
