
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia arrived in Beijing tonight on the first stop of an Asian tour intended to revive his country's faded diplomatic role in the region and build what could become a Chinese-Russian axis to counter American influence.
Mr. Putin is expected to sign at least six accords with Chinese leaders on Tuesday, including a joint statement with President Jiang Zemin condemning American proposals for missile defense systems over North America and Asia. 
Opposition to the American plan has accelerated a relationship that Russia and China describe as a "strategic partnership" intended to counter American power.
"The partnership is an effort to oppose hegemony and supremacy, and one single country dominating the world," said Zhao Huasheng, director of the Russian Studies department at the Shanghai Institute for International Studies.
On Wednesday, Mr. Putin travels to North Korea, where he is expected to ask that country's leader, Kim Jong Il, to forgo its missile development program. 
The United States has told Russia and China that the proposed American missile defense system is intended to counter threats posed by smaller, missile-armed states like North Korea.
Mr. Putin then stops in Blagoveshchensk, in eastern Russia, for a conference on a region that is experiencing increased immigration from China. 
He ends his tour on the Japanese island of Okinawa, where he is due to arrive late Friday for the annual gathering of leading industrial countries.
China is by far Mr. Putin's most important stop. 
It will be his first visit there since he was elected president in March. 
And it follows eight visits by his predecessor, Boris N. Yeltsin, who agreed with President Jiang in 1996 to establish the strategic partnership to build a "multi-polar world," a euphemism to describe opposition to America's status as the world's sole superpower.
"Russia shares a strategic partnership with China and puts relations with Beijing among the highest priorities of its foreign policy," Mr. Putin said in an interview with China's state television last week.
While it is not yet clear how warmly Mr. Putin will embrace the Chinese worldview, Western analysts say the rapprochement between the countries is taking on an increasingly anti-American cast.
"On one level, this is classic realpolitik balance-of-power, but on another it has the appearance of a united front against the United States," said David Shambaugh, a China specialist at George Washington University and the Brookings Institution in Washington.
Mr. Jiang and Mr. Yeltsin had pledged to increase economic cooperation between the two countries to bolster that partnership, but bilateral trade has fallen far short of the targeted $20 billion a year, stagnating at around $6 billion. 
Russian arms sales to China account for much of that.
Mr. Putin hopes to change that, though it will not happen overnight. 
Russia's troubled economy presents a far less attractive export market for China than the United States, Europe and Japan, and Russian goods cannot compete in China against domestically manufactured products or high technology imports from Japan and the West. 
About the only things Russia can offer China besides arms are commodities like natural gas.
Among the agreements Mr. Putin is expected to sign in Beijing is one calling for a feasibility study for a gas pipeline from Russia's Irkutsk region to China. 
That project has been talked about for years with little progress, partly because China does not really need more natural gas.
Another deal on the table during Mr. Putin's visit is Russia's sale of a second pair of nuclear reactors for the Tianwan nuclear power plant in eastern China. 
An initial two Russian reactors are currently being built at the plant.
Still, weapons are likely to remain the strongest bond in the two countries' economic relationship. 
China wants weapons to modernize its military and Russia's overdeveloped arms industry is begging for customers with cash. 
Already, China has bought advanced fighter aircraft, submarines and Russian guided-missile destroyers.
Russia has become even more important to China since Israel bowed to American pressure earlier this month and canceled the sale to Beijing of an early-warning radar system mounted atop a Russian jet. 
Russia could supply China with similar technology.
Mr. Putin's large delegation includes Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev and the director of Russia's arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, Alexei Ogarev. 
And China is expected to place additional weapons orders during Mr. Putin's visit.
China remains decades from developing a military force sufficient to challenge the United States, but it is intent on building a credible threat to Taiwan, over which Beijing claims sovereignty. 
Though China has repeatedly threatened to recover control of the island by force, it does not currently have the military capability to do so.
That military build-up is just one of the many areas in which China and Russia's economic and political interests converge. 
Russia not only offers China the hardware necessary to achieve its goals in the Taiwan Strait, it also acts as a potential diplomatic counterbalance to any intervention by the United States, which supports Taiwan.
China, for its part, has stood by Russia in opposition to the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia and in Moscow's brutal war against separatists in Chechnya. 
Beijing sees parallels between those cases and separatist movements in its own regions of Tibet and Xinjiang, where it fears Western condemnation or even intervention if conditions deteriorate.
In fact, Mr. Putin first met Mr. Jiang earlier this month in Tajikistan, bordering Xinjiang, where they signed an agreement to fight ethnic separatism and terrorism in the region.
Still, those areas of common interest pale in comparison to the American missile defense proposal, which both countries see as a means of securing the United States military dominance in the world.
"Of course, since this will affect both international security, the security of Russia and China, I can tell you I expect that we will have to have more consultations and discussions to find out ways and means to eliminate or at least reduce this kind of security threat," Sha Zukang, head of the Foreign Ministry's Department of Arms Control and Disarmament, said last week.      
