
Pretty Poison
Q. What is cinnabar?
A. True cinnabar is a mineral, HgS, or red mercuric sulfide, the only important ore of mercury. 
Cinnabar is also known under names like cinnabarite, native vermilion, Chinese vermilion and quicksilver vermilion. 
It has been used since ancient times as a pigment, but the familiar rust-red "cinnabar" carved beads and boxes from China may or may not be colored with it, as cinnabar is now relatively expensive, as well as poisonous.
Red mercuric sulfide is formed when the black version of the same mineral, called black mercury or black mercuric sulfide, is heated. 
The two kinds have different crystal structures; cinnabar forms hexagonal or rhombohedral crystals, which are sometimes large and jewel-like in their luster.
Some notable examples of large cinnabar crystals have been found in China. 
However, most deposits are red or brown earthy or granular masses, and are found near recently formed volcanic rocks and hot springs. 
Besides China, historical producing areas for cinnabar have included Spain, Yugoslavia, Italy, Peru, the Soviet Union, Mexico and California.
When heated to 835 degrees Fahrenheit, cinnabar sublimes, that is, vaporizes and separates into its components. 
Oxygen then combines with the sulfur vapor, which passes off as SO2 , sulfur dioxide, leaving the pure mercury behind.
Cinnabar is insoluble in water or organic solvents, making it valuable as a protectant. 
The vermilion used in paints to protect iron and steel was formerly obtained by grinding pure cinnabar. 
It is too expensive for large-scale use as a paint pigment, so now vermilion is either highly adulterated or produced artificially, or is actually an imitation vermilion made with red lead.
Genuine cinnabar has a romantic history. 
In ancient times, it was used as a preservative in Chinese tombs. 
The highly prized Chinese cinnabar lacquer is made with the refined sap of the lac tree, Rhus verniciflua, a relative of poison ivy, which is also highly irritating or poisonous to humans. 
The sap is mixed with the cinnabar or built up in layers over a base of cinnabar, then carved.   C. 
CLAIBORNE RAY
