
There have been no balloons, no bunting and no brass bands. 
No babies have been bussed, no handshakes at the rope line, and no rallies have jarred Hong Kong's single-minded pursuit of wealth.
Yet four men -- two tycoons and two former judges -- have declared that they want to be the first to lead Hong Kong under Chinese rule, which is to resume next July after 150 years of British control.
Sometime before the end of this year, China will decide who will be Hong Kong's first Chief Executive under Communist rule. 
But to lend the selection the semblance of a horse race, Beijing has encouraged prominent Hong Kongers to step forward and announce their interest in succeeding Britain's last colonial Governor, Chris Patten.
It is, however, not much of a contest. 
Hong Kong's people will have no voice in selecting their new ruler. 
Instead, an electoral college of Hong Kong's elite, hand-picked by China, will ordain whomever Beijing chooses to be the territory's first Chief Executive, as the post will be known.
The new executive will oversee one of Asia's most muscular financial centers, the region's unrivaled port, and the international gateway to the vast markets and resources of China. 
At the same time, he will, under the territory's new constitution drafted by Chinese and Hong Kong representatives, be charged with defining and defending the autonomy promised Hong Kong.
With the transition only eight months away, the Hong Kong stock market is at new highs and property prices have begun surging after a sharp slowdown last year. 
Despite assurances from Beijing that Hong Kong will remain "substantially" unchanged for the next 50 years, many people here have grave doubts about Beijing's promises. 
Indeed, earlier this month China renewed its threats against some long-held freedoms, including freedom of assembly and of the press.
Further souring the local mood, the candidates have avoided any hint of criticism of Beijing and have refrained from making audible commitments to democratic processes.
"The more secretive the process," said Christine Loh, an independent member of Hong Kong's legislature, "the more hesitant the candidates. 
And the more the Preparatory Committee" -- the Beijing-appointed body that is overseeing the transition to Chinese rule -- "ignores the public dimensions of the selection process, the less confidence Hong Kong as a whole will feel."
Of the four candidates, the odds-on favorite is a shipping magnate who has now admitted that he was bailed out of financial oblivion in the 1980's by $120 million of secret financing from China.
Tung Chee Hwa, like all but one of his rivals, was born in Shanghai and fled Communism with his family, relocating first to Taiwan and later here, where his father built Orient Overseas (International) Ltd., one of Hong Kong's two large shipping companies. 
After inheriting the concern in the 1980's at a time when global shipping shrank dramatically, Mr. Tung used money secretly invested from China to save the company.
He also served as a member of Mr. Patten's cabinet, a position from which he resigned in June.
Another prominent businessman, Peter Kwong-ching Woo, a former Chase Manhattan banker in New York and the enormously successful chairman of a property and shipping conglomerate founded by his father-in-law, has also declared his interest in leading Hong Kong under Chinese rule. 
At 50, he is the youngest aspirant for the job, but his chairmanship of the local hospital authority has given him experience in public administration that none of the other candidates possess.
The other two candidates are former Justices on the Supreme Court. 
Sir Ti Liang Yang, 67, whose resignation as Chief Justice took effect today, was also born in Shanghai and studied law there before Mao's troops entered the city in 1949. 
He was very much an innocuous fixture in Hong Kong until last year, when he suggested that the Bill of Rights Ordinance, a series of laws intended to codify basic civil rights, should be weakened.
The second judge, Simon F. S. Li, entered the race last week. 
The 74-year-old Mr. Li, the only native Hong Konger, is unapologetically pro-China, even resorting to familiar Communist jargon to describe Hong Kong's relationship with China as "similar to lips and teeth."
But his candidacy is not helped by the fact that his daughter, Gladys Li, is the chairwoman of the Bar Association, a body that has forcefully dissented from China's plans for Hong Kong, or that a son, Simon Li, is the foreign editor of the Los Angeles Times.
Despite rounds of news conferences, meetings with business groups, and consultations with delegations of the civil services by each of the four men, Hong Kong seems resigned to the fact that there is no real race for the job. 
But some argue that popular sentiment will be taken into account.
From a democratic perspective, the selection process is "totally dictated by China," said Peter Cheung, a political scientist at Hong Kong University. 
"But this creates a dilemma for China," he added. 
"It doesn't want things to get out of control; on the other hand it cannot send its trusted officials to rule. 
So China would like to see a candidate acceptable to the Hong Kong people."
Still, the jockeying has clearly done little to bolster faith in the future. 
A survey by the Hong Kong Transition Project, a multi-university research effort begun in 1993, found Hong Kongers still skittish about China's impending takeover, still identifying themselves as distinctly Hong Kongers as opposed to Chinese, profoundly unhappy with Beijing's dealings with Hong Kong and deeply worried about a rise in corruption and threats to personal freedom.
"There is yet to be a majority of people who want to join China," said Michael DeGolyer, the director of the project, and a professor of political science at Hong Kong Baptist University. 
"We've been expecting this number to increase but it's been increasing very, very, very slowly."
Since 1993, when 42 percent of those polled said they wanted unification, today only 48 percent desire unification; the rest are split among other choices, including independence and remaining a colony. 
The poll found that 44 percent of Hong Kong's 6.2 million people would try to leave if the situation under Chinese rule deteriorated significantly.      
