
It would be hard to find legislation that has been embraced so unconditionally by America's financial institutions as the China trade bill. 
Whether they think they have more to gain from its passage or to lose from its failure, they have been lobbying hard.
Companies with commercial banking operations, like Citigroup, salivate over the prospect of providing auto loans and other services. 
Investment banks are more concerned that rejection could chill relations with Chinese officials who have begun to tap foreign capital markets.
New York companies have played leading roles in raising capital for several state-run enterprises, including the initial public offering this month for PetroChina.
Fresh from political skirmishes over that underwriting, Henry M. Paulson, chairman of Goldman Sachs, said rejection of the bill could hurt his firm's chances of advising on future privatizations. 
But he is more worried that client companies would not play as big a part in China's economic development.
"We don't need any changes in the rules to work on privatizations and other assignments," he said.
Goldman Sachs advises the Chinese government and sells foreign securities in China. 
But the firm does not have an investment bank there, as it does in Japan, because the American company would be limited to a minority stake.
Commercial banks are much more eager to expand their physical operations in China. 
Citibank has only four branches there and cannot do business in local currency.
"There essentially is no consumer banking system in China," said Lionel Johnson, Citigroup's director of international government relations. 
"People have very limited relationships with banks, limited opportunities to invest their savings."
While China is expected to remain wary of anything that threatens the stabilityII of its state-run banks, all that is supposed to start changing within five years under the trade pact, potentially giving Citibank and other foreign banks an even chance to compete with domestic banks for tens of millions of consumers. 
The banks see an opportunity to lend money to Chinese customers for big-ticket purchases, especially cars. 
They also anticipate being able to decide where to put branches, instead of having the government assign the sites.
"For the first time," Mr. Johnson said, "market forces will make those decisions."   PATRICK McGEEHAN
