
The entertainment industry -- especially Hollywood -- has been enthusiastic about easing trade barriers with China and has been pushing hard for the trade bill. 
There are two reasons: China is a huge potential market, even if few American movies are now released there. 
And studios worry that rejection of the bill would prompt Beijing to spitefully cancel the fledgling trade agreements already in place.
"Our trade with China is minuscule," said Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, which represents studios. 
"The reason we are passionately in favor of the trade bill has far more to do with the long-range future."
Until last summer, China limited United States companies to exporting 10 movies a year there, with the studios keeping half the revenue and China the remainder. 
On the other hand, there was no limit to how many films the studios could simply sell to Chinese distributors. 
In recent years, 40 to 50 films made outside China, mostly small independent ones, have been sold for flat fees there.
Hollywood studios, however, are not interested in flat fees. 
They want a continuous share of the loot.
Last summer, President Clinton's trade negotiators reached a new deal that doubled, to 20, the number of American movies that could be imported, with promises of further increases in future years. 
That is still small potatoes by Hollywood standards, but a step in what the studios consider the right direction.
The studios now do about $25 million of business a year in China. 
That is a tiny fraction of what would start flowing in if most movies were given a Chinese release and if lower trade barriers continued to expand a Chinese middle class hungry for such diversions.
Some entertainment conglomerates have negotiated separate commercial deals with China. 
Disney is planning a new theme park in Hong Kong, and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation has an extensive telecommunications agreement.
Another issue is theaters. 
Most in China are in sad shape. 
The nation has been eager to attract foreign investment in new cinemas, but foreigners are limited to a minority share of any operation.
Again, not good enough for Hollywood. 
"We're not going to buy any theaters until we own them," Mr. Valenti said. 
"And we're not going to put more money into theaters if they're not letting in more American pictures."
Under a new agreement, foreigners could own a controlling interest in new Chinese multiplexes within three years.
Video piracy is also a source of irritation. 
Even Hollywood films not released in China are often quickly available through bootleg sources. 
Then, of course, not a penny of revenue flows back to the studios.
In recent years, American trade officials say, the Chinese have clamped down more vigorously on bootleggers. 
Bringing more Hollywood movies into China, along with more multiplexes, would give the Chinese authorities reason to crack down harder, entertainment executives contend.
"If Congress votes no, my judgment is that all the agreements we have made will be null and void," Mr. Valenti said. 
"I mean, would you keep an agreement with someone who just exiled you and kicked you on the backside?"   RICK LYMAN
