
Americans love to get fashion on the cheap. 
Even with the economy booming, they are snapping up more $4.99 cotton T-shirts and Indian print sundresses than ever.
And shoppers are not being tricked into getting less. 
They have actually been winning the war on costs. 
Over all, apparel prices have fallen about 1 percent a year throughout most of the 1990's. 
Last year, prices fell even more.
The main reason that Americans pay so little for products from blue jeans to sneakers is that manufacturing jobs have been shipped wholesale to countries with cheap labor -- countries like China. 
Long before the trade agreement was negotiated, employment in the American apparel and textile industries was already plunging. 
Together, the two industries employed 1.2 million people in this country as of January of this year, according to the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees. 
That is down from 2.5 million in 1973, the peak employment year for apparel workers.
There is little doubt that the trend toward exporting sewing jobs has been helped by earlier trade agreements that lowered tariffs and expanded quotas. 
Union data shows that in the 36 months before Nafta took effect, the United States lost 2,000 apparel jobs. 
During the following 36 months, the loss was 134,000.
But because so many jobs have already disappeared, the effect on manufacturing still based in the United States may not be as severe in the future -- even the union predicts a loss of 15,000 jobs a year at most. 
The real impact of the China agreement -- which allows it to participate in the phasing out of nation-by-nation quotas on clothing imports to the United States by 2005 -- is likely to fall mostly on other Asian countries that will not be able to compete with China's even lower-cost labor.
When judging China's importance, consider that Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's largest importer, already gets 53 percent of its clothing imports from China, according to a study of United States Customs Department documents by the Citizens Trade Campaign, which is critical of the company and opposed to the China trade agreement. 
Wal-Mart refuses to give specifics on its imports, but a spokesman, Jay Allen, acknowledged that the company contracts directly with "several thousand factories."
Once China joins the World Trade Organization, the retail industry says, there will be gains at home to offset the job losses abroad. 
Most important, executives argue, are the tariff cuts will allow them to sell more to China. 
"We see a great market opportunity," said Candyce Cummings, general counsel of the VF Corporation, maker of Lee and Wrangler clothing.   LESLIE KAUFMAN
