
American agriculture could be one of the biggest beneficiaries of the trade bill.
After suffering through nearly three years of depressed commodity prices, American farmers hope that improved trade relations will let them sell millions of bushels of surplus corn, soybeans and other crops to China over the next few years.
Last year, the United States had more than $50 billion in agricultural exports; only about $1 billion of that went to China. 
Agriculture officials say that if relations are normalized, exports could double in five years.
Farm equipment makers like Caterpillar, Deere and CNH project strong exports of farm tractors and combines. 
Cargill and Archer Daniels Midland expect to sell more processed goods, like soybean meal and vegetable oil. 
And the prices that farmers get for beef, poultry and pork could also get a lift.
Nearly all agriculture officials see a win-win situation that could only increase exports and raise commodity prices. 
"Everybody except for a few splinter groups wants this to happen," said Bob Callanan, a spokesman at the American Soybean Association. 
"China needs so much. 
Their people want to eat better."
Soybeans are the leading American farm export to China. 
Although little corn reaches the country, China has already made concessions that would include importing 4.5 million metric tons of corn.
"It's not going to be easy to get China to implement this agreement," said Susan Keith, an official at the National Corn Growers Association in St. Louis. "But if they're denied access, they will do nothing to accommodate the U.S."
China has already said that if it receives trading privileges, it would lower its tariffs on most American agricultural goods. 
Most everything from apples to wine would have a better chance of getting in. 
Tariffs could fall from 31 percent today, on average, to 14 percent in 2004.
If China, as promised, also cuts subsidies to its own farmers, American corn growers could have a better chance of selling their crops.
"China is the largest consumer market in the world," said Tamara White, director of commodities at the Illinois Farm Bureau. 
"To get in on the ground level would be great. 
You want American beef and American corn there, so you can get your flavor on their taste buds."   DAVID BARBOZA
