
Inside a bare, dimly lit concrete building on the outskirts of town, five workers at the Huaxing Razor Blade Factory sit hunched over noisy machines that spit ordinary razor blades into a row of blue kerosene cans.
Upstairs, lounging in an oversized black leather chair, Yin Jiande, the factory manager, snorts at accusations by the Gillette Company that he had made more than 50 million counterfeit copies of razor blades produced by Gillette's joint venture here and sold them in look-alike packaging.
"If they say we can't do it anymore, O.K., we won't do it anymore," said Mr. Yin, who promised to stop last year when he was caught copying Gillette's packaging, only to continue copying it until he was caught a second time and finally stopped.
"No one told us about this law," he said, alluding to a 1993 rule that bans the copying of a competitor's wares or packaging.
Factory managers like Mr. Yin are at the core of a fight that has pushed the United States and China to the brink of a trade war over intellectual property rights, including copyrights and trademarks. 
A final round of talks began Wednesday in Beijing.
Both countries have mixed heated accusations with stern promises to stand tough, and it is unclear if either will soften in time to reach a last-minute accord before Feb. 
26, when trade sanctions threatened by both countries are set to begin.
Yet whether or not peace is made in Beijing, the struggle over piracy is unlikely to stop anytime soon in factories in the back alleys of Shanghai, and in hundreds of small towns in southern China, where counterfeit versions of everything from Lux soap to Kellogg's cornflakes to Shell Oil lubricants are being churned out.
American trade negotiators like to cite pirated compact disks and computer software as the kind of items that could easily be controlled. 
But the counterfeiting of ordinary consumer goods has become so widespread that restraining it appears to be far beyond Beijing's grasp.
Counterfeiting in China ballooned in the last two years as factory managers like Mr. Yin operated in an environment of speedy economic growth coupled with a weak legal system, seeing quick profits and little risk of punishment. 
The infringement of trademarks -- the symbols and design that identify a product -- now involves billions of dollars worth of goods produced in China, trademark lawyers estimate.
Counterfeit goods in a developing country are nothing new, and items like fake Rolex watches and Gucci bags are sold on the streets of New York City. 
But the recent growth of consumer piracy in China has been so fast and the volume so large that Western businessmen say they are alarmed by how big a bite is being taken out of their bottom line.
After Gillette discovered that Huaxing Razor was pirating the packaging and perhaps the contents of Gillette's Flying Eagle brand razor, it presented evidence to the local authorities, who raided the premises. 
But the action led only to broken promises from the factory and to legal action so minimal that it virtually invited more counterfeiting.
At the Huaxing factory, a modest operation with 100 workers who are paid $50 to $90 a month, Mr. Yin expresses nonchalance about his dispute with Gillette, apparently out of confidence that local officials will continue to go easy on him.
"I'm friends with most leaders in the district government," said Mr. Yin, a boyish-looking man of 40 who wears a black leather coat with a fur collar. 
Although he said he was paid a salary of less than $200 a month, the sleek black Audi and the Mitsubishi pickup truck parked outside his office suggested a broader income.
"The cars belong to the factory," he said.
Although Huaxing did stop counterfeiting after a second raid and fine, it left Gillette without a penny of compensation from lost sales estimated at more than $1 million. 
As in other parts of China, the economic police in Shanghai may often have little incentive to penalize factories that generate local tax revenue and are run by acquaintances.
Xing Dongsheng, a deputy section chief at the Shanghai Administration of Industry and Commerce, which is responsible for enforcing trademark violations, insisted that the Gillette case was an example of good government work because fines were collected, twice, and handed over to the central Government. 
He denied that any favoritism had been shown to Mr. Yin.
"The key question is whether the local government is enforcing the law," said Mr. Xing, dressed in the blue military-style uniform that investigators wear when they check on stores in Shanghai. 
"Our Government is determined to take action, and last year we held one conference after another to discuss the problem."
When not attending meetings, or conducting spot-checks, Mr. Xing said he relied on companies like Gillette to bring claims forward and to present hard evidence.
"You can't say that just because something is selling cheaply that it is counterfeit, he said. 
"You need evidence. 
The United States should not ask us to prosecute every case. 
No one can prosecute every case."
Tony Au Yeung, general manager of Gillette (Shanghai) Ltd., the joint venture, estimates that counterfeiters now sell Gillette look-alikes worth more than $10 million, or roughly one-third of the annual sales at his Shanghai operation. 
Du Pont, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, S. C. Johnson and McDonald's are among the dozens of other companies that are fighting trademark infringements.
In downtown Shanghai, a mere hundred yards from a McDonald's outlet on Huai Hai Road, another fast-food restaurant uses a sign with golden arches on a red background in a way that looks like a McDonald's "M" but with a leg partly missing, making it an "N," for Nancy's Expres. 
A lawyer for McDonald's said legal action was being considered.
Legal action in China is rarely easy, but trademark cases are now being handled regularly in courts and by administrative means. 
Under pressure from American negotiators, China agreed in 1992 to expand its legal framework for intellectual property rights and has set up special courts and assigned more investigators, especially in large cities like Shanghai and Guangzhou.
"I think the central Government recognizes that this is really a problem," Mr. Au Yeung said of Gillette. 
"But because the local authorities are so unwilling, it is difficult to do anything about it."
Gillette opened its joint venture with the Shanghai Razor Blade Factory in 1992, and produces both the Chinese Flying Eagle brand as well as Gillette's Atra and Sensor brands. 
Gillette owns 70 percent and has management control.
In late 1993, Mr. Au Yeung learned from his Chinese business partner that the Huaxing factory was making an imitation of the Flying Eagle single-edged razor and selling it for 1.3 cents each, or 20 percent less than the joint venture's price. 
He persuaded local investigators to raid the factory in January 1994.
Mr. Yin, the factory manager, insisted that his razors, sold under the brand name Sea Gull, were different from Gillette's. 
But he acknowledged that packaging he began using more than a year ago was the same color and design as the joint venture, down to the white bird with wings spread wide.
"It was a coincidence," Mr. Yin said.
The district authorities decided that the packaging, but not the razors, violated Gillette's trademark, though Mr. Au Yeung said he thought the razors were copied, too.
Five months later, after the authorities fined Huaxing $3,500, an amount that Mr. Au Yeung considers paltry, he learned that the factory was still using the same packaging. 
But the district authorities would not do anything about it, saying they had already done their job.
Undeterred, Mr. Au Yeung went up a rung in the city bureaucracy, appealing to the Shanghai Administration of Industry and Commerce. 
Their investigators led a second raid, in August 1994, which led to a second fine, $3,300, in December.
Asked why he kept using the same packages after the first raid, Mr. Yin, the factory manager, said he did not want to throw away packaging that had already been printed. 
"We didn't want to waste it," he said.
In the eight months before Huaxing was stopped, Mr. Au Yeung estimates, the factory sold more than $1 million worth of imitations, most of it in exports to Southeast Asia. 
"That's revenue that we should have gotten," he said.
Mr. Au Yeung said he thought the fines on Huaxing were so small they could simply be considered the cost of doing business, even in a factory like Huaxing, where Mr. Yin said annual profit was $120,000 in 1994, before taxes.
Mr. Xing of the Shanghai Administration of Industry and Commerce said there was a formula for fines: a maximum of 50 percent of the value of the counterfeit goods, or five times the profits derived from them.
But he conceded that the total fines of $6,800 in the Gillette case were less than 1 percent of the $1 million worth of pirated goods. 
The Government has to consider other factors, Mr. Xing said, such as putting people out of work.
"If a factory only makes $100,000 a year, we can't fine them $1 million," Mr. Xing reasoned. 
"One million dollars -- that is a very small amount for a big American company, but to a small Chinese factory, it could put them into bankruptcy."
Joseph T. Simone, a lawyer at Johnson Stokes & Master in Hong Kong, who has represented several American companies in trademark disputes in China, argued that the situation would not improve until stiffer penalties were enforced.
"If nobody's going to jail and fines are negligible, you're not going to get in front of the problem," Mr. Simone said. 
"And you just invite more piracy."
Although a factory like Huaxing stopped counterfeiting after it was caught red-handed twice, Mr. Simone said its example showed other factory managers that they could counterfeit other products with impunity and the worst that would happen was a minimal fine.
"In most countries, if you have 10 pirates, you can go after one, expect seven to stop, and then figure out how to get the remaining two," Mr. Simone said. 
"But in China, when you go after one, the other nine see exactly what you're doing. 
Not only do they keep pirating, but you invite 10 more to join in."
