
Two boats loaded with weary Chinese refugees from halfway around the world docked here early today. 
Within hours the first 100 refugees had their hands bound together with plastic restraints and their hair marked with a patch of brown dye and were on a charter jet carrying them back to the country they had risked everything to leave.
Five old green-and-white buses roared out of the main gate at the port of Ensenada at daybreak, giving a crowd of more than 50 Mexican and foreign journalists the only glimpse of the desperate Chinese whose attempt to enter the United States illegally set off a diplomatic incident. 
Mexico at first rejected a United States request to allow the ships to dock in Mexico, but then reversed the decision.
Today, most of the windows of the buses were darkened, but where the glass was clear the refugees could be seen quietly sitting, their faces set with what appeared to be hard masks of fatigue, shock and dismay.
 
Handcuffed and Marked
Some had their hands pressed against the windows, where it was possible to see the plastic handcuffs, commonly used by the border police, that had been put on them as they boarded the buses. 
The police had also sprayed part of their hair with the brown dye to mark them, presumably in case they managed to escape.
That unusual step, which is not common on the border between the United States and Mexico, underscores the Mexicans' desire to avoid a repetition of an incident in May, when about 200 Chinese refugees who had been smuggled into Ensenada escaped from an airplane hangar where they were being detained by the Mexican authorities. 
Most were recaptured, but some crossed the border into the United States and have never been tracked down.
The buses leaving here today were preceded and followed by patrol cars, which accompanied them on the highway 60 miles north to the Tijuana International Airport.
"They seemed very sad," a military nurse, Rosa Guadalupe Alvarez de Lugo, said of the refugees. 
She had examined several of them after they left the Long Sen, one of the filthy commercial vessels on which refugees had been taken across the Pacific by Chinese smugglers who charged each thousands of dollars for the voyage.
Most seemed to be "not in perfect condition," the nurse said, but generally healthy and surprisingly calm considering what they had been through.
Last month, at least eight Chinese aliens died when a ship ran aground off a New York City beach. 
After that incident, President Clinton approved a plan aimed at stopping the smuggling of refugees into the United States, and the Administration stepped up its efforts to patrol international waters and seize suspect ships.
Jorge Medina Viedas, director general of communications for the Mexican Interior Ministry, was inside the port today as the refugees disembarked. 
"They seemed to be very tired and hot," he said.
Most of the refugees were young men 18 to 25, he said, and they cooperated with the authorities. 
There were no incidents of violence.
 
Up to 300 Others on Ships
Mr. Medina Viedas said that because only one charter jet was available for the long flight back to China, the remaining people aboard the ships -- as many as 300 -- would temporarily stay in a large warehouse at the Ensenada port that is usually used to store cotton. 
Cots, clothing and other supplies will be made available there, he said.
As other jets become available, the remaining refugees will begin their return to China.
After leaving Tijuana this morning, the first jet headed east and was scheduled to stop for refueling in Barbados, Senegal and the United Arab Emirates before landing in the Chinese province of Fujian, where most of the refugees began their journey more than a month ago.
Mr. Medina Viedas said the 12 crew members on board the first ship to arrive were notified that they were under arrest as soon as they entered the 12-mile territorial limit claimed by Mexico.
 
Ships Are Confiscated
Members of the crew were taken by van to the office of the State Attorney General, where they are expected to be charged with violating Mexican immigration laws. 
Their ships have been confiscated.
Mexican officials said a third ship that had been part of the group was still at sea. 
They said its arrival was being delayed because of several problems, which are believed to include the strong opposition of those on board to being brought into Mexico.
Mexican officials said that unrest on other ships and a concern that the refugees might try to escape required security to be tightened severely. 
This included bringing in a contingent of armed marines, who were stationed around the first two ships.
The need for security was also given as the reason that reporters were not allowed to witness the disembarkation, after Mexican officials had said all day long that access would be provided. 
The gates to the port were also closed to the director of the Baja California State Commission on Human Rights, who was not allowed inside to check on how the refugees were treated.
 
Mexico Is Criticized
The Mexican Government has been criticized by the commission and others for its handling of the refugees, and especially for its decision several days ago not to even consider granting asylum to any of the more than 650 Chinese aboard the three ships.
While the three Chinese ships were in international waters under the supervision of the United States Coast Guard, the refugees filled out questionnaires, and those who appeared to have a possible claim for asylum were interviewed by officials from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Of 58 people on board the ships whose situation was examined in this way, Mr. Medina Viedas said, only one was taken from the ships and sent to the United States to pursue that claim.
One other refugee, a 19-year-old woman named Zhou Shiuyun, who was airlifted off one of the ships last week because she had to have surgery, asked for political asylum while in a San Diego hospital. 
She was not brought back to the ships.
