
United States officials welcomed the release of Wang Dan today but said that was only a small step toward full political and civil rights in China.
"The release of Wang Dan suggests that our continuing drumbeat on the subject of human rights does have an impact," said Samuel R. Berger, President Clinton's national security adviser. 
"The President and others involved in this process are enormously pleased by the release. 
This is something we have been advocating, working for, for a very long time."
But Mr. Berger said the Chinese Government still had a "very long way to go" to address American concerns about its human rights record.
Mr. Berger was among the American officials accompanying President Clinton to Santiago for the 34-nation Summit of the Americas, which ended today.
Mr. Clinton had no direct comment on Mr. Wang's release.
A senior Clinton Administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said today that there was "absolutely" no deal made for Mr. Wang's parole from an 11-year prison sentence on medical grounds.
But senior Clinton Administration officials had previously indicated that the release of Mr. Wang was part of a pact between Washington and Beijing. 
In essence, the United States had given China a "road map" of actions required for Washington to drop sponsorship of an annual resolution at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva condemning China's rights policies, those officials said.
Last month, the Clinton Administration announced it would not sponsor such a resolution this year because China had met all its requirements -- including agreements to sign the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to release a number of prominent political prisoners.
In public statements, White House officials have been keen to separate Mr. Wang's release from Mr. Clinton's visit because the Chinese want to avoid the appearance of bowing to American pressure on internal matters, and White House officials also do not want to risk delaying the release of other dissidents by bragging about the American role.
The senior Administration official with the President's entourage here insisted that Mr. Wang's release was a result of a steady campaign of United States and international pressure and not a quid pro quo for Mr. Clinton's decision to agree to a high-profile visit to Beijing that bolsters the legitimacy of the Communist Chinese Government.
"You don't do business with the Chinese by putting conditions on things," the official said. 
"We have placed great importance on the release of political prisoners and pushed it constantly throughout the Administration. 
By continuing to engage them you do get progress."
Mr. Clinton emphasized to Jiang Zemin, the Chinese President, when the two leaders met in Washington last October that the United States looked for concrete evidence of Beijing's commitment to greater political freedom. 
He specifically sought the release of Mr. Wang and Wei Jingsheng, who was freed and sent into exile just weeks after the Clinton-Jiang meeting.
In exchange, the Clinton Administration resolved not to use the freed dissidents as propaganda weapons against Beijing. 
That commitment was tested in December, when Mr. Berger told the Government-sponsored Voice of America radio network that airing an interview with Mr. Wei might harm United States-China relations.
The V.O.A., which enjoys editorial independence from the Government, broadcast an abbreviated version of the interview. 
But the official Worldnet, a propaganda arm of the United States Government, canceled its broadcast of the Wei interview.
An Administration official said today that the Government had not had detailed discussions with Mr. Wang about his plans and would neither encourage nor discourage him from speaking about conditions in China.
"He's going to do what he wants," the official said. 
"Even if we wanted to, we couldn't muzzle him, so it would be silly to enter into any understandings with him or with China."
Human rights monitors note that thousands of Chinese and Tibetans remain jailed for trying to exercise freedom of speech or religion. 
They have criticized the Clinton Administration for moving toward closer relations with Beijing without commitments to political liberalization.
But the Administration official said that the freeing of a handful of dissidents and greater political freedoms, including local elections, were not merely cosmetic changes.      
