
The relocation of at least 1.2 million people to make way for the Three Gorges Dam in central China is off to a poor start, calling into question the official timetable for filling the dam's reservoir five years from now, a Chinese social scientist who toured five of the most heavily affected counties in January says.
Interviews with local officials and people affected by the giant project to tame the Yangtze River suggested that the resettlement program -- said by the Government to have moved about 100,000 people so far -- has been plagued by inadequate compensation and a shortage of new jobs and farmland for people being relocated, official corruption and false reports of progress by local officials to national leaders, the researcher's report says.
Last November, to nationalistic fanfare, China diverted the Yangtze around the construction site and began building the dam, which will be the world's largest if completed as planned. 
The Government has signed contracts with Western companies for turbines and other equipment.
But opponents here and abroad, far from giving up, say they intend to step up their campaign. 
They say the expected ascension next week of Zhu Rongji, a hard-nosed economic pragmatist, as Prime Minister gives them new hope that the project, expected to cost more than $25 billion, might eventually be scaled back or even abandoned.
The dam has been an obsession of the outgoing Prime Minister, Li Peng, a Soviet-trained engineer, while Mr. Zhu has shown no enthusiasm, said Dai Qing, a well-known Beijing journalist and one of the few people inside China who publicly attacks the Three Gorges Dam.
"Zhu has never spoken favorably about the project," Ms. Dai said in an interview, noting that Mr. Zhu, as the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of finance and the economy, was notably absent from the celebration at the dam site in November. 
There is no way to corroborate her view of Mr. Zhu, and some observers believe the dam is too far along, and the Government's prestige too committed, for China to back off now.
In the November ceremony, President Jiang Zemin -- who as head of the Communist Party is China's most powerful political figure -- called the damming of the Yangtze "a remarkable feat in the history of mankind."
Government officials say the dam will provide huge benefits by controlling floods, providing clean energy and opening the interior to shipping. 
Critics say that the benefits are exaggerated and that the dam will destroy the Yangtze ecosystem, bury priceless cultural relics and cause suffering for hundreds of thousands.
Because of these concerns, the World Bank and United States Export-Import Bank have not lent money to the project, and opponents hope to curb European export credits.
The author of the new report on resettlement, an experienced field researcher, has concealed his identity to protect his career. 
His report is being distributed this week by the International Rivers Network and Human Rights in China, two American-based groups that oppose the dam on environmental and human rights grounds.
The Chinese Government has acknowledged sporadic problems of mismanagement but says the first phase of resettling people has generally gone smoothly.
By 2003, when the dam is built and the reservoir of water behind it is filled to its initial level, at least 500,000 people must be moved from cities, towns and villages of Sichuan and Hubei Provinces. 
By 2009, when the reservoir is filled still higher, the Government says a total of 1.2 million people will have to be moved, mostly to better jobs and farmlands.
But some people are resisting.
"Foot-dragging opposition to resettlement is widespread, presaging a major crisis if the dam project continues as planned," wrote the Chinese researcher, estimating that the number of people moved to date may be little more than half of the official total. 
Given the slow pace, he wrote, officials in one county said no official would want to be in charge of resettlement as the year 2003 approaches because so many people will have to be moved within such a short time, raising a specter of unrest.
These officials hope that at the least, the Government will decide on a lower final reservoir level, reducing the area to be inundated and thus the number of people who will have to be resettled.
To improve the prospects for displaced people, the Government has offered incentives for companies to locate in the region. 
But the current effort to shed excess workers in ailing state industries has instead meant rising unemployment. 
One county official in Sichuan reportedly said, "There is no way to find industrial jobs for rural settlers."
The report cites examples of the false reporting of resettlement data by local officials who want to please provincial and national leaders. 
In one case last fall, when Prime Minister Li visited a town where residents were about to be moved, people angry about what they considered meager compensation were barred from the meeting while others not even slated for removal were sent in to serve as the audience for Mr. Li's speech, a county official said.
The researcher met with several "model resettlers," families who were happy with their new lives and are showcased by officials as success stories. 
But the small number who have been officially designated as models have received four times the average compensation for relocation, the report says.
