
South of this onetime camel stop on the Silk Road, bulldozers and men with spades flounder in the wickedly fine sand, leveling dunes into fields in China's own version of the taming of the West.
Soon a stretch of the Taklimakan Desert will be transformed into an oasis of cotton and rice. 
And another enclave of ethnic Chinese will spring up in the mainly Muslim frontier region of Xinjiang.
The men and machines are the advance guard of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, a huge, little-known organization that for nearly half a century has led China's drive to settle -- and secure -- this alien region with a turbulent history and China's most violent separatist movement.
The Corps, as it is known, is practically a world unto itself. 
It has built whole cities and hundreds of farms and factories producing more than one-third of Xinjiang's cotton and other goods. 
With workers and their families numbering 2.4 million, 97 percent of them ethnic Chinese, it runs its own university and television station, its own militias and prison camps.
In the tradition of settlers anywhere, Corps leaders look on their works with an exalted sense of achievement -- and seemingly little understanding of how indigenous people, the dwindling majority of Muslim Uighurs and others, might respond to the onslaught.
"We've made towns and cities where there was nothing but a vast wasteland, blank spots on the map," said Wang Guizhen, the deputy commissar. 
"That is a source of great pride for the Corps."
Although Uighurs want economic progress, and have benefited from regional development, they worry about their culture, and many resent the Chinese domination of politics, water resources and production.
"The Corps says it's here to help local development, but look at us -- we're still poor," said a Uighur teacher. 
"Uighurs see the Corps as a military agency. 
They don't want us, and we don't want to work under them."
Leaders of the Corps, by contrast, unabashedly recite its mission, laid down at its inception in the heyday of militant Communism in the 1950's: "To develop Xinjiang, defend the nation's borders and protect social stabilityI."
When the Chinese Communists gained control of the northwestern frontier in 1949, they felt special measures were required to hold it. 
All desert and mountain, Xinjiang accounts for one-sixth of China's land area, yet even now it has a population of little more than 17 million. 
Over the last two centuries, it has been the scene of repeated revolts.
To tame this wild land, the Corps was formed as a paramilitary organization of cashiered soldiers, convicts and volunteers. 
In this landscape of scorching summers and subzero winters, the early pioneers endured hardships that are now legendary in China, living in branch-covered holes and pulling plows with their own shoulders. 
Some fought die-hard remnants of the defeated Chinese Nationalists. 
"In those days we held a hoe in one hand and a gun in the other," Mr. Wang said in an interview in Urumqi, the provincial capital.
The mythic struggles of the early pioneers are now being honored in a dramatic television series, filmed on location and featuring the adventures of 8,000 women who were sent as soldiers to join the men in the desert in the early 1950's.
These days Corps militias and armed police sometimes aid the army and civil authorities in quelling riots. 
But its primary contribution to security is more basic.
"Over time, 'defending' became more a matter of occupying real estate than of bearing arms," said James D. Seymour, a China expert at Columbia University who has studied the Corps. 
"It is a corporation whose purpose is to colonize."
With the Corps as a spearhead, the number of Chinese in Xinjiang has grown dramatically. 
In 1949 there were just 300,000, but by 1997, more than 6 million Chinese made up 38 percent of the population, according to official figures.
Uighurs number 8 million, or 47 percent of the total, while 1.2 million Kazakhs and numerous smaller groups round out the total.
Today the children of the early pioneers have taken over their parents' jobs, supplemented by a stream of Chinese migrants. 
But Corps leaders say their overall numbers have largely stabilized, with new arrivals offset by retirees returning home.
The Corps operates in parallel with the provincial authorities, reporting directly to Beijing. 
Over the decades it has created hundreds of enclaves of Chinese culture within the Islamic Xinjiang of exotic bazaars, bearded men in skull caps and women in scarves or veils.
The Chinese settlements are concentrated in an arc along the western border, which in the 1960's and 70's was -- in Chinese eyes -- menaced by the Soviet Union.
Today that border is with three countries: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. 
The military menace has diminished as China has fostered good ties with those nations. 
But a revival of cross-border ties among Uighurs and related ethnic groups may be promoting Uighur nationalism, and Chinese authorities say they have found weapons smuggled from Central Asia to Uighur separatists in Xinjiang.
The showcase of the Chinese effort to bind this vast territory closer to the rest of China is Shihezi, west of Urumqi, an all-Chinese model city of 220,000 people surrounded by Chinese farming towns.
Each of the 174 Corps farming complexes is a Chinese stronghold. 
Driven by zeal as much as by economics, the Corps still reclaims more than 100,000 acres from the desert each year, usually expanding from existing farms.
For decades this was a project powered by the paramilitary, communal nature of the Corps. 
In the new, more market-oriented China, even the Corps is trying to transform itself into a corporate conglomerate, battling low farm prices and obsolete factories by avidly seeking foreign investors. 
Its No. 1 Agricultural Division, with large holdings in Aksu Prefecture, has even sold shares on the Shanghai exchange to raise money for new desert development.
"We are pushing back the desert," gushed Yang Haihan, vice commander of the division. 
"We are improving the environment."
In centuries past, Aksu was one of the main Uighur oases of southern Xinjiang. 
Here, from the desert floor, snow-capped peaks of the Tianshan Mountains are visible year-round, the source of the river waters that permit agriculture.
On a recent tour, the ethnic divide was evident, along with the formidable achievements of the Corps. 
But, accompanied at all times by several officials, including one who videotaped every encounter, a foreign reporter was not permitted to speak privately with Uighurs or with ordinary Corps workers.
Today, 1.8 million people crowd into the Aksu area, surrounded by desert. 
More than three-fourths of them are Uighurs, mostly living in mud-brick villages where they farm cotton, grains and melons. 
The Corps has 264,000 people in the area, divided between Aksu City and numerous farms.
Aksu City has the look and rhythms of mainstream China: On a summer evening, pop music blares from the multistory Corps recreation building and hundreds of Chinese couples and retirees gather to practice the fox trot.
In the Uighur corner of the city, a modest minaret pokes into the sky, radios play wailing ballads and shops offer stacks of flat breads.
Officials insist that all groups in Aksu are living in harmony. 
But on the streets are Government signs saying "Oppose National Separatism" and "Defend Social StabilityI."
Here and in other Uighur centers, with an unknown degree of public support, festers a violent movement that seeks an independent East Turkistan.
In 1998, according to an article in The Xinjiang Daily, the police in Aksu Prefecture "wiped out a number of terrorist gangs, confiscated a number of firearms, demolition devices and reactionary propaganda materials, and discovered a number of underground scripture-lecturing places and underground military-skill schools."
Xinjiang's political leaders have spoken publicly about the "grim situation" and "fierce struggle" against separatism in the province. 
So far this year, the executions of at least 18 Uighurs for bombings, murders of officials, arms smuggling and other crimes have been reported in newspapers; hundreds of Uighurs, perhaps thousands, are in prison for political offenses.
An article on June 2 in a Hong Kong newspaper with close ties to the Beijing Government said that to fight the "heinous" armed separatist movement in Xinjiang, economic development must speed up and Chinese immigration via the Corps should accelerate.
"The purpose is to adjust the proportions of the populations of different ethnic groups in this region, especially in its southern part," said the article, in Ta Kung Pao.
It is unclear whether the article reflects a proposal under serious debate.
Mr. Wang, the deputy commissar, said the development contributes to stabilityI by helping all of Xinjiang's people. 
Certainly living standards have improved, even if the Chinese remain better off on average, and many Uighurs and members of other minority groups benefit from Government projects. 
In Urumqi and Aksu, Uighur professionals are visible on the streets, working easily with Chinese counterparts.
But many Uighurs have a deeper fear.
"They're all aware that Inner Mongolia is now only about 14 percent Mongol," said Dru C. Gladney, dean of the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in Honolulu. 
"They just don't want that to happen to Xinjiang. 
On the other hand, they do want development."
