
I GREW up eating Chinese food, usually on Sunday with my grandparents and often in Chinatown in Manhattan. 
The food was novel, flavorful, ridiculously cheap and available on a take-out basis for people who didn't enjoy the wildness of Chinatown as much as my family did.
Unfortunately, the Chinese food situation in New York and the surrounding areas has deteriorated. 
Thai restaurants and, especially in New Jersey, Indian ones offer more excitement. 
Two Hong-Kong style restaurants, China Gourmet and Empress Garden, recently opened in Essex County, but neither provides the same thrill of eating the slippery, glittering, flavorful oddities that I remember from my girlhood. 
China Night, House of Chan, Hang Far Low, Bobo's -- what happened to you?
Putting aside for the moment that you can never recapture the past, I ate two meals at Chengdu 46 recently that I can only describe as transporting. 
By now, the chief problem of the restaurant, which opened in 1983, is obvious: the food is expensive, especially for Chinese food, which makes a steady diet of it difficult. 
Spend $6 for an order of spicy dumplings that barely feeds one and you feel cheated.
Still, these dumplings really are marvelous. 
The chefs are wizards, each plucked from Chengdu, the capital of Szechuan province in China, and able to produce dishes that are as visually arresting as tiny Tiffany windows. 
Alice Wang, who owns the restaurant with her sister, Fang Chih Kuan, endures as among the more skilled restaurant managers in New Jersey and is certainly the best dressed. 
(Her favorite designer is Vivienne Tam.) Chengdu 46 may be a far cry from Pell Street circa 1963, but it serves an entirely different type of Chinese food and in a more rarified atmosphere.
Certainly, Chengdu 46 is prettier than seedy old Hang Far Low. 
A splash of white paint and the formerly Polynesian-style House of Lam became a rare spot of light among the car dealerships and sludge on Route 46 in Passaic County. 
BMW's crowd the lot, and inside, the bar is a starry planetarium. 
The dining room beyond it is equally mysterious. 
The walls look like raw silk and the flowers are always orchids. 
Mao would never have approved. 
The restaurant is beautiful.
Beer goes well with Chinese food; the Fetzer gewurztraminer on the skimpy wine list is also popular, although it's a little sweet for my taste. 
The Buena Vista sauvignon blanc also withstands the volatile flavors of Szechuan cooking, and if you're at all inclined, Champagne is certainly an option (from $48 to $200 for Dom Perignon).
Chinese menus normally list a thousand dishes; Chengdu's is smaller and more manageable. 
The tidy list highlights chicken and seafood dishes, as well as standards like moo shu pork that are both more subtle and potent than the usual watered-down, bloated versions. 
The spicy dumplings are a good example, baby-sized tortellini in a teacup of soy sauce, chili oil and brown sugar. 
Note their playfully slippery texture and, especially, the richness of the succulent pork.
The excellent spring rolls are crisper and more flavorful than many versions; I just find other dishes more original. 
My favorite is bang-bang chicken, cold, white, delicate strips of expertly poached meat, braided with wisps of scallion and smothered, sundae-style, with a lush, thick sauce that looks like fudge. 
The sauce is redolent of plum and brandy but the actual components are far more mundane: soy sauce, sesame paste, chili oil and sugar. 
You want to eat it by the spoonful.
Both the cold sesame and the Chengdu cold noodles are beautifully presented, tall, droopy coils of rope, but the flavors in each are almost too subtle, bland really, and although the spicy cabbage looks like something from the Whitney Biennial, its flavor is also disappointingly timid; it's my grandmother's cucumber salad with too much sugar.
The filet of sole is overcooked, but almost every other entree is perfect. 
Sweet, smoky lobster in Chengdu sauce, a house specialty, comes coated in a delicate white sauce peppered with preserved mustard greens imported from China. 
Spicy baby eggplant is equally tender and practically seedless, and the spicy volcano chicken couldn't be hotter, bits of lava-hot chicken tumbling down the sides of an even larger mound, sparkling with hot oil and red chili peppers.
MOO SHU PORK in other restaurants is mostly cabbage; Chengdu's fluffy version is a mix of Chinese chives, silken tree ear mushrooms, lean pork and hot, buttery scrambled egg, cut into chiffon-like streamers. 
Who ever knew that moo shu pork could be so elegant?
The Peking duck also sets a standard: airy crepes packed with tender duck meat, crackling skin and spiky scallions, all smeared in thick, lush plum sauce. 
The duck is $38 and produces four elegant packets, each $9.50 and well worth the money.
Mrs. Kuan founded Chengdu 46 but has recently ceded most control to Ms. Wang. Asked what prompted her sister to open the restaurant, Ms. Wang said, "We were desperate. 
We all loved to eat, and at that time there were no authentic Szechuan restaurants in New Jersey."
Those of us who also felt desperate are especially grateful.
 
CHENGDU 46
1105 Route 46 East, Clifton
(201) 777-8855
 
EXCELLENT
ATMOSPHERE Post-Mao China.
SERVICE Men In Black.
RECOMMENDED DISHES Dumplings in spicy sauce; bang-bang chicken; spring roll; Peking duck; moo shu pork; spicy volcano chicken; two-flavored beef; lobster in Chengdu sauce; eggplant strips in garlic; bombe glace.
PRICE RANGE Lunch specials, $8.50 and $9.50 (includes soup or appetizer, and entree); dessert, $3 to $14 (banana flambe for two). 
Dinner, appetizers, $3 to $18 (pu pu platter for two); entrees, $10 to $38 (Peking duck for four); desserts, same as lunch.
HOURS Lunch, Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 3 P.M. Dinner, Tuesdays through Thursdays, 5 to 10:30 P.M. Fridays and Saturdays, until 11:30 P.M. Sundays 1 to 10:30 P.M.
RESERVATIONS Recommended.
CREDIT CARDS All major.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESS One level.
RATINGS Poor to Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary.
 
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambiance and service, with price taken into consideration. 
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
