
The Chinese rifle that Secret Service agents said was used to spray bullets at the White House yesterday has been illegal to import into the United States since May, Federal officials said.
While the standard model of the semi-automatic rifle, called an SKS, is not classified as an assault weapon and was not one of the 19 weapons banned in the crime bill passed in August, its importation was banned by President Clinton as a condition of the most-favored nation status granted China earlier this year. 
If the weapon used yesterday had been modified to contain more than 10 bullets, its sale would be outlawed by the crime bill.
Jack Killorin, a spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, said the rifle, as manufactured, resembles the American-made Garand M-1 rifle used in World War II and the Korean War. 
It was originally manufactured for the Soviet armed forces during World War II and was adopted by the Chinese in 1956.
"It is part of the family of more traditional-type rifles made around World War II, before the advent of dedicated assault weapons," Mr. Killorin said. 
"They have been very popular as exports into the United States because they were very inexpensive, usually less than $200."
Mr. Killorin said that the rifles were manufactured with an internal magazine that holds seven rounds of 7.62-millimeter ammunition, the same used in AK-47 assault rifles. 
A version of the SKS sold with a detachable clip, which could hold many more bullets, was banned in 1989.
A Federal law-enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity said that witnesses had told the authorities that more than 20 shots had been fired, leading them to believe that the gun had been modified. 
The crime bill bans weapons with clips that hold more than 10 rounds. 
The official also said that the weapon was being traced and that officials expected to learn by today where it had been bought.
Statistics from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms show that the SKS accounted for most of the 950,000 Chinese rifles imported into the United States in 1993. 
It was also the fourth most frequently traced gun by the bureau, which traces guns seized in criminal investigations.
The SKS was also the type of rifle used in a shooting spree by a student at Simon's Rock College in Great Barrington, Mass., in December 1992 that left two dead and four injured.
