
Despite what he calls continuing abuses of human rights in China, the United States Ambassador here argues that Beijing has made "dramatic" progress in improving the lives of its citizens and that this record should be taken into account when policy toward China is reviewed early in the new year.
In an interview this week, Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy said that the setbacks in human rights represented by the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 and the wave of repression that followed were being steadily reversed, and that the Communist Party had loosened its control over many aspects of Chinese life.
His comments came before a Congressional review in January of China's record on human rights. 
Before July, President Clinton must decide whether China has made "overall, significant progress" in human rights and thus deserves to have its beneficial trade status renewed.
 
Question of Progress on Rights
Mr. Roy, 58, a career diplomat who is to complete his tour in Beijing next summer, said he could not predict whether China would satisfy the standard of "overall, significant progress."
"I can't answer those questions, because the Administration is going to have to define what it views as significant progress," he said.
He acknowledged that there had been important human rights "setbacks" in 1993, including arrests and harsh treatment of political and religious dissidents. 
But he said the economic and technological revolution promoted by Deng Xiaoping since 1978 had stripped away much of the ideological prison in which the Chinese had lived for three decades.
In an executive order in May, President Clinton said there were seven key areas in which China had to make "overall, significant progress" before he could renew its trade privileges in July 1994. 
Among the areas are "releasing and providing an acceptable accounting for Chinese citizens imprisoned or detained for the nonviolent expression of their political and religious beliefs."
 
Role of Security Forces
Mr. Roy said that human rights abuses were likely to persist for the foreseeable future under the Communist Party and the security apparatus that keeps it in power.
But in nearly two hours of discussion this week, the American Ambassador argued that the overall economic and social transformation under way in China should not be ignored.
China now trades with the United States under what is known as "most favored nation" status, which means that its exports face the lowest trade barriers in force when they enter the United States. 
China has angrily denounced those in Congress who favor revoking this status to punish Beijing for its human rights record.
The Clinton Administration has had to balance its approach to China between those who call for punitive action over rights violations and those who argue that China must be accommodated because of its importance as a growing market for American goods and investment and as a potential security partner.
In addition, the Administration has tried to engage China in trying to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons program, and many argue that a confrontational approach with Beijing does not work.
In his remarks, Mr. Roy took care to reserve for the White House a full range of policy options should China fail to make further progress in human rights.
 
Opposition to Linkage
But he was far more explicit than his superiors have been in showing a preference for abandoning the practice of linking of China's trading status to its human rights record, calling the linkage abnormal.
"At the core of our approach," Mr. Roy said, "is not the idea that we can somehow get beyond the human rights factor in our relationship with China.
"Rather, it is a question of what is the most effective way" to press human rights concerns, he said, while conducting normal diplomacy on crucial Asian security issues.
"If you look at the 150 years of modern China's history since the Opium Wars, then you can't avoid the conclusion that the last 15 years are the best 15 years in China's modern history," Mr. Roy said. 
"And of those 15 years, the last 2 years are the best in terms of prosperity, individual choice, access to outside sources of information, freedom of movement within the country and stable domestic conditions."
Mr. Roy was referring to social and economic forces that have effectively curtailed monolithic Communist Party control over where people live, work and go to school and whether they can be admitted to universities or get married.
He argued that a new "diversity" had taken root in Chinese society, reflected in a willingness to express individual views, an information revolution wrought by satellite television and fax machines and a new Government "tolerance" for many forms of criticism. 
He also cited the beginnings of a legal foundation that might help Chinese citizens seek redress and compensation for abuses.
 
Advocates Further Dialogue
Mr. Roy made clear that in his view, the most effective way to resolve disputes with China was through the intensified diplomatic dialogue that began last fall after a review of China policy at the White House and the State Department.
If Secretary of State Warren Christopher "were to recommend next May that we should extend" China's trading privileges "without conditions, that would not remove human rights from our foreign policy agenda with China," Mr. Roy said.
"We would expect to still continue an active human rights dialogue with the Chinese," he said, "and we would continue to expect to see significant progress on human rights issues."
Ambassador Roy said China's top leaders had taken Mr. Clinton's seriously when he had warned that China's favorable trade access to the American market would be on the line in 1994.
"We see progress in some areas, and, yes, we do see continuing negative factors in other areas," he said. 
"And so our purpose is to try to encourage the further progress in the areas that will be taken into account next May."
Mr. Roy said China had released the "vast bulk" of political prisoners seized in the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown and, with the release of Wei Jingsheng in September, the major figures from the Democracy Wall period of 1978-79.
 
Dissidents Still in Prison
But a number of democracy campaigners from the Tiananmen Square uprising remain in prison, some of them with severe medical problems, he added. 
He said Beijing should release them on medical grounds, granting them a form of parole.
With Mr. Clinton having met with President Jiang Zemin in November in Seattle, Mr. Roy said, the two countries are carrying on their most extensive dialogue in five years.
Mr. Roy suggested that with further progress from China in coming months, this dialogue could supplant the contentious annual debate in Congress over whether to extend China's trading privileges, and remove the constant threat of disruption to the increasingly interconnected trade channels between China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and the United States.
The Ambassador, who was born in China to a missionary family in Nanjing and witnessed the Communist takeover in 1949 from Shanghai, said that any new wave of Government repression against Chinese citizens would certainly bring an immediate response from Washington.
"It is impossible for a country like the United States to have normal relations with a country that resorts to overt suppression against its own people," he said. 
There "will be an impact on the U.S. relationship with China when such repression occurs."
Mr. Roy added that while the widening of individual freedoms represented a "radical transformation" of Chinese society, American policy makers could not forget that China relied fundamentally on "repression as its normal means of maintaining control," mainly through the state security forces.
