
Ten years ago, when Russians gazed across the Amur River into China, all they could see was a scraggly forest and an occasional smokestack. 
What lay beyond was a mystery, sealed by a border shut tight.
Today, with ferryboats now making regular trips across the river, the view is more revealing, and all the more galling for residents of a city, a region and a country that have spent the last decade falling behind the strides of their giant neighbor.
"Look over there," said Irina Guiman, a 28-year-old candy factory employee whose last paycheck surfaced six months ago. 
She waved her hand at the sparkling new skyline across the river in the Chinese city of Heihe, bursting with new high-rise buildings, which she like many others believes were built with the money Chinese traders take back with them from Russia.
"And look at this," she said, turning back toward Lenin Square, surrounded by grimy Soviet-era structures. 
"We're still the same dirty old village we always were."
At a time when Moscow and Beijing are talking about strengthening their strategic partnership to counter NATO's show of strength in Yugoslavia, Russians on this side of the 2,400-mile border have a more cautious, even suspicious view.
Ten years of trade, tourism and a regular flow of official exchanges -- begun after a trip to China in 1989 by the last Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev -- have left many Russians feeling bitter, disappointed and often exploited by a hectic shuttle trade in Chinese goods and food that has enriched their Chinese neighbors and left them as poor as before, if not poorer.
"We send them our natural resources, and they send us their disposable clothes," said Larisa V. Buyanova, a deputy editor of Amurskaya Pravda. 
"For China, it is not profitable for us to be strong. 
The weaker we are, the more they can get from us."
Always present in the back of the Russian mind is a centuries-old fear of Chinese expansion -- if not by force, then by infiltration. 
That fear is echoed by Russian foreign policy experts in Moscow who point to Chinese encroachment in the Far East and Siberia as one of the nightmares Russia may face if Moscow's authority over the country continues to weaken.
It is not a question of military confrontation or border changes, those experts stress, but of gradual erosion of Russian control and rising Chinese influence, including migration, in a region very far from Moscow.
At a recent meeting of leaders from Russia's border regions, Viktor Ishayev, Governor of the Khabarovsk region, described with alarm how more and more Chinese are moving into the Russian Far East, often illegally. 
Citing national statistics, he said half a million Chinese crossed the border into Russia each year, many never to return.
"The danger is there," said Sergei Torbin, editor of The Pacific Star, a popular newspaper in Khabarovsk, the second largest city in the Russian Far East. 
"The Government has to take stricter measures, or else one day we will wake up with Chinese all around us."
The logic for such scenarios is purely arithmetical. 
"We have 10 million people in the whole of the Far East," said Sergei Lopatin, head of the Khabarovsk region's foreign economic relations department. 
"And there are 40 million Chinese in just one of the provinces across the border. 
Unemployment in northern China is high, 30 percent. 
And their main strategy in Russia is not only in trade and business; they are constantly and very actively proposing their labor."
 
Chinese Melons And Spicy Food
So far the Chinese presence in Russia's Far East -- a huge swath of territory carved out by Russian explorers and settlers in the 19th century -- is still muted. 
But even if the numbers are small, their influence is growing. 
Every city has its "Chinese" market, selling fruit, vegetables and clothing brought over by Russian and Chinese "suitcase traders" on the daily ferries.
Here in Blagoveshchensk, residents have learned to appreciate spicy Chinese cooking at restaurants with names like The Great Wall and Black Dragon. 
More than a dozen local dormitories have been given over to Chinese traders, while busloads of Chinese tourists fill the rooms at the local Friendship Hotel.
The number of Chinese residents and visitors has fallen off sharply in recent years, as the local and federal authorities tighten up passport and visa controls. 
For a border region, the presence of Chinese does not strike a visitor as overwhelming, and the frontier is obviously far less porous than the one, say, between Mexico and Texas. 
But many residents here speak darkly about an illegal migration of Chinese that they say is hidden, and uncounted.
In the vast and empty countryside that stretches north of the Amur River, hundreds of Chinese farm workers -- earning twice the wages they can get in their villages in Manchuria -- have been hired on seasonal contracts to plant watermelons and vegetables, teaching their Russian hosts how to coax crops out of poor soil using the age-old Chinese style of back-breaking labor.
And in a neighboring autonomous region, Birobidzhan, local officials are watching closely to see how a Chinese company fulfills its promise to turn around a bankrupt Russian logging enterprise and turn timber into chopsticks for the Chinese market.
Yet behind these still-tender shoots of local Chinese business lurks the uncomfortable feeling that Russia -- its economy weakened by reform, mismanagement and corruption -- has let itself be taken advantage of by "the other shore," as Mrs. Buyanova refers to China.
"They consider this their city," said a photographer who takes snapshots of Chinese tourists against the backdrop of the Amur River. 
"And that," he added, pointing to Heihe's glistening skyline, "is our money over there."
The problem, as most Russians here will admit, is that while Russian shoppers grumble about their dependence on cheap, sometime shoddy Chinese goods, Russia today has little to offer its Chinese trading partners except military hardware and natural resources.
Local manufacturers have been unable to compete with Chinese goods that even now, after last summer's sharp devaluation of the ruble, cost less than their Russian equivalents. 
Last year the giant region of Khabarovsk -- from the Amur River up the Pacific coast -- could boast only $600 million in sales to China, of which all but $60 million was for military exports.
 
A Trend Confirmed By Export Statistics
"In the beginning we sold them Russian military overcoats," said Yuri Garushyants, a China expert at Oriental Studies Institute in Moscow. 
"Every Chinese who came to Russia in the early 1990's went home with one. 
Now their market is stuffed with coats, and we have nothing else to sell them."
Although China still ranks as Russia's third-largest trading partner, after Germany and the United States, the total has dropped sharply in recent years -- from $6.8 billion in 1996 to $5.5 billion in 1998, according to the Russian Trade Ministry. 
Russian exports, valued at $5.5 billion in 1996, had dropped to $3.6 billion by 1998.
Here along the border the decline has been even more dramatic, after the boom years of the early 1990's when a torrent of Russian raw materials and heavy equipment streamed across the border in exchange for crates of fruit, vegetables, rice and other commodities.
"In 1991, as a result of reforms, we were left with empty shelves," Mr. Lopatin said. 
"In these conditions, China did its business. 
They sent us their cheap goods, their noodles and their vegetables, and everyone bought them up."
Much of this early trade was barter -- which allowed entrepreneurs on both sides to avoid taxes and customs duties, and which skewed statistics. 
In China, where the Communist Government keeps stricter control over foreign trade, much of the profit was plowed back into the economy -- hence the glistening Heihe skyline. 
In Russia profits, including those earned by local middlemen, were rarely if ever translated into investments.
The boom years were already over by the mid-1990's when Russia began to raise fees on rail transport, utilities and other costs, which made Russian-produced tractors, excavators and other heavy equipment less economically attractive to the Chinese. 
Here in the Amur region, for instance, trade with China peaked in 1993 at $416 million. 
By 1998, it was down to $100 million.
Cross-border barter has also been curtailed, as Russia tries to bring its foreign trade in compliance with requirements set by the World Trade Organization. 
According to the Trade Ministry, if in the early 1990's, half of Russian-Chinese trade was conducted in barter, now -- officially -- the proportion is only 4 percent.
Official statistics, however, consistently underestimate the volume of shuttle traffic and, according to many residents, the real numbers of Chinese who have taken up residence in Russia, sometimes illegally.
By the mid-1990's, the numbers of Chinese traders, arriving here on tourist visas, became so great that Russia adopted tighter requirements, obligating tourist agencies to hold onto the Chinese clients' passports until their departure.
 
The Fall of the Ruble Hurts 'Suitcase Trade'
The collapse of the ruble last summer put a major dent in the "suitcase trade."
At the Chinese market in Khabarovsk, where 1,500 vendors are licensed to trade in tightly packed stalls, salespeople speaking pidgin Russian complain loudly that business these days is bad, very bad.
Among the trade that goes unreported are the goods brought into Russia by Russians, who are hired by Chinese suppliers to make the trip from Blagoveshchensk to an island in the middle of the Amur, where the Chinese have built a new trading center.
Mrs. Buyanova, for instance, has a neighbor, an underemployed university professor, who gets paid 200 rubles for each of the nine trips she makes to China each month, bringing back only as much as she can arguably use for her personal use.
But according to Mrs. Buyanova, that requirement is not strictly enforced by Russian customs agents. 
"Our customs officials are good at looking the other way," she said, "because they know that this is how people are forced to make a living."
