
The presidents of China and Russia denounced the United States's proposed missile defense program in a joint statement today and vowed to strengthen a strategic partnership between their nations.
But the first day of their summit meeting produced no substantive economic agreements, which Western scholars said pointed to a fundamental flaw in that partnership. 
Trade ties are more binding than talk in the post-cold-war era, and Russia cannot compete with what the United States, Europe or Japan can offer China these days, they said.
"The Chinese are the ultimate realists, and they know Russia is now a third-rate country economically, technologically and politically," said Michel Oksenberg, a China scholar at Stanford University.
China's president, Jiang Zemin, and Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, met for nearly three hours today after a brief welcoming ceremony at Beijing's Great Hall of the People on Tiananmen Square. 
Mr. Jiang bantered with his guest in Russian, which he had learned as a student in Moscow when the Soviet Union played big brother to the fledgling Chinese Communists.
After the first session of the summit meeting, which ends on Wednesday, the two leaders signed a joint statement condemning the United States for seeking "unilateral military and security advantages" with a missile defense plan that would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. 
The statement warned that breaching that treaty would "trigger a new arms race."
President Clinton may decide by October whether to begin the first phase of the system, or he may leave the decision to his successor.
"Our two countries presently share a common position on the global security balance," Mr. Putin said after signing four other documents, including accords on banking and energy cooperation and an agreement for Russia to build an experimental fast-neutron reactor in China. 
Mr. Jiang said that the two countries would "push forward a global multipolar process and establish a new political and economic order."
Multipolar is the shorthand used by China to describe a world in which the United States is not the sole superpower.
But what was conspicuously missing from the list of documents signed today was an agreement on building a multibillion-dollar pipeline from Siberia to China. 
Some form of commitment on the pipeline was expected to have been the largest, most concrete development to come from Mr. Putin's visit.
The absence of any agreement contrasts sharply with visits by Western heads of state, who typically preside over the signing of billions of dollars in their trade deals with China. 
Trade between Russia and China totaled only $3.56 billion in the first half of this year. 
In 1999, trade between the United States and China totaled $94.9 billion.
"To further boost trade ties, China and Russia need a big-scale strategy and large projects," said Lu Nanquan, vice director of the Russian Studies Center at China's Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing. 
He said the pipeline deal was stalled over a dispute about where it should go, with Russia favoring a route through Mongolia, and China wanting the pipeline to pass farther north to its refining center near the oil fields in Heilongjiang Province.
Despite the talk of partnership, analysts say that the two countries are likely to remain wary of each other without more cross-border investment and stronger trade flow. 
"China can get large investments and advanced technology only from the West, particularly from the U.S., so there is only so far such a Sino-Russian coalition can go," said Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University.
Russia is so far unwilling to help China in the one area that it wants and for which Russia has the resources: the transfer of weapons technology. 
Moscow has been reluctant to give China sensitive know-how that could someday be used against it. 
Russia prefers to sell China arms instead.
And many people say Russia continues to regard China with suspicion, given Russia's increasingly tenuous hold over its own Far East. 
"Russia is most concerned about the immigration of Chinese into its Far East region, where only hundreds of thousands of Russians live close to a Chinese region with a population of hundreds of millions," said Zhao Huasheng, director of Russian studies at the Shanghai Institute for International Studies. 
"Russia fears that Chinese immigrants will outnumber Russian citizens in the region, and might someday raise territorial issues."
Mr. Oksenberg said Beijing also understands that too close a relationship with Russia could push the United States into an even closer relationship with Japan, which is something Beijing hopes to avoid. 
China wants to build better ties with the world's industrialized powerhouses rather than hitch itself to a weak economy like Russia's. 
"Beijing may seek to use Moscow opportunistically for a while, but China's leaders now conceive of themselves as in the big leagues, and behind their honeyed words, they view Russia with scorn, disdain and pity," he said.
 
--------------------
Beijing's Objections Cause Concern
WASHINGTON, July 18 (AP) -- Although Russia opposes a United States national missile shield, and European allies doubt its usefulness, the toughest political obstacle may be China, the chief United States arms control official said today.
"The ones that we have to work on most assiduously are the China concerns," said John D. Holum, senior adviser to the secretary of state on arms control. 
"It will take considerable work to demonstrate that this system isn't aimed at them."
Defense Secretary William S. Cohen met with President Jiang Zemin and other top Chinese officials in Beijing last week but reported making little headway in overcoming their objections to missile defense.
China has only a couple dozen ballistic missiles of intercontinental range. 
Although the Pentagon has said its proposed national missile shield is designed to counter a threat from North Korea, not China or Russia, it acknowledges that the system could defend against as many as two dozen incoming missiles.
      
