
Russia and China signed a five-year military cooperation agreement today that is expected to broaden the transfer of military technology to China. 
But the Russian Defense Minister, Gen. Pavel Grachev, said the expanded cooperation would not be used "against any third country."
Chinese and Russian officials also emphasized that General Grachev was not here to negotiate any new sale of Russian weapons to China, which has been a matter of concern to China's neighbors and to the United States.
Western officials say China is now focused less on buying large and expensive weapons from Russia and more on modernizing Chinese military industries by purchasing Russian know-how. 
The Chinese are particularly interested in acquiring military technology in rocketry, anti-submarine warfare and air defense, Western analysts say.
On his four-day visit, General Grachev met with senior Chinese leaders, including Prime Minister Li Peng, who characterized the visit as "very successful."
But in today's statements to Russian reporters here, neither side provided details of the cooperation agreement.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said, "During the visit, the question of Russian arms sales to China will not be discussed."
Last December, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev of Russia said Russian industries had sold $1.2 billion in military hardware to China in 1992, including about 24 advanced SU-27 fighters.
Concerns about those Russian sales have prompted consultations between Washington and Moscow, diplomats here say. 
A diplomat here said Russia had agreed not to sell China "power projection" weapon systems, like aircraft carriers and long-range bombers.
As a consequence, Beijing has become increasingly testy in complaining that Washington and Moscow are seeking to limit the technological development of the Chinese military, diplomats say. 
Chinese leaders are highly critical of decisions by the United States to sell F-16 fighters and other modern weapons to Taiwan.
 
'The Embassy Doesn't Know'
Western officials remain concerned that Russia has not been able to control the flow of representatives from Russian military industries and research institutes to Beijing.
"We run into Russian defense industry people here on the street, and we ask the embassy, and the embassy doesn't know they are here," a Western diplomat said, adding that the Russian Government "has not been fully effective" in policing the relationship between the Russian military establishment and China.
A dispatch from the official New China News Agency said General Grachev had briefed the Chinese leadership on last month's political upheaval in which the Russian military, backing President Boris N. Yeltsin, put down the revolt of the Russian Parliament by mounting a tank and infantry assault on the Parliament building.
Western diplomats here said China remains deeply concerned about stabilityI in Russia, which has a 2,480-mile border with China that was the scene of long-running confrontations and tense military buildups during the cold war.
"The overall policy line is caution," a Western diplomat said, "caution over whether a Russia that is hostile to China might emerge."
