
Formally ending an era of tension between two of the world's most powerful countries, Russia and China agreed today not to aim nuclear missiles at each other, never to use force against each other, and to sharply limit the number of troops stationed along their border.
The declaration was signed at the end of talks at the Kremlin between President Jiang Zemin of China and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia. 
The two men also agreed to work harder on developing economic ties.
The Russia-China relationship has been rocky and traumatic. 
In the early 1950's their leaders dreamed of fashioning a world of Communism. 
Indeed, it has only been 40 years since Mr. Jiang trained as an engineer in Moscow at the giant Zil automotive factory.
But by the late 1950's, the two Communist giants had entered into such a fierce and dogmatic battle for supremacy that they became bitter enemies. 
The bloody clashes along their border in the 1960's led many to believe that if there was another World War it would begin there.
"The signing of these agreements are achievements of historic scope," said Mr. Yeltsin today, just back from Germany where he watched the last Russian troops withdraw from Europe. 
"For the first time in the history of Russian-Chinese relations the border between our two countries is legally fixed."
Tensions had cooled a while ago. 
Chinese ballistic missiles are not targeted in advance, according to Western military officials, so the agreement is largely symbolic. 
The Chinese missile system is built largely for retaliation. 
And the Russians have made a great show of limiting their targeted missiles over the last two years.
The economic agreements signed today were more important than those reached on arms control. 
China -- despite its stridently Communist political system -- has proven far more flexible economically than Russia was under Communism, or Russia is today. 
Many Russians now say they look to China as a model of how to apply phased economic reforms.
This is an ironic twist for two countries that have taken such divergent paths. 
Struggling to find the right route to a successful market economy, Mr. Yeltsin and others sometimes seem to look wistfully at China's remarkable economic growth over the past decade. 
"We pay much attention to studying the experience of economic reforms in China," Mr. Yeltsin told Mr. Jiang.
China has become Russia's second largest trading partner after Germany. 
Trade between the two almost doubled in the last three years, and according to Chinese statistics, accounted for $7.68 billion last year.
This is tricky ground for a Russian President who must appeal to Western leaders even as he seeks increased partnership with China. 
Russia has carefully avoided joining the United States and other Western countries in attacking China's human rights record, which most Westerners consider abysmal.
Wu Jianmin, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said after today's meetings, "Both leaders stressed that the international community should acknowledge that there is no single pattern for the development of all countries and that all countries should be equal."
He said the subject of human rights had not come up.
