
A leading American satellite maker acknowledged for the first time today that a committee headed by one of its top executives provided a report in 1996 to the Chinese on a failed Chinese rocket, without first consulting Federal officials, and contrary to the company's own internal policies.
But the company, Space Systems/ Loral, a subsidiary of Loral Space and Communications, based in Manhattan, said it "does not believe any of its employees dealing with China acted illegally or damaged U.S. national security."
The company issued a two-page statement, which it called a "fact sheet."
In the statement, Loral said it was cooperating with the Justice Department, which is investigating whether sensitive technological information was passed to the Chinese during industry reviews of an accidental explosion of a Chinese rocket seconds after liftoff in February 1996.
The criminal inquiry is focusing on whether officials from Loral and other companies who participated in the review violated American export control laws.
Loral maintained today that no secret or sensitive information was conveyed to the Chinese. 
But a classified Pentagon study concluded the review had helped Chinese missile capabilities and harmed American security, Administration officials said. 
The Pentagon study prompted the Justice Department's inquiry.
In recent days, the Clinton Administration's policies on Chinese-launched American satellites have come under intense scrutiny because of accusations that a Chinese military officer had funneled nearly $100,000 into Democratic campaign committees during President Clinton's re-election campaign.
The New York Times has reported that lawyers and officials have said that Johnny Chung, a fund-raiser, provided information about the Chinese officer, Lieut. 
Col. Liu Chaoying, who was a senior Hong Kong executive for China Aerospace, the Chinese conglomerate whose rocket exploded with a Loral satellite in 1996.
China Aerospace also issued a statement today, acknowledging the donation to Mr. Chung, according to The Christian Science Monitor. 
The state-owned company denied that the $100,000 was part of a Government attempt to influence policy. 
The donation "was done by Liu Chaoying acting as an individual," Zhang Libul, a spokeswoman for China Aerospace, told The Monitor in Beijing. 
"She used her own financing rather than China Aerospace funds."
The information attributed to Mr. Chung, which followed his pleading guilty to campaign-related bank and tax fraud charges, has re-ignited Republicans' zeal to investigate whether the Chinese Government tried to influence Clinton Administration policy. 
On Sunday, President Clinton said reported political contributions from China had not influenced his foreign policy.
Speaker Newt Gingrich is considering creating a special select committee to investigate the transfer of advanced space technology to China, and House Republicans are threatening to attach amendments to the Pentagon's budget bill later this week that would bar the sale of commercial satellites and missile technology to China.
Loral's statement today said that "no political favors or benefits of any kind were requested or extended, directly or indirectly, by any means whatever."
It also said that the company's chairman, Bernard Schwartz, who has been one of the largest individual Democratic Party donors in the last few years, "was not personally involved in any aspect of this matter."
In outlining its involvement with the Chinese rocket, Loral's statement said insurance companies asked Loral and other satellite concerns, including the Hughes Electronics Corporation, to review the results of an accident investigation done by the Chinese.
The outside review was headed by a senior executive at Space Systems/ Loral. 
The review committee's report shows that the senior Loral executive had been requested by the president of China Aerospace, which controls China's satellite and space enterprises.
In the end, the review committee affirmed what the Chinese found: "that a failed solder joint was the most likely cause of the failure," Loral said today.
Loral also said that while the 1996 review was under way, unidentified Loral officials "discussed the review committee's work with a number of U.S. officials interested in China's space program."
But the company acknowledged that it had not followed its own procedures.
"Contrary to SS/L's own internal policies, the committee provided a report to the Chinese before consulting with State Department export licensing authorities," Loral said without elaborating.
The company has privately told investigators in a report that Loral's security advisers had told the company to seek State Department approval before talking to the Chinese but those instructions were not followed, industry executives and Federal officials said.
Loral has privately conceded another mistake: ignoring license conditions that required Pentagon monitors during the transmission of any information, the executives and officials said.
Last February, President Clinton approved the Chinese launching of another Loral satellite. 
That license, American officials said, explicitly requires separate Government approval to participate in any accident review and contains stringent safeguards against transfer of any technology. 
Administration officials have said that being under investigation was insufficient grounds to deny Loral a license.
But the Justice Department opposed the recent Presidential approval for Loral's license, officials said. 
Department lawyers feared that the approval would undercut the viability of a criminal case -- if one were to go forward -- by creating the appearance for a jury of Government support for Loral's previous conduct.
Law-enforcement officials also had initial concerns about some of the licensing language, but those concerns appear to have been allayed as the inquiry is going forward, officials said.
The expertise needed to put satellites into orbit is similar to that used to deliver nuclear warheads. 
The overlapping commercial and military uses lie at the heart of both the criminal inquiry and Congressional concern about President Clinton's policies on satellite launches in China.
On Capitol Hill today, senior Republicans continued to call for a broad investigation into whether the transfer of space technology to China threatened United States security.
Mr. Gingrich today called on President Clinton to delay his trip to China in June.
The Speaker is also proposing the creation of a special committee, with five Republicans and three Democrats, and headed by Representative Christopher Cox, a California Republican, said Christina Martin, Mr. Gingrich's spokeswoman.
"The purpose would be to assess whether U.S. policy was affected by Communist Chinese efforts," Ms. Martin said.
But Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House Democratic leader, argued that the House had several standing committees that could handle the task.
House Republican aides also said lawmakers were drafting several amendments related to the China developments that might be attached to the Pentagon budget bill when it came to the floor later this week.
      
