
Four years after China's leaders crushed a movement by millions of prodemocracy protesters, they are facing a new challenge -- one that is quieter and less confrontational but eventually perhaps more serious.
The challenge is most visible in the form of hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes that are sprouting, as the Chinese say, like bamboo shoots after a spring rain.
Already millions of Chinese can hook in via satellite to the "global village," bypassing the Communist Party commissars and leaving them feuding over how to respond.
 
State Control Is Slipping
In short, the information revolution is coming to China, and in the long run it threatens to supplant the Communist revolution. 
For while political power here grows out of the barrel of a gun, as Mao once observed, it is sustained by the Communist Party's monopoly on news and propaganda -- a monopoly that is now crumbling.
"The Government has already lost control over information," a senior Chinese journalist said. 
"The leaders may not know it yet, but these days they simply can't control what people know."
Most satellite dishes are technically illegal, but hard-liners are finding themselves stymied in their efforts to organize a crackdown. 
Fundamentally, their frustrations reflect the headaches that the party encounters as it tries to maintain political controls while liberalizing the economy.
The information revolution in China began in the 1980's, with the spread of short-wave radios and the end of the ban on listening to broadcasts by the Voice of America and the British Broadcasting Corporation. 
But the pace has picked up enormously in the last couple of years.
 
Direct-Dial to the Outside
Fax machines are everywhere, even in private homes, and direct-dial international telephones are multiplying much more quickly than the number of State Security employees who bug such calls. 
The number of long-distance phone calls doubled from 1989 to 1991, when 1.7 billion were recorded.
Computers are spreading as well, so that a growing number of people can communicate via electronic bulletin boards and electronic mail. 
Young people exchange information with Chinese students studying in the United States, and they can even swap computer viruses -- like the one developed a couple of years ago that appears on a screen to ask whether the computer operator likes Prime Minister Li Peng.
If the person at the keyboard says no, regular work can continue. 
If the person says he likes the Prime Minister, the virus wipes out all the computer's memory.
In Fujian Province, opposite Taiwan, millions of Chinese aim their antennas eastward and tune in Taiwan television news and other programs. 
In Guangdong Province in the south, families watch Hong Kong television, sometimes with official cable systems.
 
Voices From Abroad
Short-wave radios have proliferated and are now an important source of news for dissidents and officials alike. 
Chinese listen not only to BBC and Voice of America but also to broadcasts from Australia, France and Taiwan.
The next technological wave may belong to satellite dishes, which first appeared in shops about a year ago and now seem to be everywhere. 
In Beijing alone, dozens of shops sell the dishes, typically about five feet in diameter, for about $500 including the receiver.
"Lots of customers can afford them now, because they're hardly more expensive than a video recorder," said Cao Hongxia, a manager at an electronics shop on the bustling Wangfujing Street. 
"I get people coming in who want to buy a hundred dishes and then resell them elsewhere."
The hard-liners staked out their position recently in a confidential Communist Party document prepared by the city of Beijing. 
The paper, one of a series about how to improve social order in Beijing as it applies to be host to the Olympics in the year 2000, uses harsh language to argue that satellite dishes can be used to watch pornography and reactionary programming.
 
Some Welcome the Change
Another briefing paper, prepared by Shanghai authorities and published in "Internal Reference Selections," a confidential magazine, takes the opposite view. 
It argues that if China is to modernize its economy, then it must give its people access to instant information and embrace new technologies like satellite television.
"We should have confidence in the viewers," the report declares. 
"We shouldn't seal the window just because a fly might slip in."
Senior Government leaders recently agreed in principle on a crackdown, and they have held inter-ministry meetings in the last week to decide how to proceed. 
But the authorities seem deeply constrained because of conflicts of interest within the Government.
The Army General Staff Department and the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television, for example, both turn a good profit by selling satellite equipment to the public. 
The Ministry of Electronics operates a factory that says it plans to build 60,000 to 70,000 satellite dishes this year.
It may seem surprising that Government ministries should manufacture and sell products that the same Government bans. 
But with China's push toward a market economy in recent years, this is not so unusual.
A clinic in southern China run by the family planning commission switched its focus when it discovered it could make more money as a fertility clinic. 
And a branch of the official Women's Association was caught last year running a prostitution racket.
 
A Shattered Monolith
As a result, the Government sometimes resembles not so much a Communist monolith as a disorganized conglomerate. 
The Politburo, acting as a fractious board of directors, often ignores tacit disobedience.
Even if the central Government ordered a major crackdown, it is unclear that it would be enforced outside the capital. 
Local governments, always lethargic about implementing edicts they dislike, are making money by running cable television systems that depend on satellite television.
"The leaders are trying to ban the dishes," said another Chinese journalist. 
"But I don't see how they can succeed."
Governments throughout the world are fretting over the same realization: their armies can repel invading troops but are useless against television broadcasts.
 
Banned Images, New Ideas
In Arab countries, dishes offer viewers a chance to see programs racier than those broadcast by local stations. 
In Taiwan, people tune in to mainland China television news programs. 
In India, millions of people are hooking into cable systems connected to satellite dishes, directly encountering foreign ideas and values that never bother to apply for a visa.
No one yet knows what the sociological or political consequences will be.
China passed a law in 1990 banning the use of satellite dishes to receive foreign television signals, except with permission from the police. 
But the law does not ban the sale of the dishes, nor even their installation, so long as they are used to receive China's own programming.
"When I bought my dish, the salesman told me that if the police ever asked, I should tell them that I use it only to watch China Central Television," said a 28-year-old businessman who bought his dish a few months ago. 
"The police know that's absurd, but they can't prove it."
The huge white dishes now perch on the roofs of apartment and office buildings in cities like Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, and sometimes even on the roofs of newly built peasant homes.
 
Grass-Roots Sabotage
The latest trend is for employers and "street committees" to erect one or two huge dishes and then hook up everyone in an apartment building for a fee. 
The street committees are supposed to be the Communist Party's grass-roots monitoring organizations, but they like to make money too.
"We don't have enough people to implement the law against satellite receivers," said Jin Guojun, an official of the Beijing Radio and Television Bureau, and simultaneously the president of the Beijing Cable TV Network. 
"And the best approach is not to ban satellite dishes and leave it at that, but rather to give the public an alternative -- like cable TV."
At last count, 1,800 cable television systems were operating in China, with 429 set up in just the first three months of this year.
Some simply show videos, but many show satellite programs, of which by far the most popular are those broadcast by Star Television in Hong Kong. 
A State Statistical Bureau survey several months ago found that 4.8 million households in China can receive Star Television -- presumably a significant underestimation, since the bureau counted only Government-authorized satellite dishes.
"There's a tremendous amount of potential as the economy of China opens up more and more," said Arnold Tucker, executive vice president of Star Television. 
"That's as true for satellite TV as for toothpaste or ads or bicycles or anything else."
 
Films, Sports and News
Star Television, which belongs to the stable of companies controlled by Li Ka-shing, a Hong Kong billionaire, gets its revenue only from commercials. 
It offers five channels: Chinese-language films and television serials; music television; English-language sports; English-language films and serials; and BBC Television news.
The most politically sensitive by far is BBC. 
Chinese are beginning to discover that the BBC broadcasts a separate Chinese-language soundtrack, and so they can watch the BBC television news in Chinese.
To be sure, most viewers are more interested in sit-coms or cops-and-robber shows than in news programs.
"What people want is entertainment," said Zhang Zedong, manager of the satellite sales counter at a state-owned shop. 
"They're not so interested in BBC, but rather in MTV and sports and Chinese-language serials."
Yet even mundane programming like Taiwanese sit-coms seems to have a corrosive effect on the authority of the Communist Party. 
The sit-coms offer a window into how people overseas live, underscoring the wealth and freedom abroad.
American cops-and-robbers shows sometimes play on Chinese television, and viewers often find the plot twists full of surprises -- like the moments when the bad guys are read their rights and allowed to call a lawyer. 
To some Chinese, that kind of novelty is more memorable than the plot itself.
