
A federal immigration court in Hawaii has ruled that the leader of a banned Chinese meditation group may remain in the United States, defying Beijing's demands that he be returned to face rape charges, a rights group said yesterday.
The decision is sure to irritate Chinese leaders and complicate law enforcement cooperation between the United States and China. 
It could also crimp relations newly smoothed by the Senate's passage of a trade bill this week granting China permanent normal trading rights.
However, the immigration court stopped short of granting political asylum to the meditation group's leader, Zhang Hongbao, who remains in Immigration and Naturalization Service custody at a prison on Guam, according to an attorney familiar with the case.
Mr. Zhang's attorney, Charles Kinnunen, was not available for comment, but he was quoted yesterday in a Guam newspaper as saying that Mr. Zhang would file an appeal. 
The newspaper said the immigration service would also appeal the case, apparently to have the withholding order removed so that Mr. Zhang can be sent back to China.
Mr. Zhang, 46, founded the meditation and healing group known as Zhong Gong in 1987, but dropped out of sight in the early 1990's. 
Like the better-known Falun Gong movement, Mr. Zhang's group promises to give followers supernatural powers. 
In Zhong Gong's case these include the ability to fly, see the future and fast for weeks at a time.
But China banned the sect last year as part of a crackdown on unauthorized spiritual movements that the Communist Party perceived as a threat to social order. 
The Chinese government has been hunting Mr. Zhang since then.
In a recent interview with Pacific Daily News on Guam, Mr. Zhang said that after he left China, supporters helped him hide in Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and the Philippines. 
He used a fake passport in January to enter Guam, where he was detained and requested political asylum. 
The island, a United States territory covered by American immigration laws, attracts many Chinese seeking asylum, often for fraudulent or flimsy reasons.
But Mr. Zhang appeared to have a very strong case. 
With Zhong Gong outlawed and many of the group's senior adherents arrested, there was little doubt that he would face harassment, if not imprisonment, even without the rape charges. 
It is also unlikely that Mr. Zhang would be given a fair trial on those charges.
Even so, with law enforcement cooperation growing, China asked the United States for help in returning him to face trial in China.
China and the United States have no extradition treaty, but a recent bilateral accord affords the framework for the return of people wanted on criminal charges by either side.
The United States has been trying to get two men now in Chinese custody who are wanted for the 1991 execution-style killing of five people in Chinatown in Boston. 
American officials may have decided against granting Mr. Zhang political asylum to mute the damage that keeping him on American soil might cause to law enforcement cooperation.
Mr. Zhang's attorney, Mr. Kinnunen, told the newspaper that the immigration court had instead granted Mr. Zhang a request for "withholding of removal" and relief under the United Nations' conventions on torture. 
The status will allow him to stay in the United States indefinitely but without the possibility of securing permanent resident status.
