
As senators resumed debate on a major bill establishing permanent trade relations with China, the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, said today that he would try to schedule a final vote by the end of next week.
The Senate has delayed consideration of the bill since the House approved it in May, drawing criticism from Democrats that Mr. Lott was trying to use one of President Clinton's top remaining legislative priorities as political leverage in the last days of the Congressional session.
But with the pro-Republican business community clamoring for results on a bill that would give a push to American farmers and corporations, the foot-dragging is ending. 
Senators will debate 7 to 10 amendments this week and next before voting on the measure, which would end Congress's annual review of China's trade status.
Unlike in the House, where supporters eked out a victory, passage in the Senate is all but assured. 
About 70 senators are expected to vote for the measure. 
But with only about five weeks left before lawmakers leave for the year, supporters say they need a clean bill, free from amendments that would force the measure back to the House for a second vote.
"Bluntly, a vote to amend is a vote to kill this bill and, with it, any chance that U.S. workers, farmers and businesses will benefit," said Senator William V. Roth Jr., a Delaware Republican who heads the Finance Committee.
Business lobbyists voiced cautious optimism that the Senate would reject all amendments, but remained unsure how the next two weeks would unfold. 
"My sense is we're in good shape, but the difficulties lie in that the process will be uncertain," said Nick Calio, a bill supporter who was President Bush's top legislative aide on Capitol Hill.
The biggest potential obstacle facing the bill is a measure sponsored by Senators Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, and Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey.
Their measure, which Mr. Thompson said could be offered as an amendment next week, would require the administration to monitor China's record on the spread of nuclear, chemical and missile proliferation. 
It would impose sanctions on China if there is evidence of exports of certain types of prohibited weaponry.
Mr. Thompson has sought to modify the bill in response to administration criticisms that the measure would hurt American businesses, infringe on the president's authority and focus too narrowly on China.
"There are enough senators who feel very strongly that they do not want to have to go through the House consideration again that it'll make it difficult for Senator Thompson," Mr. Lott said today. 
"On the other hand, China is still doing some very unsettling things. 
He's right on the substance."
Implicitly acknowledging he may not have the votes, Mr. Thompson said that if his measure failed, he was considering a second amendment that would simply condemn countries that traffic in nuclear, chemical or missile technology.
But Senator Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, the ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, said few senators want to vote on anything that could doom the trade bill. 
"There are an awful lot of Republicans and some Democrats who would like to vote for Thompson, but they don't want to be responsible for killing this," Mr. Biden said.
The Senate's action will overlap with President Clinton's scheduled meeting on Friday with President Jiang Zemin of China at the United Nations summit meeting in New York. 
The White House will prepare Mr. Clinton to telephone senators on specific amendments this week and next, if necessary, aides said.
But in contrast to Mr. Clinton's fiery rhetoric on campaign issues like education, health care and taxes, he and his top aides are deliberately keeping a low profile on the China bill to avoid inflaming Republican critics.
On the Senate floor today, friends and foes of the trade bill squared off in the first of several days of debate.
Senator Jesse Helms, a North Carolina Republican who heads the Foreign Relations Committee and opposes the trade measure, said the United States should not reward a Beijing government that intimidates its neighbors, sells sophisticated weapons to America's enemies and persecutes its own people for their religious beliefs.
Supporters like Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, warned that the "potential for estrangement and worse" with China is still real.
Mr. Moynihan for the first time suggested that racism might underlie some of the bill's opposition: "There is a long and rueful history in the United States of our racial antagonism to Chinese emigration to this country, which now appears as an antagonism to the arrival of Chinese goods."      
