
The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said today that testimony to the panel last week in closed session showed that the Chinese Government had planned to influence the 1996 election.
But the chairman, Senator Richard C. Shelby, Republican of Alabama, added that it remained unclear whether the efforts were actually carried out. 
His comments were based on testimony by Attorney General Janet Reno, Director George J. Tenet of Central Intelligence and Director Louis J. Freeh of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"I don't know if they influenced it, but I think they tried to influence it," Mr. Shelby said, speaking of China, in an interview aired today on "Fox News Sunday."
"I think that's two different things," Mr. Shelby said. 
"There's a lot of information out there that they were involved, trying to get involved. 
Of course, a lot of nations try to do that, but in this particular one, it went to China."
Mr. Shelby's remarks, the first public comment on the subject by the chairman of the influential intelligence committee, echoed findings of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, which last year concluded that Beijing had tried to influence American elections. 
But that committee, headed by Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, also uncovered scant evidence that the plan had been carried out.
Mr. Shelby's committee hearings last week were the first formal Congressional sessions on the China Plan, as it is known, since the disclosure that Johnny Chung, a Democratic Party fund-raiser, had told Justice Department investigators that a large portion of the nearly $100,000 that he raised for the Democrats came from an official with close ties to the Chinese Army.
The money came from Liu Chaoying, a Chinese Army lieutenant colonel who also is an official of a Chinese aerospace company. 
Her father was a high-ranking general and Communist Party official.
Mr. Shelby's hearings were the first of a number of planned Congressional inquiries into accusations concerning campaign fund-raising and the Clinton Administration's decision-making process in allowing the launching of civilian American satellites on Chinese rockets.
The Justice Department is looking into Mr. Chung's disclosures along with whether two satellite makers -- Loral Space and Communications and Hughes Electronics -- illegally gave China space expertise that allowed Beijing to more accurately aim its nuclear missiles. 
The issue of the transfer of technology arose after a Chinese rocket carrying a $200 million Loral satellite was launched in China on Feb. 
15, 1996, and exploded seconds later. 
China asked Loral and some experts from Hughes to conduct an independent review of the accident. 
It was in the course of the review that some Administration officials raised questions about how much information had been turned over to the Chinese.
Bernard L. Schwartz, the Loral chairman, contributed more than $1 million to Democratic political campaigns in the last election. 
Mr. Schwartz and other Loral officials denied the donations were an effort to influence Administration decisions on Loral's satellite deal.
Today, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Republican of Utah and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said he was willing to accept Mr. Schwartz's statement that he never tried to buy influence with the Administration. 
Mr. Hatch said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation" that while there is "some evidence that favors may have been granted" in the satellite deal, "we're not convinced at this point" that national security was compromised.
Last week, the intelligence committee uncovered evidence of conflicting views on the subject within the Administration. 
A C.I.A. review concluded that the companies had not disclosed information to China that damaged national security. 
But that report was contradicted by an intelligence arm of the State Department, which found that the disclosure had placed American security interests at risk.
The White House has pointed out that waivers to export civilian satellites for launching aboard Chinese rockets also were issued by the Bush and Reagan Administrations.      
