
Wang Wu Dong was a skinny man of 40 when he washed up on the shores of Queens five years ago, a passenger on the Golden Venture, a freighter loaded with a human cargo of 286 illegal Chinese immigrants that shuddered to a halt on a sandbar within sight of the city's lights.
He was apprehended that night and spent the next three years behind bars, trying unsuccessfully to win asylum on the ground he had been persecuted for resisting China's one-child policy. 
He finally gave up and went home, just months before Congress passed a law in 1996 that would have made his asylum claim more likely to succeed.
Mr. Wang's timing was miserably off once again last Saturday. 
He was among the 23 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard the Oops II, a 30-foot powerboat named with a cruelly flippant aptness. 
It ran aground in dense fog off the Jersey Shore, leaving the men to scatter in the darkened streets of the wealthy seaside area where they were picked up by police.
Lawyers, advocates, officials and a fellow Golden Venture passenger interviewed yesterday remarked on Mr. Wang's ill fortune, which was first reported yesterday in The Star-Ledger of Newark. 
But they tipped their hats to his determination to get to America.
"To me, it's unbelievable he went through all of that, then turned around to come back again," said Beverly Church, a paralegal who became a mother hen to many of the Golden Venture passengers during their three-year detention in York, Pa. 
"It tells me how much he'll go through to be free."
Mr. Wang's lawyers said he would definitely apply for asylum again, citing what he says was his wife's forced sterilization. 
"The law has changed significantly and I think he has a good case," said Robert Porges, the Chinatown lawyer whose firm is representing 20 of the 23 detainees.
Mr. Porges said all his clients would ask for asylum, some on the basis of China's one-child policy and some contending they were persecuted because they are Christians.
Hearings for Mr. Wang and the other 22 men apprehended after the Oops II grounded off Bay Head, N.J., will begin today in Elizabeth, N.J., where the immigrants are being detained in the custody of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Immigration officials said all the men from the Oops II would be charged with entering the country illegally. 
The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights gave a briefing to the detainees at the Elizabeth center on Wednesday, explaining the process to them. 
Immigration officials said that at the first hearing, a judge would inform the Chinese of the charges against them. 
Hearings on the merit of their cases will probably be held within six months.
The authorities are still searching for Jason Choi, 38, the captain of the Oops II. 
Mr. Choi is a Korean who was questioned and released the night the boat ran aground but before the Bay Head police realized it had been carrying illegal immigrants. 
Mr. Choi's former roommate at an apartment at 147-15 Northern Boulevard, in Flushing, Queens, told The Korea Times newspaper that Mr. Choi last lived in the apartment from February until late April and had said he came from Korea about one year ago.
The men who were passengers on Mr. Choi's boat, however, were settling into detention last night. 
Mr. Wang, who identified himself to his lawyers as one of the Golden Venture passengers, conferred with them about how best to fight deportation to China.
Russell A. Bergeron Jr., a spokesman for the immigration service in Washington, said he could not confirm whether there was a Golden Venture passenger on board the Oops II because of Federal privacy laws.
Immigration officials said the each man on the Oops II may have paid the smugglers as much as $40,000 for the journey to New York. 
The men, from 18 to 45 years old, came from Fujian Province, home to many of New York City's illegal Chinese immigrants.
When Mr. Wang first arrived in the United States five years ago, he had little chance of winning asylum on the ground that he had been persecuted under China's population control policies.
Had he come a year earlier, when Bush Administration policies were in effect, he would have had a chance. 
But during the Clinton years, immigration judges routinely ruled that China was not persecuting the immigrants, but enforcing a national policy designed to fight overpopulation.
Mr. Wang spent three years behind bars in York, Pa., in the custody of immigration authorities. 
Like many of the other men, he began passing the tedious hours by using toilet paper, water and glue to help make papier-mache creations like eagles, dragons and Statues of Liberty. 
But as months and years passed, he became discouraged, say people who knew him then.
Ms. Church, who regularly visited the York County prison where Mr. Wang was being held, said he worried about his family in China, especially since he was unable to work and send money home. 
"He was of no value to anyone in prison," she said.
His asylum petition had been denied. 
And the legal battle being waged in Federal court to win new hearings for the Golden Venture detainees seemed to drag on endlessly. 
The immigrants' legal advocates maintained that the men had been unfairly denied refuge in the United States because the Government was using them to send a message to smugglers.
Finally, in February 1996, Mr. Wang gave up. 
He asked to be sent back to China.
"Too much depression," said Steven Shi, 27, a Golden Venture passenger who won an artist's visa last month that allows him to remain in the United States. 
"Depression made him go back."
In September 1996, Congress passed a new law backed by anti-abortion Republicans that made opposing China's one-child policy a potential reason for a grant of asylum.
It is that law that gives Mr. Wang's lawyers hope that his luck has finally changed. 
Already yesterday, Mr. Wang was gaining some potentially important political allies, including some of the members of Congress who worked to change the law and lobbied on behalf of the Golden Venture detainees.
"It's obvious that because of the practice of forced sterilization and human rights violations, these people will do anything to escape," said Representative Bill Goodling, a Republican whose district included the York prison. 
"That he would risk being reimprisoned so soon after he went back shows you how unbearable the situation is."
