
In a feat of engineering that China's leaders turned into a major political event, an army of workers and engineers diverted the Yangtze River from its natural course today, clearing the way for construction to begin on the world's biggest dam.
President Jiang Zemin came to the vast construction site here, dusty with convoys of gigantic dump trucks, to preside over a grandiose ceremony where he declared the project, known as the Three Gorges Dam, to be a sign of China's emergence as a world power.
"Blocking the Yangtze is a great moment in the modernization of our country," Mr. Jiang proclaimed, noting that China's emperors could only dream of taming the Yangtze, the third-longest river in the world. 
"It vividly proves once again that socialism is superior in organizing people to do big jobs."
The New China News Agency, in a remarkable outpouring of nationalist sentiment, called today's diversion "the most exciting moment for the Chinese people," and hailed the dam as the most significant achievement in engineering since the Great Wall was built 2,000 years ago.
Yet, like the Great Wall, the Three Gorges Dam may be as symbolic as it is practical. 
Although engineers on the site today described how the dam will control floods that have ravaged central China for centuries, these experts gushed even more about how the dam's tremendous scale -- 600 feet high and more than a mile wide -- represents the nation's contemporary greatness.
By insisting on an enormous size, rather than building several smaller and safer dams nearby as some engineers have proposed, the Communist Party leadership is building not just a dam but a political monument to itself.
To a leadership built on a combination of brute intimidation and troubling insecurity, a tremendous physical project like the Three Gorges Dam contributes to the Communist Party's mystique of omnipotence.
Today's celebration of the dam, with exploding firecrackers and tooting boat horns that brought cheers from 5,000 onlookers, was clearly an effort to unite people behind a costly and controversial project by making it sound patriotic to do so.
Even if the authorities exaggerated the significance of the day's event, the hundreds of millions watching on television were doubtless a willing audience when it came to waving the flag.
Although the leadership billed it as a blocking of the river, for instance, what the workmen at the site actually did today was to complete a temporary dam that diverted the river flow to a side channel.
Five years from now, when this next stage of the dam is complete, the river flow itself will be blocked and the water level on the upstream side will start to rise.
However, today's ceremony also drew attention to the scope of the Three Gorges project, which is breathtaking.
At a cost officially estimated at $25 billion, and likely to climb far higher, the dam will create a lake 350 miles long, forcing 1.2 million people to leave their homes and generating 18,200 megawatts of electricity, equivalent to what 50 million tons of coal could produce a year.
China's leaders have fought off environmental concerns, so grave that the United States' Export-Import Bank declined to finance any part of the project, and have overridden objections from protectors of countless cultural relics and temples on the riverbanks that will be submerged in the coming years.
Not even the widespread mourning for the eventual loss of the Three Gorges themselves, the strikingly beautiful ravines that are as famous in China as the Grand Canyon is in the United States, has stopped the leadership from forging ahead.
All public debate on the Three Gorges Dam has been banned by the Government since 1989, leaving concerns about the project only half-answered.
"If the Three Gorges project is such a fantastic idea, then why is the Chinese Government so unwilling to allow a public debate on the subject?" said Dai Qing, one of the few critics who still dare to speak out. 
"If a public debate is not allowed, then why not at least allow scientists and specialists to discuss the pros and cons of the project?"
Today's ceremony seemed to take no notice of differing opinions. 
It was held in a gigantic reviewing stand, backed by a 13,000-square-foot Chinese national flag and lined with 14,000 potted flowers.
As a bulldozer pushed in the last pile of boulders and soil that blocked the river's flow at 3:30 P.M., a roar of cheers went up from the engineers in red hard hats who have toiled day and night in recent months to make today's deadline.
"The damming of the Yangtze River is successful!" shouted Prime Minister Li Peng, who has been the project's most ardent supporter.
If the authorities seemed to create the impression that the Three Gorges Dam would dam the Yangtze River for the first time, that was misleading. 
Just 25 miles downstream, the smaller Gezhou Dam won that distinction in 1981.
One of the biggest environmental concerns about the Three Gorges Dam is that the enormous quantity of silt carried in the Yangtze -- estimated at 530 tons a year -- will be clogged up by the dam and will turn the lake it creates into a kind of giant mudpie.
With billions of gallons of raw sewage still pumped into the river each year upstream at Chongqing, a big industrial center, there is also concern that stagnant water will be particularly polluting.
Officials in charge of the dam insist that all those problems will be handled. 
Whatever risks exist, they argue, are outweighed by the potential benefits, even if their arguments sometimes tend to hyperbole.
"Basically, no technical problem is insoluble," said He Gong, one of the chief engineers in change of building the temporary dam. 
"The Three Gorges project is a great project, capable of producing great economic results, flood control and generation of electricity."
Although the authorities insist that the people who must move are happy about it, complaints abound that resettlement payments -- a few hundred dollars per family at most -- are sometimes getting delayed in the pockets of local officials.
Another concern, discussed at length in the official press over the last week, is the danger of flooding if the Three Gorges Dam was somehow to become a target of a terrorist or during wartime.
Official reports went so far as to say the dam could withstand conventional weapons because of the thickness of its concrete walls. 
Even if the dam were destroyed under nuclear attack, the official press reported, flooding could be controlled to some degree by adjusting water levels in the reservoir.
In a way, today's celebration of the Three Gorges Dam marked the last act in a remarkable series of triumphant political events for Mr. Jiang this year.
After a smooth transition following the death of Deng Xiaoping in February, Mr. Jiang presided over a nearly seamless handover in Hong Kong in July, a victorious showing at the 15th Communist Party congress in September and then his recent state visit to the United States.
Above all, the Three Gorges project is an opportunity to boost the national pride that seems to lie just beneath the surface of so many Chinese.
As Prime Minister Li put it, diverting the Yangtze "is an event that not only inspires people, butdemonstrates the greatness of the achievement of China's development."
