
As Chinese and Russian warplanes performed ear-splitting acrobatics at China's first international air show recently, Su Bichun was working inside the exhibition hall trying to sell to any willing buyer a supersonic cruise missile system that the Chinese Army does not want, possibly because it does not work.
Ms. Su, a metallurgical engineer, said that with a 1,600-pound high-explosive warhead, the C-301 cruise missile is an excellent weapon against large shipping targets.
"Including an aircraft carrier?" she was asked.
"Yes, including aircraft carriers -- American aircraft carriers," she added, breaking into a big smile.
As Ms. Su was trying to make a sale, just down the road thousands of soldiers from a Chinese military garrison here were producing the 10 tons of bean curd they sell each day in food stores all over China's richest province, Guangdong, formerly known as Canton. 
A nearby artillery unit raises chickens and pigs.
As China emerges as a power in Asia, its military, the People's Liberation Army, appears comically distracted by its own commercial pursuits while its combat forces remain technologically backward in weapons and military doctrine.
The rest of Asia, nonetheless, is worried, and with good reason.
More than at any time in recent decades, China is stirring anxiety among its neighbors as a new generation of political leaders give signs that they are willing to use military force -- especially to vanquish the independence movement on Taiwan should it gain power there -- even if it would result in catastrophe. 
China's belligerence became clear last March, when it fired ballistic missiles at Taiwan's shipping lanes in a warning to voters there who support independence.
And now, as the military's overall influence is rising at the end of the Deng Xiaoping era, so are defense budgets to finance a modernization drive that could give China a much more potent military in the 21st century.
Despite its claim to be the largest standing army in the world with three million soldiers and 4,000 combat aircraft, the Chinese military is still equipped like a fighting force from the 1950's, with a shrinking, outdated navy. 
If anything, Beijing's military stature derives from its small nuclear force -- about the size of France's -- whose missiles could reach Moscow or Los Angeles.
The military's increasing importance and its critical role in planning for a future Taiwan crisis will only insure that China's uniformed chiefs will play a pivotal role in any succession drama that unfolds after the death of Mr. Deng.
"Even if we say that the military does not aspire to play an overt political role," said Jonathan D. Pollack, a specialist on the Chinese military at the Rand Corporation in California, "we can see at critical junctures in Chinese political history precisely how they have played that role and I don't think there would be any hesitancy to doing it again."
Already, the military's growing influence may be adding to subtle pressures on untested civilian leaders to flex the country's military muscle in foreign policy disputes.
"These are not secure leaders and they have to prove their mettle on questions of sovereignty," said David Shambaugh, director of Asian studies at George Washington University. 
"They think of force as an instrument of diplomacy and so they may be more prone to act rashly because of the political succession that is going on."
America's dispatch of aircraft carriers to the waters off Taiwan during the crisis last March sobered those same leaders. 
Now, even as China seeks to avert new diplomatic confrontations with the United States, there are indications that Chinese military planners are putting new emphasis on weapons and strategies to counter American naval forces in the Pacific, especially aircraft carriers. 
China's strategy, American officials say, reflects the sense of anger over America's intervention and a sense of resignation that the chances of a conflict in the future have increased.
"If they are presented with a direct challenge on Taiwan, I do not think they would hesitate to use force, and the threat of an American intervention would not deter them," said Mr. Shambaugh, echoing an assessment of the Chinese leadership held by many outside specialists today. 
"The consequences, of course, would be a disaster for Asia," he added.
 
The Weaknesses
Impressive Shell But Hollow Core
Chinese military power today, as an instrument that could be wielded beyond China's borders, is largely an illusion and will remain so for the foreseeable future, most experts agree. 
With few exceptions, China's armed forces are poorly equipped and trained and would be easily defeated in any encounter with modern forces outside the mainland. 
Chinese submarines can be heard by sonars all the way to Hanoi, and the Chinese Air Force will not fly near its own ground forces for fear of being shot down, American experts say.
Three Defense Intelligence Agency analysts who reviewed China's 1996 military exercises off Taiwan asserted in an article in October that "as it stands," the Chinese forces pose only a "nuisance threat" to countries on China's periphery "or to military forces in the region."
Former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and a group of senior retired American officers said as much in an independent assessment 1994 when they found that, "The overall modernization of China's military forces and the acquisition of the capacity to project military power at significant distances from China's borders is well in the future."
During one Chinese Air Force exercise last summer, a large number of warplanes were set face-to-face in a mock battle. 
But when the pilots discovered they would have to fly "in unknown conditions" where targets would not be identified in advance and where electronic warfare would be employed, they panicked.
An account of their anxiety in an army newspaper had them asking, "How far should we go with these unknown conditions?"
When the pilots slipped into the command center "to make a site survey of the landmarks" near their targets, top officers rebuked them. 
"During future wars, who will bring you to familiarize yourselves with the landmarks in the enemy's rear?" the commanders asked.
The episode is all too revealing, experts say, of China's military backwardness.
"China can put a very intimidating force opposite Taiwan with 600 or 700 aircraft, but there is a difference between that and being able to launch those aircraft on day two," a former United States Air Force analyst said. 
"Without reconnaissance, without sustainability, without communications and so many things that they do not have, they have no way of knowing what is going on two minutes after the first shell is fired."
With the gaping technological inadequacies that exist today, much of the Chinese military could quickly be detected and destroyed by the battlefield sensors and weapons demonstrated by the West during the Persian Gulf war.
A retired American naval officer, Rear Adm. Eric A. McVadon, told a conference of government and academic specialists in September that the Chinese Navy "could be destroyed virtually at will whether in port or at sea" and "even the units that have received modern equipment are not capable of technologically advanced warfare."
Admiral McVadon was the senior military analyst in the United States Embassy in Beijing during the 1980's.
 
The Strengths
A Budding Interest In New Techniques
Despite the apparent weaknesses in China's military, Central Intelligence Agency analysts have found in recent years that "pockets of excellence" are developing in China's armed forces, where elite units are getting better training and weapons for sophisticated mobile warfare.
In addition, Chinese scientists, assisted by Russia and Israel, are mastering many of the latest defense technologies in their research institutes, where they are building prototypes for supersonic fighters, missiles and battlefield platforms that would give Chinese forces more of an all-weather fighting capability with weapons that could detect and destroy targets beyond the horizon.
A new emphasis on "power projection" has even revived speculation that China might again be shopping for an aircraft carrier, this time from France, which is looking for a buyer for the soon-to-be decommissioned carrier Clemenceau.
Israel is said to be helping China develop an airborne warning and control plane similar to the American Awacs. 
And Russia has sold advanced diesel attack submarines as well as a production line for the Su-27 fighter, which could be activated in the next decade. 
China has been working on a supersonic fighter prototype resembling the American F-16, though technical difficulties and financing could delay it indefinitely.
Also, China has been trying since the mid-1980's to develop an aerial refueling system to extend the range of its Air Force, but as the former Air Force analyst said, after a decade "they are still fooling around with the prototypes."
China's high-technology weapons thus remain largely on drawing boards. 
Western experts say that China would have to undertake a huge spending program over 10 to 15 years to bring these technologies into its armed forces, requiring a major diversion of resources from the civilian economy, something many Chinese would oppose.
"I am very skeptical of the P.L.A. being able to make the kind of concerted, integrated effort that it would take," said June Tuefel Dreyer, a specialist on the Chinese military at the University of Miami. 
"They can train some elite units, but I don't think they are going to be able to leave their business interests long enough to do anything on a larger scale."
 
The Strategy
An Eye on Taiwan In Making a Plan
Today, teams of planners on the general staff of the People's Liberation Army in Beijing are said by Chinese and Western officials to be working in secret on a large-scale review of how Chinese military forces could overwhelm or wear down Taiwan's defenses without an invasion and of how China might prevent the United States from intervening in a mainland assault across the Taiwan Strait.
If China has learned anything in decades of conflict with Taiwan, it is that an all-out invasion of Taiwan is well beyond its capabilities. 
The joke commonly heard among Western military experts is that a Chinese assault on Taiwan would have to be called "the million man swim."
Instead, the army is studying blockade strategies that might employ some combination of submarine forces and mine warfare backed up by ballistic and cruise missile batteries on the mainland and other cruise missile systems aboard warships.
"During Mao's time, the idea of attacking Taiwan was just talk," a member of one of China's most prominent military families said in a rare encounter with a foreign journalist this fall. 
"But now we must plan for this; if Taiwan declares independence, no Chinese leader can tolerate it and stay in power, so the military must build itself up, improving its air and sea forces to prepare for a military attack on Taiwan."
He cited the strategy of Mao calling for war to be waged in stages. 
"We can blockade, we can absorb blows and we can counterattack," he said. 
"The Chinese military will concentrate on strike weapons because Taiwan is a small place; they have a lot of weapons from the Americans, and they have spent a lot of money, but when the war starts, they will not be able to get spares and they will not be able to maintain these complicated systems."
He added that "they will be waiting for support while the Congress is debating whether to get involved."
In the Taiwan crisis of 1996, though, the United States mounted an unambiguous response when China escalated its belligerence with missile firings. 
And Chinese planners understand that any future confrontation with Taiwan will have to deal with American aircraft carriers.
"They would like to devise a strategy that would make the President and American military leaders think twice about sending aircraft carriers," said Admiral McVadon. 
"The Chinese believe that Americans are unwilling to sustain large numbers of casualties in a conflict. 
They may be trying to devise a scheme that will threaten many U.S. lives," such as the 6,000-member crew of an American carrier. 
"The carrier is not the only thing that is troublesome to them, but they seem to focus on that, and I think that is revealing."
It is seen as equally alarming that any military confrontation over Taiwan, even one that did not lead to all-out war, could easily disrupt Taiwan's shipping lanes and much of its commerce and incite civilian panic in a way that could inflict grievous harm to Taiwan's economy. 
No aircraft carrier could prevent that.
 
The Distraction
In Business Focus, Different Drummer
Whether China is a military Goliath, the larger problem in motivating the rank and file to build a stronger force is that for tens of thousands of officers and hundreds of thousands of soldiers who are living better than at any time since they "liberated" the mainland in 1949, the business of war would be getting in the way of -- well, business.
From vegetable farming, to pharmaceuticals to fiber optics, the People's Liberation Army and its related defense industries have over the last decade "dived into the sea" of business, as the Chinese like to say, marshaling obsolete production lines and jury-rigging new ones to produce anything that sells in a chaotic industrial pattern that seems, in large part, beyond the control of top military and civilian leaders in Beijing.
Military commanders have opened coal mines, karaoke bars and pirate compact disc factories. 
They have built luxury housing complexes, hotels and office towers and hived off part of their radio frequencies to set up cellular phone networks.
"At the end of the day, this is an army that is more interested in making money than it is in being the guardian of the national interest," said Mr. Pollack of Rand. 
One American intelligence officer likes to call it "the world's first genuinely entrepreneurial military force."
During the last three years, President Jiang Zemin and the Central Military Commission have been trying to get military units below the group army level to get out of business. 
But the loopholes are extensive.
"It's entrenched," said an American military official who served in Beijing. 
"They have to come up with a third of their own budget so they cannot afford to get rid of these businesses."
In October, Gen. Chen Tianlin, chief of the Guangzhou Military Region's general logistics department, bragged in an army newspaper that every regiment, every brigade and every company under his command was setting up "production bases" to raise vegetables, fish, pigs and chickens for the general market and for export.
General Chen noted that an artillery brigade sold 10,000 pigs last year for a profit of more than $40,000; and during the first eight months of this year, a military base in Hainan Island made $36,000 selling eggs from its chicken farm and chicken feed.
In this tapestry of indiscipline, it seems impossible that China's military forces could pose a threat to anyone, yet few doubt Beijing's determination.
"The whole Chinese strategy," said Ms. Dreyer at the University of Miami, "is to blow enough smoke to convince people like me that there is going to be a big, scary Chinese military by 2010, and, therefore, the United States had better accommodate them" on Taiwan and other points of potential confrontation.
The Chinese military, she said, is "potentially scary," but she added, "Making them 10 feet tall is exactly what they want."
