
In a small brick home on a leafy side street in this city, a dozen idealistic young men gathered around a scuffed wooden table 75 years ago today to launch China's Communist Party, or so the history books say.
One of the participants, Mao Zedong, then just 27, later rose to lead the Communist Party through civil war to make it the ruling power of the land. 
For decades, Mao directed efforts to install the party's authority in every office, factory and school, creating a juggernaut that could spread the party's word to every household and monitor the daily activities of every worker or student.
Today, the old building is a museum to a lost ideal. 
Virtually no one believes in Communism anymore.
As economic growth eats away at old systems and habits, the Communist Party's influence in daily life has receded sharply in the past few years, particularly among young urban dwellers -- the kind, in their 20's, who might be setting up a political party if they lived in a different era. 
In the most modern sectors of Chinese society, such as securities firms, trading companies, banks and real estate dealers, the once-omnipresent party has almost no presence at all.
The party still has an iron grip on the national levers of political power. 
Yet its ground-level organization seems to be falling farther and farther out of touch with the work and life styles of the men and women who increasingly drive China's bustling economy.
"No one with any ability joins the party today," said Yang Jun, a 26-year-old computer salesman who likes gold-rimmed glasses and polo shirts. 
"My company has 80 employees, but there's no party organization. 
If there are any party members, I don't think any of them would admit it."
Not long ago, a college graduate like Mr. Yang would be assigned a job by one party official and supervised in a new workplace by another. 
If he wanted to get married, his choice of spouse would also have to be approved by a superior. 
A neighborhood committee would keep an eye on his home, noting who came and went.
In contrast, today Mr. Yang lives relatively free from party interference. 
He chose his own job and home -- he shares a two-bedroom apartment in downtown Shanghai with a co-worker -- and doesn't worry about who approves of his girlfriend, or when she stays over. 
"I haven't introduced her to my parents yet," he said, a little sheepishly.
Party officials do not seem overly concerned with individualistic computer jocks like Mr. Yang, though their indifference would disappear in a flash if he organized any anti-Government activity. 
But they concede that they are having difficulty setting up party cells in free-market sectors of the economy.
"New companies are being set up faster than we can keep track of," acknowledged Zhou Heling, who as deputy director of the organization department in Shanghai's Communist Party oversees the establishment of new party units. 
"We are encountering a lot of problems with these new economic entitites.
"Joint ventures are very complicated," Mr. Zhou added, referring to companies with both domestic and foreign investment. 
"Sometimes they register but don't operate; sometimes they operate without registering. 
It's hard to keep up with them."
Paradoxically, as party organizations lose touch with China's young professionals, they are aggressively enrolling more new young members than ever before. 
Perhaps it is to co-opt as many young people as possible; perhaps it is simply to pad the fiction that the party is getting ever stronger.
"Young people are the key," Mr. Zhou said. 
"Last year, 54 percent of our new members were under 35.
In addition to the 19,600 35-and-unders who joined the party in Shanghai last year, Mr. Zhou said proudly, 110,000 more people applied, up 20,000 from the previous year. 
Altogether, there are 1.14 million members of the Communist Party in Shanghai, a city of 14 million, and 57 million nationwide.
But numbers can be deceiving.
A 35-year-old currency trader at a leading Chinese investment firm recalled how a manager at his company recently pressed him to apply for party membership, simply because an order had come down to step up recruitment.
"But I don't want to have to pay the party fees," the trader protested, as he remembered it later, because he would owe 3 percent of his $3,000 monthly salary in fees.
"You don't have to join, just apply. 
We need to raise our numbers," pleaded the manager. 
"Help me out."
The trader agreed, on the condition that the manager made sure his application would be rejected. 
But then the trader had trouble finding any colleagues to write him a recommendation, because none were familiar with the party line that needs to be regurgitated in an application, and eventually gave up.
The implications of this sometimes-comical attitude toward party enrollment, like the political future of China itself, are anyone's guess. 
One of the puzzles of modern China is whether the Communist Party, if it remains in power, will simply decide to shed its outdated name.
Even a leading party organizer like Mr. Zhou does not sound much like a Communist when he discusses the establishment of party cells in a company.
"Our primary concern is money-making ability," he said. 
"Setting up a party organization should be done in parallel with business functions. 
We will not get in the way."
Outside the museum where the Communist Party's first meeting was held, Wu Xiaoyong, a 40-year-old party member who arrived with a busload of colleagues, pondered the future of the organization.
"Not too clear," he said. 
"Young people have a lot more choices today than we did."
      
