
Upstairs at the Hujiang Beauty Salon, as hairdressers fussed over eight women seated regally before the mirrors and bright lights, two dozen other women waited anxiously on a long puffy sofa, in a various stages of preparation for the big day.
Every one a bride or a bridesmaid, many looked like princesses-in-the-making. 
Turban-towels floated on the heads of some, and cheesecloth adorned the faces of others, with holes cut out at the eyes, dark with mascara, and at the mouth, shiny red with lipstick.
Wan Jingjing, delayed between shampoo and blow dry, twirled a finger through the wet, stringy hair that fell limply around her shoulders as she considered the question: why did she, like all the other women in the salon, and like innumerable thousands of women in Shanghai, choose to wed on this particular day, May 18?
"Everyone knows what today is!"
Miss Wan, 24, shouted, her tiny frame shifting stiffly in a glittering silver dress with see-through black sleeves, a warm-up for the three outfits she planned to wear at a banquet that evening. 
"I will get rich!"
"Five-one-eight," or "wu yao ba," as the Chinese call the 18th day of the fifth month, sounds close enough to "wo yao fa," or "I will get rich," that it is considered as good as an omen can be. 
Sure as "I will get rich" is a motto for contemporary Shanghai, May 18 has become the city's most popular day of the year to marry.
To plan a wedding the traditional way, consulting an ancient Chinese almanac that marks lucky and unlucky days each year, is still socially acceptable. 
But many young couples are eager, without negating the old way, to add a modern twist by actually articulating their hope for riches.
In most societies, a wedding day is a time of celebration for a family and of nervous exhaustion for bride and groom. 
Yet the full flavor of a wedding day -- in traditional China it was sometimes the first time a bride and groom laid eyes on each other -- virtually disappeared during recent decades of austere Communist rule, when a trip to the local registrar and a small banquet at home were the norm.
In China today, as money-making takes ever fuller force, a showy side is bound to spill out in grander and more extravagant ways, particularly in Shanghai, the nation's financial capital.
On May 18, it was spill, spill, spill. 
Before noon, Cadillac and Lexus limousines with red roses taped across the hood and tinsel-like streamers in tow cruised Huaihai Road, Shanghai's major shopping thoroughfare, as if to celebrate an unbridled enthusiasm for the day's activities. 
Beauty salons like the Hujiang were packed, most of them booked solid weeks beforehand.
"You can't really have a decent wedding today for less than 150,000 renminbi," or about $18,000, said Li Jun, a clothing store manager who helped pay for his nephew's banquet, even though he makes $350 a month. 
When Mr. Li was married in 1981, he said, it cost about $800. 
"And that was considered fancy."
In Shanghai, many couples now follow elaborate customs, many of them adopted from Hong Kong and Taiwan: Western-style wedding gowns and suits, a set of photos taken weeks beforehand so that copies can be shown on the wedding day, four hours of hairdressing in the morning, a limousine escort in the afternoon, a multi-course banquet at a restaurant in the evening, and a final party at home with bawdy party games.
The Communist authorities, while no longer banning such extravagance, seem uncomfortable with it. 
An editorial in The Liberation Daily of Shanghai warned against putting too much store on May 18.
"Fixing May 18 as an auspicious day is groundless," the newspaper declared. 
"Let us advocate a civilized, healthy and scientific way of life, and oppose bad, stupid and backward customs and habits."
With no actual wedding ceremony before or after a banquet, most couples are legally married when they register a few days beforehand at a government office.
A spokesman for the Ministry of Civil Affairs said the number of marriages performed in Shanghai is an official secret, but a handful of beauty salon and restaurant managers agreed that May 18 is the undisputed favorite.
At Meilongzhen, an elegant restaurant on Nanjing Road with traditional Chinese decor that makes it a favorite for wedding parties, 150 friends and relatives crowded the main dining room as a groom dutifully went around to each table to toast each guest with a sip of beer. 
By the 10th table, he was having trouble standing.
His bride, dressed in a red, floor-length moire gown, was trying to light a cigarette for each male guest, most of whom reacted as expected by blowing out the match several times to enjoy her company a few moments longer.
Although the idea of getting married on May 18 is that the bride and groom will lock in a shot at getting rich, Shanghai's big-spending ways are actually making the owners of hair salons, restaurants, florists and cake shops the ones most likely to profit from that day, in part because they can charge inflated prices.
"We're full today," said Cai Jirong, manager at the Hujiang Beauty salon. 
"I like May 18."
      
