
After a final round of negotiations failed to yield a workable compromise, Shanghai's Bureau of Culture refused tonight to let a classic Chinese opera be staged as scheduled next month at the Lincoln Center Festival in New York.
Nigel Redden, director of the festival, said late tonight that Shanghai officials maintained that the production of the opera, "The Peony Pavilion," would have to be extensively revised to better reflect Chinese tradition before it would be allowed to travel to the festival. 
Although Mr. Redden was willing to accept a staging with minor changes, the officials insisted on a new set of rehearsals that would make it impossible for the opera, a 20-hour production that was to have been presented in several segments, to open on July 7 as planned.
"They have effectively canceled the project," said Mr. Redden, who flew to China on Monday to try to negotiate a way out of the impasse. 
"This is a tremendous loss for us, but it's even worse for people in the company, who worked day and night for so long to pull this together."
Mr. Redden said he planned to leave Shanghai on Thursday night. 
Yet he still expressed the hope that President Bill Clinton or Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who are to arrive in China that evening, would intervene and persuade Shanghai officials to reverse their decision.
Ma Bomin, the director of Shanghai's Bureau of Culture, said she blocked "The Peony Pavilion" because it was a national treasure that needed to be protected from unorthodox interpretations like the one Lincoln Center wanted to perform.
"This is a precious piece of Chinese culture," Ms. Ma, a former opera singer, said in an interview. 
"If we are going to show it to the world, it must be presented in line with Chinese tradition."
Speaking publicly about "The Peony Pavilion" for the first time since its staging was suddenly thrown into doubt last week, Ms. Ma defended her bureau's right to be the arbiter of what is consistent with Chinese tradition. 
Her comments reflected the doggedness with which opera buffs in China can try to guard their turf.
"We have the power to decide how an opera is performed," Ms. Ma said. 
"You must understand, our standards for Kunqu Opera and Peking Opera are not the same as for other arts. 
I am an artist, and I have a responsibility to see it done properly."
At Lincoln Center, Beverly Sills, the chairman, and Nathan Leventhal, the president, issued a statement saying that the Bureau of Culture's position "makes it physically impossible for Lincoln Center to receive the production in time to mount and present it as scheduled."
They praised "the superb artistry of the Shanghai Kunqu Opera Company," which was to have performed the work, and congratulated the director of the production, Chen Shi-Zheng, "for his brilliant and evocative conception."
Lincoln Center will explore legal steps, Mr. Leventhal said. 
"We own the production," he said, referring to Lincoln Center and its partners in the commissioning consortium. 
"They don't."
Ms. Ma brushed aside arguments that the opera be judged by Lincoln Center, which is financing the production with co-producers in France, Australia and Hong Kong, where the opera is also scheduled to appear. 
She also discounted the importance of a contract that she approved last year granting Mr. Chen full artistic freedom in its staging.
"We agreed to the contract, and we thought the production was a good idea," Ms. Ma said. 
"But now we find that it includes elements that cannot be allowed, unhealthy elements that violate China's cultural exchange regulations."
With President Clinton arriving for a nine-day visit to China on Thursday, Mr. Redden expressed hope that Chinese and United States officials would be eager to resolve a dispute involving a cultural exchange, especially since Shanghai is now trying to present itself as a vibrant financial and cultural center.
Unless some senior official intervenes, Ms. Ma is having her way. 
"I don't see what this has to do with President Clinton's visit," she said. 
"This is about art, and the debate should remain about art."
Ms. Ma cites three artistic objections to the modern staging of "The Peony Pavilion": that the production violates the spirit of the author Tang Xianzu, who wrote the opera in 1598; it violates the specific rules of Kunqu Opera, one of China's most refined and classic strands of traditional opera; and it introduces what she called "unhealthy elements," which she defines as "feudal," "superstitious" and "pornographic."
Yet as Ms. Ma spoke, it became clear that her biggest problem was with Mr. Chen, a native of China who moved to the United States in 1987 and became an American citizen.
Mr. Chen's innovative staging of the opera uses an elaborate set -- complete with a duck pond, water wheel and singing birds -- in what he described as an effort to recreate the atmosphere of daily life in China for ordinary people in the Ming Dynasty.
Ms. Ma and other elders of Shanghai's culture bureaucracy, accustomed to simple staging and more stylized acting, are also apparently accustomed to getting the changes they demand when they preview a piece of theater. 
Ms. Ma expressed surprise and some resentment when Mr. Chen resisted some changes she sought after seeing a dress rehearsal this month.
"We understand the director has the right to interpret the opera, but the spirit must be true to the original," Ms. Ma said. 
"When we made suggestions, he said he would accept some, but not others."
Wrinkling her nose in disgust, she delivered what seemed to be the most serious criticism she could make about a fellow artist of classic opera: "He lacks knowledge."
A director like Mr. Chen -- with new ideas, a healthy American budget and a firm artistic vision -- is almost inevitably going to raise hackles or induce professional jealousy in a country like China.
"He has his own ideas and he is very stubborn," Ms. Ma said. 
Asked why her bureau's objections to "The Peony Pavilion" were raised only after the production had rehearsed in Shanghai for eight months, she said concerns had been raised indirectly all year long. 
Only after Mr. Chen staged the dress rehearsal, Ms. Ma said, did she have a chance to fully explain what was wrong.
When Mr. Chen wanted to go over the script with her, to ask which points she specifically objected to, Ms. Ma seemed to rely on a tactic common to Communist Party censors, insisting that he make the changes himself and then let her judge the finished product.
"I told him: 'You're the director,' " Ms. Ma said. 
"You have to make the changes, and then let us see the rehearsal as it will be performed. 
Then we will decide."
