
Ordinarily, it takes at least a little courage to wear pajamas outside in the middle of the day.
But if you live in a city where plenty of other people are doing it, why even hesitate?
Striped, spotted and floral-patterned pajamas are plainly visible on the streets of Shanghai this summer, worn by a growing number of residents who appear to favor comfort over style. 
Morning shoppers, afternoon strollers, even casual cyclists: so many people sport their pajamas in public that they almost seem to be members of a cult.
"Comfort, No. 1," said Shi Lingmen, counting off the reasons for his pajama-wearing like tenets of a religious belief. 
"Convenience, No. 2. Looks, No. 3."
To Mr. Shi, wearing his blue-and-white pj's at his place of work -- an outdoor stall selling turtles, shrimp and crabs at a market on Yongkang Street -- does not really mean neglecting his appearance. 
On the contrary, he acts as though there were something distinctly hip about wearing pajamas.
"What do you think?" he asked, tugging on one of his short sleeves, inviting -- and clearly expecting -- approval.
In another city, like New York, a mobster like Vincent Gigante could try to use his pajama-wearing in public as evidence that he was mentally unfit to stand trial. 
That defense would probably have been laughed at in Shanghai, where such behavior is now so common.
For those who strain to interpret fast-changing trends in China, Shanghai's pajama game is more than just a fad, or a way to beat the summer heat. 
It may be seen as a sign that this city has achieved a certain stage of development, like Hong Kong and Taiwan in the 1960's, when pajamas appeared in public there, too.
In Shanghai, few people could afford the luxury of pajamas until recently, generally sleeping in underclothes. 
Besides, the political fanaticism that engulfed Shanghai in the 1960's and 70's discouraged wearing anything as bourgeois as clothing reserved for bedtime.
But since Western things are again in fashion, and ordinary people have pocket money and more, new spending habits are finding their way all the way into the bedroom.
And back out onto the street again. 
For even if simple laziness is what keeps many people in pajamas all day, wearing them in public is also a way to show off to the neighbors, and to show them you don't care what they think.
"It's not so much convenience as feeling relaxed," said Xu Xing, wearing a frilly but skimpy white nightgown to buy some groceries one recent morning. 
"My whole attitude is different when I'm dressed like this."
Ms. Xu said that, yes, she feels a touch of camaraderie with neighbors she sees wearing nightclothes on the street, partly because she guesses that many are unemployed. 
But she also seemed eager to compare her own upscale nightgown with less fancy versions, pointing to a woman in a relatively plain version to ask, with barely disguised disdain, "What do you think of that style?"
As in so much of China, semi-hidden class distinctions persist, even when it comes to pajamas. 
Several people in nightwear agreed that only working-class people would dress as they did in public, while Shanghai's more sophisticated folk -- who generally own many more clothes -- consider such behavior declasse.
Not that you can judge someone by their pajamas. 
But the well heeled, if caught wearing them on the street, may blush.
"I am a professional woman, so it's not very civilized of me to be dressed like this in public," said a morning shopper in her cotton nightgown, before scurrying off in evident embarrassment. 
"Excuse me."
In other Chinese cities, the summer heat reduces many people to shorts and T-shirts, with men often tucking their shirts up to bare a midriff, or going topless altogether. 
Pajama sightings have been made in a few other southern cities, like Guangzhou and Xiamen, but Shanghai clearly leads the pack.
"About 2 percent of the people wear pajamas out during the day," said Zhang Qianghua, a retired postal worker who asserted that his long experience delivering mail gave him a keen sense of street phenomena.
Out of 14 million residents, who make Shanghai the largest city in China, even Mr. Zhang's rather unscientific estimate would mean roughly 280,000 people.
Pajama-wearing has come back into vogue in the past few years, Mr. Zhang said, like the other Western-style clothes that were made popular by the foreign powers that divided and ruled Shanghai before Communist forces chased them out in 1949.
"I remember the way people wore pajamas before Liberation," Mr. Zhang said, using the Communist Party term for the revolution, and seemingly amazed at the relentless passage of time. 
"Now they're back."
Hu Zhonghua wears a nightgown as she wanders through a street market each morning, but her intention is not comfort so much as sales. 
Laid off by her factory two years ago, she now sews her own nightgowns and sells them for $2.50 apiece, or about half the typical store price.
"It's comfortable," she said. 
"Here, buy one for your girlfriend and let her try it."
Many Shanghainese, wearing the studied nonchalance of a big city, say pajama-wearing is no big deal.
"In China, people wear pajamas in public the way Americans wear bikinis," said a man selling eggs on the street. 
"It's not strange. 
If we saw a woman wearing a bikini on the street, that would be very strange."
