
Segments of the Great Wall of China that have been lost in centuries of desert sand were discovered in radar images taken from the space shuttle Endeavour in April 1994, says a scientist with the space agency.
The images show that two parallel sections of wall were built centuries apart, said the scientist, Diane Evans of the space-imaging project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, an arm of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Pasadena.
The Great Wall findings and the wider archaeological potential of space-based radar were the subject of a University of Florida symposium on Thursday in Gainesville, organized by the World Monuments Fund, the Royal Angkor Foundation and the university.
The shuttle captured images of two generations of the wall along a 47-mile remote stretch in north-central China, 430 miles west of Beijing.
"In the images we can recognize two different dynasties that built the Great Wall," said Guo Huadong, a member of the Institute of Remote Sensing Applications at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, and of the space radar-imaging team. 
"One was built in the Ming Dynasty and is about 600 years old. 
The other was built during the Sui Dynasty and is more than 1,000 years old."
From the ground, the low crumbling sections do not look much like images associated with the 1,500-mile wall, first begun in the third century B.C. to fend off invaders.
"One's usual image of the Great Wall is Nixon walking along with Chairman Mao," said Jeffrey J. Plaut of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
"That part around Beijing has always been maintained, whereas out in the countryside, the more typical condition of the wall is just kind of crumbling. 
In this area, they didn't use rock to build it. 
They used mud and soil."
Ms. Evans said space-based radar could penetrate vegetation and even loose sand to reveal structures beneath. 
It has been used to study the heavily overgrown ruins of Angkor in Cambodia and to search for stretches of the Silk Road in the northwestern desert in China.
Around the Great Wall, the radar penetrated about 3 feet, but in very dry sand, it can penetrate 16 to 20 feet, Ms. Evans said. 
Searching for the wall was a sideline of radar-imaging studies of geological and climate changes in northwestern China, she added.
