
The desperate risks that Chinese boat people take to get to the United States, even jumping into the ocean to swim to shore, reflect the burden of the trust that has been placed in them by friends and family.
Very few Chinese can afford the thousands of dollars demanded by the "snakeheads," or smugglers. 
So those who yearn for a better life in the United States borrow from relatives, friends and even neighbors.
They may carry with them an entire village's hopes for a better future, for if the migrant prospers in the United States he will send back money and help others migrate as well. 
On the other hand, if he is caught and sent back, he has not only humiliated himself but wasted the savings of those who bet their money on him.
Why do they go?
Some want more political or religious freedom, or to escape from the tyranny of the village Communist Party secretary, but the most powerful force usually appears to be the yearning for a better life.
Many of the boat people are peasants, especially young men. 
The per capita income for peasants in China is only about $125 a year, and land is so scarce that most can look forward to farming only a fraction of an acre.
Most of the migrants come from Fujian province, a hilly coastal region opposite Taiwan. 
The boldest people of Fujian have been emigrating since the 17th century, when the first waves began sailing for Taiwan and Southeast Asia.
Even today, Fujianese dialects are common in Singapore and Hong Kong, and the southern Fujianese dialect is dominant in Taiwan. 
President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan and Corazon Aquino, the former president of the Philippines, are among the many overseas Chinese who traces their roots to Fujian.
Today Fujian is richer than many other parts of China, but it is still clear to any Fujianese peasant that those who migrate do better than those who stay behind.
 
Unrealistic Expectations
The yearning to flee is compounded by unrealistic expectations about what life abroad can offer. 
The snakeheads tell prospective migrants that ship conditions will be comfortable and the journey easy, that it is simple to make a fortune in Meiguo, "the beautiful country," as the United States is called in Chinese.
The phenomenon of the boat people is a consequence of the economic liberalization in China, and of the Communist Party's diminishing control over the population.
Private boats used to be rare, wealth was difficult to hide, and peasants were stuck in their own villages. 
But these days, the economic boom and loosening of Government policies have resulted in a profusion of private boats and far greater mobility for peasants.
No one notices or complains if a peasant disappears from his village, or if a worker resigns from his factory job. 
And the Fujian coastline is dotted with boats that since the early 1980's have done a thriving business in smuggling goods from Taiwan and Hong Kong.
 
Boom in Smuggling
Smuggling takes place on a huge scale -- more than 90 percent of the videocassette recorders sold in China are smuggled in -- and has resulted in growing corruption among the police. 
It has also led to the emergence of Mafia-style criminal gangs that have contacts in Taiwan and in Chinatowns in the United States and Hong Kong.
Starting in the late 1980's, the snakeheads began to smuggle Fujianese peasants into Taiwan, and that business is still going strong. 
But in the last few years, the boom has been in the smuggling of Fujian peasants to the United States. 
Taiwanese ships are usually used, partly because individual mainlanders still have mostly fishing boats rather than ocean-going cargo ships.
