
What a difference eight months make.
On his last trip to Asia, in March, Secretary of State Warren Christopher verbally battled the Chinese over their human rights record every day of his visit.
But that was before the Clinton Administration ended its policy of linking trade benefits to human rights and before a parade of Cabinet secretaries marched into Beijing armed with business contracts and pledges of better relations.
Today Mr. Christopher and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, looked downright comfortable together as they met on the fringes of a meeting of foreign ministers of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, shaking hands vigorously for the cameras and accentuating the positive.
Their meeting was a prelude to President Clinton's meeting with the Chinese President next week.
In a brief exchange with reporters, Mr. Christopher praised China for what he called its constructive role in the negotiations that led to the nuclear deal between the United States and North Korea, and announced that China would have an important role in carrying it out. 
He noted that the Chinese had signed a pledge not to export missiles or technology controlled under an international nonproliferation accord.
He also said China had taken some positive steps on human rights, but did not mention the widespread belief within the Administration that the situation has deteriorated in recent months.
"This broad engagement is producing progress on various fronts," Mr. Christopher said.
Perhaps to reassure Mr. Qian of American constancy, Mr. Christopher brushed aside a question that the Administration might find it more difficult to execute its policy of engagement with a Republican-dominated Congress.
When asked about the election, Mr. Qian, whose Government has accused the American Congress of meddling in China's affairs in the past, politely deferred to Mr. Christopher. "I believe the election of the U.S. 
Congress is the entitlement of the United States," he said. 
"Therefore, I consider that question directed to Mr. Christopher."
But in their private meeting, Mr. Qian stepped out of character. 
He told Mr. Christopher that he appreciated his words about continuity in foreign policy during his formal speech to the forum. 
"We're interested and concerned to know how the election affects us," a senior State Department official quoted Mr. Qian as saying.
In a way the remark was not surprising. 
The two foreign policy committees in Congress will be headed by men who are sworn enemies of Beijing: Senator Jesse Helms, who favors independence for Taiwan and demonizes the Chinese military, and Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, who considers himself a close friend of the Dalai Lama of Tibet.
The cozy atmosphere between Mr. Christopher and Mr. Qian did not mean that there were no issues dividing them. 
Mr. Christopher raised the matter of China's refusal to accept revisions and updates of an international accord controlling missile exports or to disclose what missile technology it shipped abroad before it agreed to abide by the accord. 
He also told Mr. Qian that the United States would like China to make more progress in improving its human rights record.
Human rights in Indonesia was one of the themes discussed today by Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative. 
He announced an agreement with Indonesia on the rights of workers, a source of tension between Washington and Jakarta. 
Among the accord's provisions are vague pledges by Indonesia to amend its labor laws and regulations and to make the Government-run All Independent Worker Union more independent.
Early last year, Mr. Kantor suspended a formal review of whether Indonesia deserved certain trade benefits despite its poor record on workers' rights.
In analyzing Indonesia's human rights record at the time, Mr. Kantor noted the overwhelming role of the military and the absence of free association in the workplace.
But neither of these issues was addressed in today's accord. 
Mike Jendrzejczyk, the Washington director of the human rights organizationAsia Watch, said: "For any labor accord to be meaningful, it would have to allow truly independent labor organizations to emerge and curb the pervasive role of the military."
Mr. Kantor acknowledged that the agreement had its limitations, telling reporters even as he touted it that it was only "a step in the proper direction."
