
With the women's World Cup approaching in June, the United States appeared to have lost its scoring touch and any certainty that it was still head and shoulders above every other team in the tournament.
But after missing numerous opportunities tonight, the Americans rescued a 2-1 exhibition victory over China two minutes into extra time on a rebound shot by Tisha Venturini.
Mia Hamm fired a low cross from the right side that Han Wenxia, the Chinese goalkeeper, poked away. 
Venturini, who had entered in the 90th minute as a substitute, pounced on the ricochet and punched the ball into the net from seven yards out, awakening a quiet crowd of 15,257 at Hersheypark Stadium.
"I hit it as hard as I could across the goal and Tisha made this unbelievable run from midfield," Hamm said.
Venturini said, "You know Mia is going to get there, so I just kept running."
Tonight's friendly was seen by many as a potential preview of the World Cup final, scheduled for July 10 at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif. 
The teams will meet again Sunday in an exhibition at Giants Stadium.
The Americans, who lost by 2-1 to China in Portugal's Algarve Cup last month, dominated play in the first half but continued to struggle with putting the ball into the net. 
Cindy Parlow pounded a shot off the post in the seventh minute, then failed to lift a chip shot over Han.
In the 12th minute, Hamm made a brilliant feint to her left, moved to her right around a Chinese defender but shot the ball just wide left from 17 yards out.
Hamm is considered the world's best player, and with 104 career goals, she is only 3 shy of the women's career record. 
But it has now been six games since she has scored a goal. 
But she set up both American goals tonight.
In the 20th minute, the American defender Brandi Chastain won a tackle near midfield and caught the Chinese defense too far forward as she put the ball through to Hamm, who sprinted free down the left flank. 
Wen Lirong had no choice but to drag Hamm down in the penalty area.
Michelle Akers took the penalty kick and drilled the ball low and to the left. 
Han, a substitute Chinese goalie who was playing in only her seventh international match, guessed correctly and got her hands on the ball, but she could not keep it out of the net.
China, which failed to get a shot on goal until the 24th minute, tied the game in the 59th minute when forward Sun Wen hooked a free kick into the net from about 25 yards out.
The Americans seemed headed for a draw as Hamm then missed twice on free kicks, but her late blast left Venturini open for the game winner.
