
The third Women's World Cup will be staged in 17 doubleheader events, and with 18 days to go until the opener, 400,000 tickets have been sold. 
Officials of the tournament announced that 62,000 tickets have been sold for the opening-day doubleheader at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., that will feature the United States against Denmark and Mexico against Brazil.
"We are on pace to hit 500,000," said Marla Messing, the president of the organizing committee.
While officials are busy selling tickets in the United States, the teams from the 15 other countries have started to arrive to prepare for the 22-day quadrennial event.
Here is a look at the status of the 16 countries in the tournament, which will start June 19 and conclude July 10 at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.:
AUSTRALIA: Arrived in the United States on Sunday. 
The team will play an exhibition against the United States on Thursday in Portland, Ore.
BRAZIL: Arrived May 20. 
It has played several exhibitions already and will meet Canada on Thursday in Portland, Ore. 
The Brazilians will practice at Hofstra University on Long Island from June 8-15 and play the Long Island Lady Riders on June 9 at Mitchell Field in Uniondale.
CANADA: Has been training in Toronto. 
After playing Brazil on Thursday, the Canadians will play the United States in Portland on Sunday.
CHINA: Officials say there will be no problem with visas, but there could be a delay in the Chinese team's arrival, which is expected before June 10. 
China will practice in the San Francisco area and play Nigeria on June 14 in Los Angeles.
DENMARK: Will arrive June 14 and practice at Montclair State University in Montclair, N.J.
GERMANY: Will arrive June 13 and practice in Los Angeles. 
The Germans will play the Netherlands on Thursday.
GHANA: Will arrive in the United States today and start training at Babson College in Babson Park, Mass.
ITALY: Will arrive June 14 and practice in the Los Angeles area.
JAPAN: Will arrive June 8 and practice at the University of Pacific in Stockton, Calif. 
Japan will play Sweden there June 12.
NORTH KOREA: With no United States Embassy there, visas must be obtained in China. 
Officials say there will be no problem with visas, however. 
The North Koreans are expected to arrive on Friday and practice in Vernon, N.J.
MEXICO: Will arrive June 8 and practice in New Jersey. 
The Mexicans will play the Central Jersey Splash of the W-League on June 10 in New Brunswick, N.J.
NIGERIA: Arrival date is to be determined. 
Nigeria is scheduled to play China on June 14 in Los Angeles.
NORWAY: Will arrive June 9 and practice on Cape Cod in Massachusetts.
RUSSIA: Will arrive June 10 and practice at Franklin Pierce College in Rindge, N.H.
SWEDEN: Will arrive June 8 and practice at St. Mary's College in Moraga, Calif. 
Sweden will play Japan on June 12 in Stockton, Calif.
UNITED STATES: Will meet Australia on Thursday and Canada on Sunday in last game before the tournament. 
The Americans will practice at Pingry School in Bernardsville, N.J.
 
MAJOR LEAGUE SOCCER
The MetroStars have lost every time they have attracted crowds in excess of 40,000 to Giants Stadium. 
The crowd of 43,192 that watched Saturday night's shootout loss to New England -- the fourth-largest in the team's four-year history -- was there primarily to watch El Salvador's 2-1 victory over Colombia in an exhibition. 
The MetroStars missed out on yet another opportunity to win over fans.
With Eduardo Hurtado, their leading scorer, joining the national team of Ecuador this week for a four-team tournament in Canada, it has become imperative for the MetroStars to get their last allocated foreigner as soon as possible. 
Charlie Stillitano, the club's vice president and general manager, said he expected to get the matter resolved this week.
Whoever joins the MetroStars, he probably will not be here soon enough to play in Saturday night's visit by the Dallas Burn. 
Coach Bora Milutinovic and Stillitano have been saying that the biggest need is for someone to play with Hurtado on attack.
The MetroStars might have shifted their interest from the Romanian Florin Raducioiu, who plays in Italy, to the Argentine Claudio Cannigia, who is without a contract. 
The MetroStars are also interested in Lothar Matthaus, the 38-year-old German sweeper of Bayern Munich, who has played in five World Cups.
Matthaus and Cannigia are world-known stars the caliber of the Colombian Carlos Valderrama with Tampa Bay and the Bolivian Marco Etcheverry with D.C. 
United.   ALEX YANNIS
