
From the computer's speakers came a well-modulated American male voice with perfect diction, delivering "model utterances" to a Chinese student. 
The phrases were nothing like those in a Berlitz course for tourists or in a high school language textbook; these were designed for college professors, doctors, executives and other professionals.
"Your college transcripts are absolutely confidential," the voice said. 
It continued with other sentences: "She has office hours in the morning. 
Specifically, do you know which algorithms are causing problems?
We have no doubts that the software is pirated."
And, "Sign these checks."
The program, developed by Arthur H. Schwartz, a speech pathologist, is an advanced example of a growing effort on campuses and in businesses nationwide to teach not English, but English pronunciation.
Learning to speak any language exactly like a native becomes impossible for most people after the age of 12, and thus nearly everyone who learns English as an adult lacks the ability to pronounce some of its consonants. 
But according to Dr. Schwartz and others, Asians generally find English harder than Europeans do, because most Asian languages lack the patterns of stress and intonation that impart much of the meaning in spoken English.
Another reason for the Asian emphasis is that what used to be called the "brain drain" is still operating, drawing a torrent of professionals to the United States -- more and more of them from Taiwan, Korea, Japan and China. 
Programs that work on pronunciation have sprung up in places ranging from Honolulu to Stillwater, Okla., as well as Cincinnati, Boston, Syracuse and traditional centers of immigration like the New York City area. 
According to the United States Census Bureau, more than 200,000 people arrive in the United States from Asia and the Pacific Islands every year.
An example is Oliver Wong, the student seated at Dr. Schwartz's computer. 
A physician at the Cleveland Clinic, Dr. Wong, 35, arrived from Hong Kong six years ago with both an M.D. and a Ph.D. in nuclear medicine. 
Staring intently at the computer's screen, he tried saying, "Sign these checks."
What he saw on the monitor was a voiceprint of the "model," showing the pitch and volume of each sound. 
Below it was a print of his own effort.
Dr. Wong did well with the "n" in "sign," which is often a problem for Chinese students, who tend to drop final consonants. 
He also pronounced the "th" in "these" correctly, another tricky area, because Chinese students sometimes produce the sound without using their vocal cords, so it resembles the whispery "th" in "think."
But Dr. Wong, who is one of Dr. Schwartz's most advanced students, found the real value of the computer-based system in the last word, "checks."
For Dr. Wong, it had come out "chess."
Dr. Schwartz pointed at the voiceprint of the sample utterance and the print of Dr. Wong's effort. 
"Did you have a match for the word ending?" he asked, indicating the thin squiggle, which represented the "s" sound, at the end of the print.
Yes," said Dr. Wong, but he frowned at the screen. 
Something else was wrong, he knew, but like many students, he was having trouble identifying his error.
"Was it the 'ch' sound?" he asked. 
But no, that was fine. 
Then he looked near the end of the voiceprint. 
In the model there was a tiny gap, representing silence, between the main body of the word and the ending "s," but in the print of his voice, there was no such gap.
"There's a 'k' sound; I missed the 'k' sound," he said.
Then Dr. Wong moved on to the sentence about college transcripts. 
Dr. Schwartz congratulated him on correctly producing the last vowel sound in "confidential," and the "ts" in transcripts. 
Getting those correct made his whole sentence easy to understand, even though he missed the "p" in "transcripts."
Dr. Wong, who was born in Fujian Province and thus speaks two Chinese dialects in addition to English, said: "In Chinese, when you're done with one vowel, you're done with that particular word. 
We don't depend on consonants that much."
But in English, he said, "you need to master several vowels and consonants in one word."
Dr. Schwartz is a professor of speech and hearing at Cleveland State University, where several faculty members had referred graduate students to him for remedial work. 
That prompted him to found a small company, Accent Services, USA, and begin teaching students on the side, like Dr. Wong. His goal, he said, is not to produce students who sound just like Americans, but to help people make enough of the sounds that the listener expects so that their speech will be clear, or at least intelligible. 
As an example, he gave the word "parallel."
An Asian-born speaker trying to produce the word "parallel" might miss one sound, and say something like "pawallel," but that would still be intelligible, Dr. Schwartz said. 
Missing a second sound might still work, he said. 
"The listener is willing to work to fill in one, or to struggle for two," he said. 
But if the speaker missed a third sound, a native-born American would say, "the hell with it," Dr. Schwartz said.
SOME academic institutions have found that out the hard way. 
Syracuse University, for example, now runs a course in English pronunciation for foreign-born teaching assistants. 
Jeanette D. Macero, who teaches the course, said the genesis was complaints from parents that they were paying tuition for instructors whom their children could not understand.
Now, she said, "We have rankings, one to four."
One is near-native speaking; two is very good; three is someone who needs help, and four is "needs a great deal of help," she said.
"In order to teach, everybody needs to be a two," she said. 
"Eighty-five percent of all students become a two by the end of the second semester, and most of the remainder are a two by third semester."
In addition to English pronunciation, the course also teaches instructors that if they do not understand a question raised by an undergraduate, they should ask to have the question repeated. 
Female teachers from countries in which women do not raise their voices are taught to speak more firmly, and teachers of both sexes are taught a mixture of rhythm, intonation and melody (called prosody) that is characteristic of English. 
In Chinese, for example, tones give meanings to individual words but not to whole sentences. 
In English, tone differentiates a question from a declarative statement and also shows emphasis.
Foreign students at Syracuse and other colleges are given carefully graded tests of spoken English. 
The Educational Testing Service, in Princeton, N.J., developed a Test of Spoken English in 1981, and last year, nearly 20,000 people registered to take it; the number is still growing, according to Anthony P. Ostrander, associate director of the service. 
Tens of thousands more take a SPEAK test, or Speaking Proficiency English Assessment Kit, which is sold by the service to colleges and universities to administer to their foreign graduate students.
On many campuses the pronunciation programs originated in a speech pathology center, even though there is nothing wrong with these students; they simply grew up speaking another language.
At the Queens, N.Y., campus of St. John's University, Dr. Donna Geffner, director of the Speech and Hearing Center, also teaches graduate students and faculty members whose native tongue is not English. 
She encourages them to bring in their textbooks for help with certain words.
"If it's a teacher in the College of Pharmacy and Allied Health Professions," she said, "if he doesn't put the stress on the right syllable in the name of the chemical, the students don't have a clue about what he's talking about."
That is a problem not only for the listeners, but for the speakers, too. 
Adelina Samuels, who came to New York from Tashkent, Russia, six years ago, said: "You have no idea how frustrating it is. 
I didn't speak to people for a year and a half after I came to this country, even though in a year I knew some English already. 
Understanding what harm I do to language when I speak, I was afraid to communicate."
Ms. Samuels, who was a speech pathologist in Russia and now works with mentally handicapped Russian children in Queens, helping them speak, has developed her own multimedia computer program to help with pronunciation. 
Unlike Dr. Schwartz's, hers combines sounds with pictures of a mouth making the sounds.
Ms. Samuels herself speaks with less than perfect grammar, but her pronunciation is clear and, with her linguist's ear, she can produce on request a credible imitation of a native saying "Lawn Gyland," where she now lives.
Dr. Schwartz's program and Ms. Samuels's, which is not yet commercial, are two of several that use a personal computer. 
Computers with microphones and speakers are now almost universally available. 
Virginia Brogan, a speech pathologist who is a partner with Dr. Schwartz at Accent Services, contrasted this equipment with earlier tools.
"Tape recorders were a major step forward for grammar and vocabulary, and for someone who has a good ear," she said. 
"For a visual learner, it's a problem."
The computer, on the other hand, can give visual input to someone working on an aural task.
But the computer is only a tool, and Dr. Schwartz has found that the software, which was developed in part with a grant from the United States Department of Education, is most useful with an instructor to run it. 
And a speech professional's time tends to cost more than a piano teacher's or even a plumber's: Accent Services charges about $125 an hour, and students usually take an hour or two a week. 
Most are professional people, like doctors or engineers.
It also takes repeated sessions for the lessons to sink in, instructors say. 
But, said Ms. Brogan, "At 18 to 25 hours, it all gels."
