
Chinese officials charged with protecting relics are investigating the possibility that a spectacular ancient bronze candelabra recently sold in New York for a reported $2.5 million may have been illegally unearthed last year in south-central China and smuggled out of the country.
Last fall stories began circulating among Chinese archeologists and officials that a rare bronze funerary candelabra, known as a spirit tree, had been secretly unearthed from a tomb along the Yangtze River, in the region to be inundated by the Three Gorges Dam, and sold to a smuggler. 
The theft was never verified, although officials acknowledge that looting of artifacts in the dam area and nearby construction sites is a problem.
In late March a spirit tree, four feet high with dozens of branches and a blue patina, was offered for sale at the International Asian Art Fair, held at the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York City. 
It was sold to Leon D. Black, a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art in New York, for at least $2.5 million. 
Mr. Black is the founder and president of Apollo Advisers, a New York investment firm that owns stakes in many corporations, including Vail Resorts in Colorado; Samsonite, the luggage maker; Converse, the shoe manufacturer, and Telemundo, the Spanish-language television network.
Only two other intact spirit trees have been described in professional literature, according to Elizabeth Childs-Johnson, an art historian at New York University and expert on archeology in the region of the dam, in Sichuan and Hubei Provinces. 
Like the other examples, it almost certainly originated in the Three Gorges region, she said, and dates from the Eastern Han dynasty, of the first to third centuries A.D.
The possibility that the item sold in New York had recently been smuggled out of China has been publicized by international opponents of the Three Gorges Dam. 
In a press release on Thursday, the California-based International Rivers Network cited as evidence an Oct. 
7, 1997, article in a Chinese newspaper, Southern Weekend.
That article quoted Yao Jiong, head of the Cultural Relics Unit in Fengjie County, Sichuan, as saying that an intact spirit tree had been unearthed and sold on the black market for about $25,000.
But Mr. Yao, in a telephone interview today, said only that he had heard rumors that a spirit tree had been found in neighboring Wushan County and sold illegally. 
Government regulations, only spottily enforced, forbid export of older and significant artifacts.
Yu Weichao, the Beijing-based director of the Government's program to protect cultural relics in the Three Gorges area, is in the region investigating the charges.
Reached by telephone in the town of Zongxian, Mr. Yu said he had heard stories of a smuggled spirit tree last fall, and, after becoming aware of the sale in New York, decided to pursue the matter with local officials. 
Until recently Mr. Yu was also director of the National Museum of Chinese History in Beijing.
The sale in New York was arranged by a Belgian art dealer, Giselle Croes. 
Ms. Croes's office said today that she was traveling and could not be reached.
A spokesman for Mr. Black, Steven Anreder, said today that according to Mr. Black the seller was a reputable Hong Kong dealer and that the item came with all the proper papers. 
No one has suggested that Mr. Black did anything illegal or improper in buying the object in New York.
Mr. Black came into public view in the 1980's as co-head of corporate finance at Drexel Burnham Lambert, the defunct Wall Street firm that was dominated by Michael R. Milken, the junk-bond king. 
Now, besides his investment activities, Mr. Black is a well-known collector of Chinese bronzes and works by such 19th- and 20th-century European masters as Picasso, Cezanne, Degas and Bonnard. 
He also sits on the board of the Jewish Museum and the Mount Sinai Hospital, and recently endowed a Shakespeare Studies chair at Dartmouth College, his alma mater.
His firm is said to be considering bids for Polygram, the record company, and Simon & Schuster.
The narrow canyons above the Three Gorges Dam are sprinkled with subsurface and standing tombs, temples and other historical sites. 
Chinese historians have openly lamented the shortage of money and time to assess what will be lost when the dam is closed and waters start rising five years from now. 
They warn that a crucial, little-studied aspect of early Chinese history as well as the entire record of at least one ancient culture will be lost forever.
Another problem has emerged just above the future water line, where bulldozers are erecting new towns for the displaced populations and have little time for "salvage archeology."
What the machines do not destroy is taken by local people for sale to antique dealers.
Since the dam construction began in 1992, according to an article last January in the Three Gorges Public Security Newspaper, "antique traders converged on Wushan from different parts of the country and from Southeast Asia," and local looters shifted from trailing bulldozers to actively prospecting for artifacts. 
In May 1997 the police in Wushan County formed a special task force to deal with looting and smuggling, some by organized gangs.
Reached by telephone today, Luo Zhihong, Director of Cultural Relics for Wushan County, said that because of the lack of resources, "a lot of relics have been sold to private dealers."
He said his entire 1997 budget for protection was only about $3,600, while he had to offer that amount to entice local farmers to turn in even a single valuable relic they found.
