
Three days of talks between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and China's leaders ended today with only token gestures by Beijing on human rights. 
China's Foreign Minister blamed the United States for the lack of progress.
The two sides were so far apart that plans to hold a joint news conference after the meeting between Mr. Christopher and the Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, were canceled and the two men conducted separate, simultaneous briefings.
"The United States should be held accountable for all the consequences" of the talks, Mr. Qian told reporters after the meeting with Mr. Christopher, their second in three days.
Mr. Qian said that Washington's main "mistake" was that John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, met in secret late last month with Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent dissident.
Mr. Qian again accused Mr. Shattuck of breaking China's laws and interfering in China's internal affairs by meeting with Mr. Wei, who has been described by Chinese officials as "a criminal on parole."
 
Meeting Called 'Appropriate'
At his news conference, Mr. Christopher called the meeting with Mr. Wei "appropriate," adding that the Chinese criticism of it was unjustified.
Mr. Christopher is the most senior American official to visit Beijing since President Clinton took office, and the trip had been planned as the high point of the Administration's six-month strategy of intensive engagement with the Chinese.
But by sending home Mr. Christopher with little to show for his trip, the Chinese instead have complicated their chances of retaining trade privileges with the United States.
Under President Clinton's executive order last year, China must make "significant, overall progress" in human rights by June to win extension of the so-called "most favored nation" trade benefits, which allow Chinese goods to enter the United States with virtually no tariffs.
"I came to China to try to insure that the Chinese side understands the importance of human rights to the United States in connection with the most-favored-nation treatment," Mr. Christopher said. 
"I doubt we would have achieved such clarity, at least at the highest levels, without the advantage of this visit."
President Clinton, while traveling in Detroit today, said he was not happy with the Chinese response on trade, but said American policy on the issue remained firm.
"I was disappointed at the results of the meeting with the Secretary of State. 
Our policy is the same. 
We'll just have to wait and see what happens between now and June. 
I'll make a judgment at the appropriate time."
 
Rancor Is Lacking
Mr. Christopher sought to portray his three days of talks in a positive light, and his statements at the news conference today lacked the rancor and critical tone of remarks made during his first two days here, when he also met with President Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Li Peng.
"In an overall sense I find the differences between the United States and China are narrowing somewhat," Mr. Christopher said. 
But, he added, "more work clearly needs to be done."
Mr. Christopher noted "developments" undertaken by the Chinese on a number of fronts during his trip, but provided no assessment of whether he believed any were significant.
On the sensitive issue of accounting for and releasing political prisoners, Mr. Christopher said that his team had received "a great deal of information" on the 235 specific cases first presented to the Chinese last fall. 
And for the first time, the Chinese have pledged to provide detailed information about 106 Tibetan political prisoners, he said.
Assessing the importance of the information on the Chinese prisoners, Mr. Shattuck said afterward that the Clinton Administration would have to evaluate it carefully, but that at first blush it appeared to be "definitely more than we had before."
 
Inquiry on Jamming Promised
The two sides also codified, as expected, an oral agreement reached in principle with Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen in Beijing in January to reopen Chinese prisons to American customs officers to insure that prison factories are not making products for export to the United States.
Finally, the Chinese told Mr. Christopher they would investigate reports of the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts into China and within a few weeks would begin technical talks with representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross on how to open Chinese prisons to outside inspection.
But contrary to expectations, the Chinese did not give Mr. Christopher a concrete agreement to end the jamming of Voice of America.
They did not release ailing prisoners for medical treatment as has been requested repeatedly by the Clinton Administration and again by Mr. Christopher on this trip. 
They did not formally state their intention to enter into an agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross to allow inspections of Chinese prisons.
Mr. Shattuck had asked for all of these concessions during his visit to China early this month.
But the fact that the Chinese were willing to make even largely symbolic moves indicates that they have not yet abandoned the effort to retain their trading privileges.
In an unusual departure from Chinese hospitality, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman told reporters on Saturday that the Chinese had suggested that Mr. Christopher postpone his trip because it coincided with the opening of the National People's Congress, but that when the Americans said they could not change their arrangements, "in the end we have accommodated the Secretary."
 
Trip in Jeopardy
Aides to Mr. Christopher said that he came very close to canceling his visit at the last moment because of detentions of Chinese dissidents surrounding the trip. 
But he decided to go ahead because he felt it was absolutely necessary for him to deliver a clear, unambiguous message in person to the Chinese about what they had to do to win renewal of their trade benefits.
In addition, he was locked into going to Australia for a regularly scheduled meeting and may not have wanted to make another long trip to the Pacific at a different time.
