
Putting new pressure on the South Korean Government, religious groups here handed officials a huge stack of petitions today calling for increased food aid to North Korea.
The organizers said the petitions contained 1.1 million signatures, a remarkable number in a nation of 45 million people. 
The success of the petition drive underscores the growing discomfort in South Korea with the images filtering out of the North of emaciated children with vacant stares, and an increasing sense that some aid is necessary to avert a famine in North Korea.
South Korea has been ambivalent about assistance in the last few years. 
Many South Koreans feel a strong emotional tie with North Koreans, but they are also resentful of Pyongyang's failure to show gratitude for past aid and are alarmed about the risk that the food will go to bolster the North Korean Army.
The theme of today's rally by religious leaders was that North Korea's politics may be repugnant but that the most important thing is that Korean people are starving.
The sense of crisis was underscored by a video, titled "How Many More Must Die?" which was shown at the rally and which presented images of excruciatingly thin children and of bodies washed ashore on the Chinese side of the Yalu River, which marks China's border with North Korea. 
The narrator said the bodies were of North Koreans who had tried to flee to China because of the famine, but had drowned because they were too weak to swim.
The petition drive was strongly backed by Christian and Buddhist organizations, which have been gathering contributions for private assistance as well as calling on the South Korean Government to do more. 
The aid groups also emphasized that North Korea should allow more monitoring to insure that the food is actually given to people who need it and is not diverted to North Korean soldiers.
North Korea is one of the most isolated countries in the world, and some experts and visitors have said they saw few signs of hunger there and have suggested that the talk of famine there is exaggerated. 
But others have reported seeing bodies and have taken photos showing children suffering from malnutrition.
