
THIS summer's Women's World Cup gained instant credibility yesterday. 
This was apparent from the steamed looks on the faces of the American players, who discovered they can, in fact, lose on the green, green grass of home.
They had not lost in the United States in 50 games, but lose they did, 2-1, to China in a highly competitive exhibition that reminded everybody there are no Dream Teams this summer, no Charles Barkley whupping on the Angolans.
The American public and also the news media have not yet come to grips with this event -- 16 national teams coming to the United States in what will be the best-attended sports event held only for female athletes. 
The third Women's World Cup, from June 19 through July 10, gained a huge amount of respectability yesterday if only because it showed the United States is vulnerable, at least in the medal round.
The promoters have sold 325,000 tickets, aiming toward 475,000, and they can probably sell more tickets from bone-rattling hits like the ones that leveled Mia Hamm and Michelle Akers yesterday than from potential double-digit romps.
"China is the favorite right now," said Dr. Robert Contiguglia, the president of the United States Soccer Federation, shortly after China won the game three minutes into injury time.
Yesterday's crowd of 23,765 might have been bigger if prospective fans had not feared they had to watch the MetroStars first, like taking your medicine before a tasteful dinner. 
The locals lost to Tampa Bay, 1-0, probably not setting back Major League Soccer more than six or eight years.
The women promptly aired out the joint. 
China against the United States would be the best women's team rivalry in the world, except that Norway-United States got there first, and besides that, the Norwegians all speak English, so little gibes have built up, along with the bruises. 
China-United States, however, is getting there.
The Chinese were stunned at losing early in the first Women's World Cup, which was in their country in 1991, but time, as somebody once said, is on their side. 
They studied and traveled, and trained, and now they can play.
"They are so fast and so technical," said Hamm, who now has gone seven straight games without scoring. 
"That gave them the opportunity to win on a random clear."
The United States has still won 11 and lost 5 and tied 5 against China, with significant victories for the Summer Games gold medal in Georgia in 1996, and for the Goodwill Games title last summer. 
Then last month, China upended the Americans, 2-1, in the final of the prestigious Algarve tournament in Portugal.
There was another sign that the Yanks are not going to dominate their festival this summer. 
Last February, just after the draw for the World Cup, the United States lost, 2-1, to a group of world all-stars who had literally held one workout together the day before. 
It wasn't only feisty Linda Medalen of Norway playing traffic cop in the back four; it was emerging players from Japan and Nigeria and Canada giving what-for to the Americans.
Dynasties do wear out, like the Boston Celtics of the Bill Russell-K. 
C. Jones era, or the Islanders of the early 80's, the games and the miles adding up like dog years. 
But this is more a case of other nations catching up.
When the United States beat China, 2-1, last Thursday in Hershey, Pa., the Chinese played without their star goalkeeper, Gao Hong, who was said to be injured. 
Late in the game, the Yanks forced the play for a goal in the 92d minute.
"That's the way we are," said their coach, Tony DiCicco, yesterday. 
"They treat a tie as a loss."
They faced a loss yesterday when China's top scorer, Sun Wen, hammered a goal past Briana Scurry in the 14th minute.
"At halftime, Julie Foudy said: 'This is a test for us. 
It will show how we handle adversity,' " Hamm said later. 
"It didn't turn out the way we wanted, but we did come back."
They tied the game in the 58th minute when Cindy Parlow crossed the ball to Foudy, who made an intricate fake to her left, then waited for traffic to clear and smacked the ball past Gao, who played a terrific game.
"I only have short-term memory," Foudy said, still steamed after the game. 
"I can't remember the goal."
They could only remember how, on home turf, the Chinese swarmed around Hamm in extra time, then whacked the ball downfield, where a speedy Zhang Ouying burst past Carla Overbeck and Christie Pearce and put the ball under Scurry.
"Did we just lose that game?"
Foudy blurted into a television microphone a few seconds after the final whistle.
They did indeed lose. 
But the 1999 Women's World Cup was the biggest winner. 
Patriotism sells tickets, but parity sells even more.
