
EVER since the American organizers took out their indelible-ink pens and plotted the inexorable march from sea to shining sea, there were chauvinistic and realistic expectations that the Yanks would win this 1999 Women's World Cup.
Hardly anybody could have predicted the sudden hysteria for this appealing bunch of Johnettes and Paulettes and Georgettes and Ringoettes, but there surely was the assumption that the combination of home cooking and summer weather and loyal home crowds would make a difference.
Now there is reason to think the Chinese could spurt right past the Americans this afternoon at the Rose Bowl. 
Then, given America's fascination with winning, what happens to all the brave talk about marketing these charismatic athletes?
Still, if the Chinese should win today, they would merely be recapturing command of an event they initiated.
That's true. 
Like many of the items you bring back from the mall, the Women's World Cup carries a label that says, "Made in China."
If there had not been 65,000 fans at the stadium in Guangzhou on Nov. 
30, 1991, there very likely would not be 90,000 fans at the Rose Bowl today.
The Chinese also invented pasta, even though Carla Overbeck, the United States' co-captain, and her chef-husband, Greg, had to slip packages of pasta ("and spices, and I carried a wheel of Parmesan cheese," Overbeck recalled) with her gear back in 1991.
The American women were really pioneers back then, catching up on a sport that was played mainly by women from northern Europe.
"Honestly, we had no idea," Overbeck said this week, on a practice field surrounded by squealing fans and protected by a squad of motorcycle police.
"We had never been to a big tournament, and it wasn't even called a World Cup," Overbeck added.
Overbeck and her husband were not sure what the menu would be like in Guangzhou, so they carried packaged foodstuff with them.
"They wouldn't let Greg cook," Overbeck recalled, "so he had to draw diagrams and point how he wanted it done. 
But toward the end, they let him cook."
The women were glad to have a taste of home. 
(In this strange hybrid land of America, Italian cuisine is home cooking.) But they had no complaints about the ambience.
"We stayed at the White Swan Hotel, a five-star hotel," Joy Fawcett said. 
"We brought peanut butter, and we got by, just as I'm sure they're getting by over here."
Michelle Akers said: "I remember it was the first time we had ever seen outdoor food markets. 
Some of the food choices were pretty unusual. 
Sure, I tasted them, after taking a picture of them first."
The women had enjoyed modest crowds and celebrity in college, but 1991 was their first experience in an international tournament.
"I had to convince my dad to come over," recalled Julie Foudy. 
"He came to our hotel, and there were huge banners and flower displays, and he said, 'I can't believe the magnitude of this.'
It was unfortunate the Chinese lost in the quarterfinals, but it was a great tournament."
The Americans beat Norway in the final in front of that crowd of 65,000, at that point believed to be the largest ever to see a women's sporting event. 
The Swedish organizers in 1995 had a much more modest scale -- the United States lost in the semifinals to Norway in front of little more than 2,000 -- and now the American organizers have exceeded their own grandiose dreams.
"It was great to see 65,000 in China," said Lauren Gregg, an assistant American coach, "but most of them were factory workers who were let off from work."
Now there is the matter of the 1999 final. 
The Chinese were stung by their early loss in 1991 in front of their fans, but they just did not have the sophisticated techniques. 
Today, they do. 
They destroyed Norway, 5-0, in the semifinal last Sunday. 
Their passing is superb, their attack aggressive, their defense coordinated, and their goalkeeping confident.
In a country where most eyes were glazing over at talk of women's soccer only a few weeks ago, there is a touch of midsummer madness for this event. 
But would one loss to China turn the entire experience into a Pet Rock or a Hula-Hoop?
Up to now, the greatest long-standing United States women's team was a volleyball team, led by the talented Flo Hyman, that lived in makeshift training camps and made grueling international swings to prepare for the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.
At the time, I might have predicted that women's volleyball, with its emphasis on grace and teamwork, would become the most popular American women's team sport. 
But the Americans lost the gold-medal match to -- ah, but you guessed it -- China. 
And whatever happened to women's volleyball?
Women's soccer is not going away. 
Some young women in the crowd with their "Hamm" and "Scurry" shirts are going to be playing for the United States in the next century. 
They will be competing with the heirs to Gao and Sun in a sport that already owes a great debt to China.
