
CHINA is not going anywhere. 
There it sits, one fifth of the world's population, hurtling toward the next century, the next millenium, when it will surely be host to the Summer Games, sooner rather than later. 
It is inevitable. 
It is China.
But Beijing will not hold the Games in the year 2000 because yesterday they were awarded to Sydney, Australia, a cosmopolitan city on the southern half of the world, close to Asia, and a very acceptable choice.
The apparent hard glares above the smiling mouths in the Chinese delegation suggested they were not amused by the voting by delegates to the International Olympic Committee. 
And they have every right to be upset.
Beijing led Sydney on three separate ballots, 32-30, 37-30 and 40-37, but could not muster an absolute majority. 
When Manchester was eliminated, the ballots tipped to Sydney, 45-43, which is how it works in the old Olympic game. 
It is called paying your dues.
Maybe the sun still hasn't totally set on the old Empire. 
Melbourne and Toronto were left behind in the last stampede to the obscure charms of Atlanta; now Manchester blocks Beijing until Sydney can gain a majority. 
And China could not count on any Communist-bloc votes these days; it is hard to imagine any eastern European delegates voting for their good buddies from Beijing.
China has come too far to slam the doors and windows shut, but it will be hard for China to save face by accepting the choice of Sydney as pragmatic rather than political. 
It is very soon after the brutal events in Tiananmen Square in 1989 and the world is well aware of thousands of dissidents in Chinese jails. 
Chinese officials did not help their cause by boasting there would be no demonstrations against the Games in the next seven years. 
As somebody once said in another context, they just don't get it.
But few of the delegates may have been swayed much by the recommendations by the United States Congress that China be passed over. 
And few delegates may have been moved by the passionate lobbying of groups like Human Rights Watch, which keep people alive and out of jails all over the world. 
By and large, people do not get to be delegates to the I.O.C. because of a preoccupation with human rights.
More to the point, the delegates often vote for creature comforts. 
Four years ago, this same group voted for a second-tier American city, Atlanta, for the 1996 Games, only 12 years after the Games in Los Angeles. 
There was no reason to go back to the United States so soon, except maybe Atlanta was in the right time zone for television and lobbied the hardest. 
Now Australia gets the Games, four years later.
Sydney surely has the infrastructure of a major first-world city -- the hotels, the phones, the arenas, the roads -- while Beijing was just describing how it would go about building them.
The delegates were left with a perfect out by the evaluation report on six bidding cities, delivered last July. 
Sydney had the highest marks because all events would be within 30 minutes of each other. 
Manchester and Berlin scored well, Brasilia failed, and Istanbul and Beijing were marginal. 
Those delegates on an inspection tour did not miss the point when Beijing shut down its furnaces in the middle of winter to try to clean up the murky air.
"It must be noted that China currently falls significantly below international standards," read the report on China's environment.
In some ways, it would have been brave to award the Games to China. 
I am not talking here from any anachronistic sentiments about the purity of the Olympic movement. 
The sneaker companies and the cola companies promote these Games for profit.
It would have been a practical statement to bring China just a little closer to the rest of the world. 
But there is no guarantee that holding the Games will purge any country of its ancient traditions. 
Witness the raping and killing in Sarajevo, where the 1984 Winter Games were held.
China has made huge strides in living standards in recent years. 
Its totalitarian government could probably have built the Olympic facilities in the next seven years, but what's the rush?
Chinese officials have already promised not to boycott the 1996 Games, and they would be foolish to even think of it. 
Besides, why are athletes asked to carry the burden of failed politics?
Why not tourists?
Why not companies pushing soft drinks or cigarettes?
Why not arms vendors?
With her female runners turning in incredible times, after a promising performance in Barcelona in 1992, China would be wise to show up in Atlanta and Sydney and take as many gold medals as it can, and make as many friends as it can. 
Play the game. 
Time is on China's side.
