
Scholars have unearthed official records of the two meetings between Stalin and Mao. 
Along with Mao's commentaries on the meetings, they suggest that the Chinese-Soviet alliance that the two men made in Moscow 45 winters ago was founded on shaky ground.
The transcripts of the December 1949 and January 1950 sessions, obtained from Soviet archives, had long been sought by historians of the cold war. 
The documents, to be published by the Cold War International History Project of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, contain no great revelations, only the give and take between the leading Communist titans, and tyrants, of the cold war. 
Stalin gives more than he takes.
The first meeting took place in Moscow on Dec. 
16, 1949, only months after Mao's revolutionary army had taken control of China. 
Stalin, taking the attitude of the chairman of the board talking to the chief of a subsidiary, advised Mao that he thought China would have peace for the foreseeable future.
"Japan has yet to stand up on its feet," the transcript quotes Stalin as saying, "and is thus not ready for war. 
America, though it screams war, is actually afraid of war more than anything. 
Europe is afraid of war."
Mao asked Stalin "to send volunteer pilots or secret military detachments to speed up the conquest of Formosa," the island, now known as Taiwan, to which the Chinese Nationalists retreated after losing the mainland to the Communists.
Stalin demurred, promising only to consider the request, and paternalistically advised Mao to foment his own uprising. 
He went on to tell Mao how to run his country in a dozen different ways: establish mine inspectors, build oil pipelines, create a weather service.
Stalin initially startled Mao by seeming to renege on a deal, informally agreed to by the two countries' diplomats, to do away with provisions of the 1945 Yalta accord governing relations between the Soviet Union and the since-defeated Nationalist Government of China. 
As leaders of the Allied powers of World War II, Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill reached an uneasy concord on the fate of nations, including China, in the war's aftermath.
Stalin and Mao danced around the issue of revising the accord and decided to raise it at their next meeting. 
In a telegram back to Beijing after the meeting, he called Stalin "really sincere."
Mao then cooled his heels for 17 days, waiting for another audience with Stalin. 
He appears to have been unhappy waiting in a dacha in the Moscow winter. 
In a 1958 conversation with the Soviet Ambassador in Beijing, obtained from Chinese archives and to be published with the earlier records, Mao railed at his perceived mistreatment.
"I got so angry that I once pounded the table," he recalled.
When they met again, Stalin changed his tune on Yalta provisions regarding key points in Chinese-Soviet relations. 
He said he would indeed abrogate them.
The next month, the two nations signed a Chinese-Soviet Treaty, which opened what the United States saw as a new front in the cold war. 
But the new records and recently released documents from Chinese archives suggest that the alliance did not have a strong foundation and may have been foredoomed.
The Russians "have never had faith in the Chinese people, and Stalin was among the worst," Mao told the Soviet Ambassador, Pavel Yudin, in 1958, five years after Stalin's death and about the time that deep fissures in the Chinese-Soviet alliance were appearing.
