
It was a symbol of America's industrial might, one of the world's biggest, most sophisticated, most expensive steel mills, employing thousands of workers and producing 2.3 million tons of high-grade carbon steel a year when it went on line in 1979.
But almost immediately, the 23-story-high Kaiser Steel Corporation plant, built at a cost of $287 million, became a symbol of wrenching changes in the economy, its roaring furnaces burdened by international competition, environmental regulations, labor disputes and the encroachments of corporate raiders.
Within three years it was closed. 
This desert town 45 miles east of Los Angeles, once home to citrus groves, then part of Southern California's industrial engine, slipped into the shuttered slowdown that has gripped the region.
Now, since early last year, the mill has been the scene of one last burst of activity: 300 Chinese workers from the Shaogang Steel Corporation in Beijing have been cutting, unbolting, dismantling, marking and crating the 55,000-ton mill and shipping the pieces to southern China for reassembly.
Amid sprays of sparks from cutting torches and the roar of giant cranes, each piece -- some nearly 200 tons -- was photographed and chalk-marked in Chinese characters to be matched with blueprints and painstakingly fitted back together.
 
$400 Million Moving Job
Shaogang Steel, otherwise known as the Capital Iron and Steel Corporation, estimates the operation will cost $400 million. 
California Steel Industries Inc., which bought the plant, along with related steel-finishing operations, from Kaiser Steel in 1983 for $120 million, will be paid just $15 million for it. 
The main plant never resumed operation in part because of competition from low-cost Japanese and Korean steelmakers, who were accused of dumping steel at prices below cost in the Western United States.
"That was the only offer there was with people that had the money to pay for it," said Don Duffy, vice president for operations for California Steel. 
"The price they are paying us is a pittance by comparison with the total costs for them."
Nevertheless, the deal makes good sense for the Chinese, who do not have experience in building sophisticated steel mills, said Matt MacFadden, California Steel's vice president for human resources.
"Ten years ago this was the very best in the world," he said. 
"There haven't been that many dramatic improvements. 
Looking at this facility, knowing that it ran, knowing that the configuration worked together, knowing its heat, its tonnage per hour -- why try and reinvent the wheel?"
It has been a long ordeal for the Chinese workers, who have lived virtually sequestered in a motel in nearby San Bernardino with little contact with American society other than occasional visits to places like Disneyland and Chinatown. 
Their own cooks have trucked lunches to the work site.
As they began to arrive, the Chinese were the subject of protests by labor unions here, angry that the dismantling jobs did not go to American workers in the struggling economy of Southern California.
"These jobs don't belong to those Chinese guys," Joe Perez, executive secretary of the Building and Construction Trades Council in Riverside, said at the time. 
"They belong to us. 
We put this thing up, and we should be able to take it down. 
We want those 300 jobs."
But the protests soon died; the sale of the plant was contingent on employing Shaogang workers, so they could become intimately familiar with the structure they would rebuild.
 
Land to Be Swept Clean
The deal with Shaogang includes a promise that the 76 acres on which the massive plant stood will be thoroughly cleared and leveled. 
The last components are being loaded onto railroad flatcars and onto 175-foot-long trucks so big they can only travel the highways after 10 P.M., headed for the Port of Los Angeles.
Two sea shipments have already arrived in China. 
The last will leave soon.
At the dismantled plant, the last members of the Chinese work crew, with their yellow plastic hard hats, are breaking its concrete foundations into chunks of no bigger than 10 square inches that will be used as fill.
Other members of the crew are already in China working on the early stages of the reassembly of the plant, which is known as the No. 2 Basic Oxygen Process and Caster Operation, or "BOP 2."
"It was like peeling a banana," Mr. MacFadden said. 
"First the outer structure came off. 
Then the equipment itself. 
The casters. 
The last thing left was the furnaces, huge ladles."
He looked around at the dusty site, where one crew, using a crane, was loading a section of steel frame onto a flatcar, another was knocking down the concrete base of the last of six 12-story elevator shafts and a third was pulling iron reinforcing bars from piles of broken concrete.
"This is what's left: massive rubble," Mr. MacFadden said. 
"They've gotten the ladles out of here, the bag house, the water-treatment facility. 
It's wild. 
I couldn't believe it would come down so quickly. 
We're to the point where everything's come down and nothing is up in its place yet."
Now that the plant is gone, he said, it is still not certain how the land will be used. 
There is talk of building a mini-mill to process scrap steel, or the area might be used as a transport and loading yard for the smaller steel-processing mills that surround it.
 
Big Appetite for Steel
In China, where the economy grew by as much as 13 percent last year, the plant will add to a burgeoning industrial base and feed a voracious appetite for steel.
Richard S. Masco, project engineer for the Diversified Packaging Development Corporation, an American subcontractor for Shaogang Steel, said the Chinese could have the plant up and running in as little as two years.
"These are some of the finest engineering people I have ever run across," said Mr. Masco, who coordinated the work of crews of American subcontractors including heavy equipment operators, technical advisers and truck drivers. 
"They are fantastic, organized, everything in its place, everything in its order. 
The heavy lifts were all engineered to the point of exactly what angle the booms on the cranes were to be."
There was a note of poignancy in his words. 
It is the Chinese workers who now embody the energy, know-how and optimism that have been a part of this region's lore.
While California Steel thinks about what to do with the vacant land, Kaiser, which is now out of the steel business, has plans to build an auto raceway on an adjacent tract.
A decade and a half ago that outcome would have seemed impossible. 
The mill, built with more steel per square foot than any other building in the country, was meant to withstand the harshest onslaughts, including an earthquake up to 8.6 on the Richter scale of magnitude.
"This was meant to be here in perpetuity," Mr. MacFadden said. 
"When the earth ended, this thing was going to be here."
