
Chinese stocks climbed on ecord turnover today, as fresh funds flowed into the volatile market. 
Trading reached a record of $1.34 billion for a single day, lifting class A shares to their highest close.
Class B shares, those sold to foreign investors, were also sharply higher, benefiting from a revival of interest in all types of Chinese securities amid expectations that the economy is headed for a soft landing, brokers said. 
The B share index surged 6.11 percent, to 78.95.
Turnover on the A share market, which caters exclusively to Chinese, was more than double its daily volume during the bull market of 1992 and early 1993, when an army of small investors drove Shanghai trading. 
Today's record trading was also more than three times the turnover on Monday of the more widely known Hong Kong stock market.
Brokers therefore expressed belief that large institutions, probably securities houses, were leading the latest charge, which began last Monday after the Beijing Government announced a freeze on all new stock listings this year.
The Shanghai A index added 28.95 points, or 4.13 percent, to close at 729.52. 
It rocketed by 108.05 percent last week after having fallen sharply for most of the preceding 12 to 15 months.
 
Big Initial Offerings
Fifty million class A shares of Harbin Suibao Polyelectricity and the Hangzhou Baida Group will be offered Tuesday along with 10 million employee shares in a public utility, Shanghai Shenergy. 
The shares were issued before the freeze took effect.
"How well the index performs tomorrow will largely depend on how the new shares do," Zhong Lai, a senior analyst at International Securities here, said.
Brokers predicted that the bull market was far from over. 
"Market sentiment is still strong and the index is likely to further rise after the pressure of profit-taking eases," said Hu Huipeng of Zhongnan Securities.
Wendy Rong, chief B share dealer for Shanghai International Securities, said simply, "The market is crazy," adding that meteoric rises on the A share market had also helped rekindle interest in the B share market among local investors, who are now heavy buyers.
Bill Sung, manager of Morgan Grenfell Asia's China Fund, credited the latest economic statistics for the surge in overseas interest in class B B shares, citing a drop in companies' accounts receivable and new credit to state enterprises. 
Foreign investors, Mr. Sung said, "are more confident that China will have a soft landing."
In the smaller stock market in the south China city of Shenzhen, the A share index shed 2.13 points, or 1.28 percent, to 163.79, while the B index rose 0.90 percent, to 108.00.
