
Chinese authorities announced today that they were preparing to prosecute senior members of Falun Gong, the spiritual movement that was banned last month after it startled China's leaders with its ability to organize potent anti-Government protests.
To deliver a strong message that Beijing will tolerate no protests of any kind, the authorities are now expected to charge Falun Gong's leaders with subversion and direct that they be sentenced to life in prison.
An order jointly issued by the Communist Party's Central Committee and China's Cabinet specified that core members of Falun Gong must be punished severely, the official New China News Agency reported this evening.
Directed by President Jiang Zemin, the campaign against Falun Gong has provided a vehicle for a political crusade that seems aimed at invigorating the Communist Party's authoritarian operations.
The campaign's strong embrace of Marxist ideology appears to have renewed the political firepower of security and propaganda operations, but it seems out of touch with popular concerns.
Mindful of the explosive role that groups invoking mystical forces have played in toppling weak authorities at transitional periods throughout Chinese history, Government leaders have conducted the campaign against Falun Gong with marked thoroughness.
Yet what many Chinese analysts see as the campaign's overkill has led them to question whether Mr. Jiang is pursuing his own political objectives as well, using the campaign to extend his authority at a time when he faces multiple challenges, notably with Taiwan.
Today's order did not specify how many people would be prosecuted. 
But more than 50 leaders now in custody are believed to face harsh punishment for leading anti-Government protests that the authorities later described as an attempt to overthrow the Government.
Official efforts continue to blame the leaders of Falun Gong while ordinary followers are pardoned and encouraged to disavow the movement. 
The order said that only a "tiny minority" of Falun Gong followers would be charged with crimes.
Most Falun Gong practitioners will be forgiven, the order said, if they promise not to take part in the future.
A Hong Kong-based human rights monitor said lawyers in Beijing had been told to get official permission before taking on cases involving Falun Gong members, and to report any instances of Falun Gong members approaching them for advice.
Falun Gong mixes elements of Buddhism and Taoism with traditional qigong exercises that most Chinese believe can channel and enhance vital forces. 
It also preaches frugality and abstinence from liquor and tobacco as aids to leading a moral life.
Disillusioned by wrenching changes in Chinese society, including unemployment and growing corruption, millions of people yearning for spiritual fulfillment have been drawn to the movement. 
Many are retired or unemployed workers who have lost their health benefits and believe Falun Gong's promise that illness can be avoided or cured through meditation and exercise.
Criticism of the movement by Government skeptics provoked numerous small protests in different parts of China in recent years. 
But the movement came to the attention of China's top leaders on April 25, when more than 10,000 followers surrounded Zhongnanhai, the leadership compound in central Beijing, to demand official recognition.
That event, expertly organized by Falun Gong leaders, so frightened China's high officials that they later labeled it an attempt to overthrow the Government. 
When the authorities formally banned Falun Gong on July 22, they accused the movement of corrupting people's minds and sabotaging national stabilityI.
Tens of thousands of Falun Gong followers were detained as the Government ordered a huge campaign that reached down to every state-run workplace in the nation and has dominated the nation's media for weeks.
Although most detainees were let go and sent home within days, the Government has proceeded with a campaign of vilification of Li Hongzhi, who founded the movement in 1992 and now lives in New York.
Falun Gong supporters in London said today that Mr. Li had abandoned plans to attend a movement gathering in Britain this weekend. 
Although Britain did not agree to a request from China that Mr. Li be blocked from entering the country, Mr. Li has told reporters in New York that he fears assassination or kidnapping by Chinese authorities.
China issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Li last month and offered a $10,000 reward for information leading to his arrest. 
Interpol rejected a request from Beijing for help in apprehending Mr. Li, saying the request was politically motivated.
Mr. Li has protested that his movement is apolitical and poses no threat to social stabilityI. 
But his credibility has been undermined by his conflicting statements about his role in the April 25 protest, which China accuses him of masterminding.
In New York today, a Falun Gong spokesman, Zhang Erping, denounced what he said would be "show trials" of the group's leaders, adding "We hope the world will speak out to insure fairness and a respect for international legal standards as well as for the right of people to practice their beliefs."
Today's Communist Party statement said it was necessary to prosecute harshly anyone who "plotted from behind the scenes and deliberately sabotaged social stabilityI."
At the same time, it encouraged leading members of the movement to admit their mistakes and to expose the movement's inner workings.
Although Falun Gong leaders have insisted that the movement has no formal organization, it was evident from the April 25 protest that they could mobilize large groups of followers to act in a disciplined and effective manner.
Today's order did not name any of Falun Gong's leaders. 
But those expected to receive the greatest punishment include Li Chang, a former deputy director at the Public Security Ministry, and Wang Zhiwen, a former Railway Ministry official.
Alarmed to discover that several senior military officers were also Falun Gong followers, Chinese leaders have conducted a crackdown in the army to root out any Falun Gong members.
Today's order advised work teams to treat most Falun Gong followers as victims who were unaware of the political goals and motives of the movement's leaders. 
The same attitude will probably extend to more than 1,000 Government officials who were identified during the first week of the crackdown as Falun Gong followers and were detained in Communist Party schools and forced to renounce any belief in the movement.
With today's announcement, the campaign is evidently in its third and final stage.
First the authorities outlawed the movement and accused it of threatening social stabilityI, illustrating their assertions with testimony of former adherents who described how harmful it was, causing some members to die from refusing medical treatment and others to commit suicide in fits of delusion.
Next, the authorities expanded their campaign with accounts that purported to show how Falun Gong was organized for political purposes, with the ultimate aim of overthrowing the Government.
The final stage of the campaign is now expected to publicize the punishment of the movement's leaders as an example to anyone considering ways to challenge the authority of the Communist Party. 
It is likely to be wrapped up in the coming weeks, before Oct. 
1, when the party is planning a huge celebration of its 50 years in power.
      
