
In the space of a few short weeks, North Korea has gone from one of the world's most politically reclusive states to the most diplomatically ambitious.
With little fanfare, but with a speed that has surprised many people, the Communist government in Pyongyang has established diplomatic relations with Italy and has resumed diplomatic discussions with Japan and Australia for the first time in years.
It has also recently sent out discreet feelers to at least two other major Western nations, Canada and Britain. 
And according to diplomats in the Philippines, it has approached their country about joining the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum.
Political experts attribute much of this diplomatic activity to a feeling among North Korean leaders that they have consolidated their authority and that their government will survive any threats by foreign countries. 
They also believe that the overall direction of the country is promising, given that only recently it was on the brink of economic collapse, with much of its population hit by famine.
These moves are taking place against the backdrop of talks between the United States and North Korea that diplomats say will be crucial to easing the country's isolation and lowering tensions on the Korean peninsula, one of the cold war's final flash points.
In New York this week, North Korea's deputy foreign minister, Kim Gye Gwan, and an American delegation led by Charles Kartman have been discussing final arrangements for high-level talks between the two countries tentatively scheduled for April in Washington. 
No high-ranking North Korean official has visited Washington since the Korean War ended in 1953.
In September, the Clinton administration lifted some trade, banking and other sanctions that had been imposed on North Korea for decades. 
Now Pyongyang wants Washington to take it off a list of nations that Washington says support terrorism. 
Among other things, the United States reportedly wants North Korea to agree that it will not resume tests of ballistic missiles like the one it fired over Japan in 1998.
Washington has also sought to encourage Pyongyang to respond more favorably to the so-called Sunshine Policy of the South Korean leader, Kim Dae Jung. 
North Korea has recently accepted limited forms of investment and tourism from South Korea, but has spurned offers for direct talks.
"The U.S. has been encouraging them to engage with the outside world," said Park Young Ho, a senior research fellow at the Korean Institute for National Unification, in Seoul. 
"This is happening at a time when North Korea seems to have realized that it needs to have more relations with other countries in order to improve its own situation."
Other experts have taken a much more skeptical view of Pyongyang's opening. 
They say it is a short-term ploy meant to keep North Korea's weapons programs and its often belligerent posturing from becoming campaign issues in important legislative elections in South Korea in April, and in the United States presidential election in November.
"This may be a diplomatic flurry for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea," said Nicholas Eberstadt, a North Korea expert at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. 
"But, like they say, they've been down so long it looks like up now. 
All of the new diplomacy is with countries that are willing to give assistance, and it is meant to cover them in case the Washington scenario doesn't work out."
But other recent signs of diplomatic activity by Pyongyang have involved its historic ideological patrons. 
This month the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, paid an unusual visit to the Chinese Embassy in Pyongyang, at the invitation of the ambassador, Wan Yongxiang.
In its only explanation of the visit, the official North Korean media said Mr. Kim "expressed thanks for the invitation and conversed with the leading officials of the embassy."
The visit set off speculation among North Korea experts that Mr. Kim was preparing to visit China. 
It would be his first overseas trip since assuming power after the death of his father, Kim Il Sung, in 1994.
North Korea has also recently signed a new friendship treaty with Russia.
This diplomatic activity comes at a time when Mr. Kim believes that he is in a strong position politically, despite a sharp and prolonged economic decline brought on by the disappearance of its cold war allies from the Soviet bloc, and by unusually harsh weather and crop failures that led to famine.
Last year, the economy is believed to have grown slightly, for the first time in a decade. 
And in a change from his normal diet of visits to military installations, the 58-year-old North Korean leader began emphasizing visits to factories and food production centers.
Now, many experts say, Mr. Kim appears determined to bring about a rebound from economic collapse. 
He has apparently decided that one of the keys to doing this is through a controlled opening to the rest of the world. 
If this is so, there is still considerable divergence among experts over the economic direction to expect from Pyongyang.
Under its Sunshine Policy, South Korea is investing heavily, both in economic and diplomatic terms, in encouraging its neighbor to emulate the gradual evolution toward capitalism undertaken by Communist nations like China and Vietnam.
In a recent interview, President Kim of South Korea said Pyongyang had three options before it: war, which would end disastrously for it; the status quo, which he said has already proven a dead end, and evolutionary change.
"This third option, which I believe is the only viable option, is to follow the example of China and Vietnam," Mr. Kim said. 
"They have maintained their political systems, while gradually opening up economically. 
This is what we, and all of our friends and allies, want from North Korea, and we are prepared to help them."
      
