
President Clinton yesterday urged China's president, Jiang Zemin, to open a dialogue with the new government of Taiwan and put a stop to China's missile exports to Pakistan.
But in what had already been a week of diplomatic frustration for Mr. Clinton, Mr. Jiang offered little more than good wishes for the president's retirement in four months and thanks for supporting China's bid to join the World Trade Organization.
While Mr. Clinton's aides described the session as cordial, it was not expected to produce any breakthroughs -- and it did not.
It came on a day that Mr. Clinton's efforts to restart the peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians made such little headway that the president was overheard by photographers telling the Irish prime minister, Bertie Ahern, "This Middle East thing -- it's maddening."
He was not the only leader unhappy at the diplomatic gridlock as the summit talks here ended. 
A senior Japanese official said Israel's prime minister, Ehud Barak, had vented his unhappiness to his Japanese counterpart, Yoshiro Mori. 
At a meeting yesterday, he complained that the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, "has not responded" to several new proposals on the status of Jerusalem, and questioned whether "Arafat has the political courage to make the move."
Mr. Clinton's aides had played down the prospect of any major progress on Chinese missile exports, Tibet or Taiwan during Mr. Clinton's last months in office. 
But they had hoped that the expected Senate approval this month of permanent normal trade relations with China -- which the United States promised as part of the accord with China that ushers it into the World Trade Organization -- would be rewarded. 
They hoped to claim political progress on issues that have bedeviled Washington's relations with Beijing since the two first met in 1993.
In a measure of the two leaders' continuing communications problems after seven years of interchanges, a senior administration official said yesterday that the meeting was "designed to get these two men on the same wavelength a little more."
But Mr. Jiang was eager to show his American hosts that he could talk the talk of a high-tech nation, even while offering up familiar lectures about respecting China's sovereignty. 
Immediately after his hour-and-a-half meeting with Mr. Clinton, he used a luncheon meeting with America's top business executives to declare that China is plugging into the world.
"We now have over 16 million netizens," he said in a speech delivered entirely in English, "more than 27,000 World Wide Web sites, over 70,000 Chinese domain names and 61 million mobile phones in China."
But he did not mention China's recent efforts to crack down on the use of the Internet for the spread of dissenting opinions in China, and Mr. Clinton, aides said, never broached the subject.
When Mr. Jiang was done reciting China's technological advances to the executives, though, he wove back to familiar territory. 
He argued that China was a place of religious tolerance, saying, "The languages, religions and customs of ethnic minorities in China, including the Tibetans, are protected and respected, and their cultural traditions have been carried forward and developed."
Pro-Tibet groups argue that China has done all it can to stamp out the Tibetan culture, and they succeeded in killing a World Bank project this summer that some feared would relocate ethnic Tibetan farmers and further dilute Tibetan culture.
Mr. Jiang also called the Falun Gong religious group, whose members have been arrested in large numbers in recent months, a cult and said any government would crack down on "those who have done severe harm to the people."
As he spoke, members of the group performed silent exercises across Park Avenue, under the watchful eye of the police.
James Lilley, a former American ambassador to Beijing who was at the luncheon, said Mr. Jiang's arguments amounted to "an effort to grab the religious issues by the throat and say, 'We have religious tolerance, but not your kind,' " adding, "He just wants to sail right by the issue."
The conversation on China's missile exports to Pakistan came after Mr. Clinton, earlier this summer, sent a delegation to China to try to cut off the supply. 
The administration worries that any new missile technology would heighten Pakistan's ability to strike India.
But Mr. Jiang, by all accounts, has paid little attention to the issue. 
"This is going to take a while," an aide to Mr. Clinton said.
Nor did the Chinese leader indicate that he was ready to open talks with Taiwan's newly elected leader, Chen Shui-bian. 
The aide said "they spent a long time on Taiwan, but Jiang took much of that describing China's historical claims" to the island.
That also seemed out of place for what will probably be the second-to-last meeting between the two leaders; Mr. Clinton, by now, has heard China's claims to Taiwan many, many times.
