
This time, Enin Supriyanto is ready. 
Like other ethnic Chinese here, he has his escape plan, his emergency telephone numbers and his extra rations.
On Saturday night, surrounded by the music of frogs and the sweet scent of clove cigarettes, he took his turn on neighborhood watch, sitting by a barbed-wire barricade at the gated entrance of his housing complex until well past midnight.
One year after a paroxysm of rioting in which ethnic Chinese were the targets of widespread vandalism, arson and rape, Chinese all across the country have been preparing for new attacks before the general election next Monday.
Some bought guns. 
Some are paying military units to guard commercial areas. 
Many of those who can afford to have left the country.
But something utterly unexpected has happened. 
The election campaign, in most parts of the country, has so far been mainly peaceful.
The threatening telephone calls to Chinese residents and the anonymous leaflets and rumors of attacks that have circulated in Chinese communities have not reappeared.
Sitting by their barbed-wire barricade, Mr. Enin and a dozen of his neighbors strummed a guitar, played cards and discussed their tennis strokes over late-night snacks and glasses of hot Ovaltine.
"We are playing cards, we are eating noodles, we are talking nonsense," Mr. Enin said, happily relieved.
Although Indonesia's Chinese people know that they can become targets of violence at any time, as they have been periodically over the decades, there is an emerging hope here that something fundamental may be starting to change.
The cautiously upbeat mood among the residents here in the western suburbs of Jakarta is repeated among political analysts -- both Chinese and non-Chinese -- as they survey the national scene.
After the shock of the riots and the forced resignation of President Suharto last year, the analysts say, Indonesia's Chinese may be inching toward the mainstream of society.
Adapting a pattern set by centuries of Dutch colonization, Mr. Suharto created what one analyst called a "golden cage" for the Chinese. 
They were offered economic opportunity in exchange for their support and their exclusion from the country's political and cultural life.
They constitute less than 4 percent of the population in this country of more than 200 million, but they control the bulk of its private commerce -- ranging from small rice merchants to billionaire tycoons.
Mr. Suharto's departure after 32 years of rule opened the way for a reorganization of all aspects of society, from freeing the press to forming political parties to redefining the role of Indonesians of Chinese ancestry.
Led by a better-educated, better-integrated younger generation, many of the Chinese have begun to seek a new, more active place in society.
"They had been convinced for about 30 years that everything was fine," said Daniel S. Lev, an expert on Indonesia at the University of Washington. 
"They were isolated in a sense -- they were denied any right to participate politically, but there was, at the higher levels, a payoff: you got rich.
"But for many, what happened last May came as a really brutal shock, because the part of the deal they forgot was that if things got serious they would have to serve as scapegoats."
Hari Tjan, a political analyst with the independent Center for Strategic and International Studies, who is an ethnic Chinese, said of the riots, "The cost was very high, but it is a learning process that has been started."
For the moment, he said, there has also been a change in the attitudes of indigenous political leaders, who he said "don't want to play this Chinese card anymore."
"I am amazed that their conscience as human beings has revived," Mr. Tjan said, "and it is a wonderful, encouraging development. 
Nearly all the parties are now embracing the Chinese and telling them, 'You are one of us. 
Please work together for the country.'
"
In a country where Chinese schools, newspapers, signboards and public ceremonies were banned by Mr. Suharto, it has been an extraordinary sight at some political rallies to see, among the crowds, traditional Chinese lion and dragon dances.
As they feel freer to redefine their role, Chinese here have begun a debate over whether to assert their cultural separateness or to try to blend into the broader national identity.
Some Chinese have banded together to form a culturally based political party. 
Others have chosen not to emphasize their separateness and have joined some of the 47 other parties engaged in the campaign.
Some responded to the riots by reaching out in solidarity to the overseas Chinese in other nations, said Anugerah Pekerti, an Indonesian Chinese who is chairman of World Vision Indonesia, an aid organization.
Others, like Mr. Pekerti himself, advocate a process he calls "Indonesianization," in which the country's scores of disparate ethnic groups will draw closer together in a common identity.
The debate illustrates an essential and wide-ranging change from Mr. Suharto's father-knows-best era: Indonesians are reconstructing their nation on their own terms.
And the basic lesson the Chinese seem to be applying, in the often-quoted words of the Indonesian Chinese political analyst Arief Budiman, is: "If you remain timid, you will forever be trampled on."
