
The Middle Heart
By Bette Bao Lord.
370 pp. 
New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
The historian W. J. F. Jenner has said that China is caught in a prison of history. 
He suggests that there is no escape from the past, that even the Chinese language -- which can describe a situation today, last year and 2,000 years ago in identical linguistic forms -- traps the culture and people in the stagnant, and often violent, ways of the past. 
Mr. Jenner posits that this adherence to the old led inevitably to the events at Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989.
Bette Bao Lord, the Chinese-born wife of a former United States Ambassador to China, has carved out an interesting career by bringing China and the lives of the Chinese to American readers in a variety of forms. 
She wrote "In the Year of the Boar and Jackie Robinson," a fictionalized account of her childhood as an immigrant in Brooklyn, as a children's book. 
She told the story of her younger sister, who was left behind with an aunt in China because she was too young to travel, and became separated from the rest of the family when the bamboo curtain came down, in the biography "Eighth Moon."
Her popular novel "Spring Moon" appealed to lovers of historical fiction, telling a story that spanned five generations. 
"Legacies" was a series of essays and first-person narratives on the events leading up to the Tiananmen Square massacre. 
Her new novel, "The Middle Heart," draws on her facility with all these genres -- it is a compelling and admirably accurate history of China over the last 75 years, lightly disguised as a conventional multigenerational love story.
In 1932, the year of the Japanese conquest of Manchuria, Steel Hope, the spoiled son of the patriarch of the House of Li, and Mountain Pine, a physically lame but academically brilliant servant, befriend Firecrackers, a wild orphan girl masquerading as a boy. 
They become blood brothers, pledging to die in defense of their country. 
Over the next 50 years, the three companions are separated, thrown into disgrace and left for dead, fall in love with the wrong people and spend a decade here and there in solitary confinement. 
They also survive the invasion by the Japanese, the civil war, attacks on rightists, the madness of the Cultural Revolution and, finally, the tragedy of Tiananmen Square.
At times, "The Middle Heart" seems hopelessly obvious. 
In 1940, in the Nationalist wartime capital of Chongqing, Steel Hope and Mountain Pine -- the former now an engineering student, the latter an aspiring writer -- go to the opera to see a beautiful actress, Summer Wishes. 
She turns out to be none other than Firecrackers. 
After the revolution, when the Communist Party man arrives in the old ancestral village where Summer Wishes and Mountain Pine are happily married, guess who that turns out to be.
To some readers these coincidences will seem implausible, but they should reconsider. 
In times of turmoil, which China has certainly had its share of during the last three-quarters of a century, doesn't it make sense that the same groups of people (the elite, intellectuals, artists) would repeatedly run into one another -- struggling to return to their homes, seeking solace in exile, languishing in labor camps?
Ultimately, it is this dramatic aspect of "The Middle Heart" that makes it so readable. 
In fact, Mrs. Lord has given her fictional story a good deal of authenticity by using small details -- telling nuggets of fact -- from her interviews for "Legacies."
In "The Middle Heart," Steel Hope, released from 10 years in solitary confinement, is able to pace only four steps in one direction and back again. 
This anecdote comes directly from the opening page of "Legacies," where Mrs. Lord tells the story of a former prisoner she met in Beijing. 
Mountain Pine, after years of forced labor, loses his temper when someone wastes half a glass of water. 
Mrs. Lord found this detail when she asked some Chinese children how prison had changed their mother. 
When another character in this novel is tied into the "takeoff position" -- arms twisted and tied up and back to a board as a means of humiliation and pain during the Cultural Revolution -- Mrs. Lord is using an experience she has elsewhere described as happening to her own aunt.
As each of Mrs. Lord's characters is forced to renounce loved ones, political beliefs, even his or her own morals to survive, it is important to remember that few people in China reached the 1990's without making some similar sacrifices.
In the late 1950's, Mountain Pine, declared a rightist, encourages his wife to divorce him so that their son will not be disgraced. 
"Once I'm sent away," he tells Summer Wishes, "no one must ever speak of me again, so that Little Panda will learn not to talk about his father. 
Since my existence can only harm him, I must cease to exist."
During the Cultural Revolution, in the 1960's, Summer Wishes, now married to Steel Hope, must beat her husband before hundreds of people. 
As he whispers encouragement, she addresses the crowd: "I know this filthy Revisionist better than anyone."
These scenes may seem melodramatic to American readers, but they were played out again and again in real life by people who were just trying to outlast the latest political upheaval.
At the end, a granddaughter, North Star, goes to take part in the demonstration at Tiananmen Square. 
She recalls the words Summer Wishes kept repeating at her death -- "I wanted to be a human being."
Bette Bao Lord has taken the modern history of a quarter of the world's population and turned it into the story of human beings surviving against tremendous adversity. 
"The Middle Heart" is a moving tribute to the Chinese people and their capacity to endure and, despite all, hope.
