
Three months ago, a research mathematician was dismissed from his job at the Los Alamos nuclear weapons laboratory for security violations. 
Today Federal authorities say it is most unlikely that the mathematician, who is at the center of the uproar over the suspected theft of nuclear secrets by China, will ever face criminal charges of espionage.
Moreover, the officials are unsure whether the scientist, Wen Ho Lee, will be accused of any wrongdoing, even though investigators found in March that he had downloaded thousands of secret codes used in the design of the most sophisticated American nuclear weapons.
The uncertain status of the case has infuriated some Government officials and lawmakers, primarily Republicans, who say Mr. Lee may be responsible for the most damaging espionage of the post-cold-war era. 
That conclusion was reinforced last month, when a Congressional panel found that China had used nuclear secrets stolen from American labs to develop advanced miniature warheads and a mobile ballistic missile.
Mr. Lee's lawyer, Mark Holscher, said his client was an innocent scientist who had been branded as a spy even though he had not even been charged with any crime. 
"Mr. Lee has been unfairly injected into a politically charged debate over America-China relations and has been subject to improper leaks in violation of Federal law," Mr. Holscher said.
The extent and nature of evidence against Mr. Lee remains obscure. 
But interviews with officials about the still classified evidence -- including details about Mr. Lee's work, his meetings with Chinese scientists and his overseas travel -- help explain why after three years of investigation law-enforcement officials acknowledge that they will probably never learn the truth.
Over all, officials said, the evidence is a mosaic of fact and conclusions that suggests why counterintelligence cases are frustrating and often fail to result in prosecutions. 
These are some of the points:
*There are no witnesses who saw Mr. Lee engage in espionage.
*There is no evidence of a motive in the form of unexplained income or a change in his style of life.
*Nor are there indications that Mr. Lee, a naturalized American who was born on Taiwan, was ideologically allied with Beijing.
*Even the evidence that a theft occurred is circumstantial.
Still, counterintelligence officials said, they strongly suspect that China stole the important information data in the mid-80's. 
The loss was apparently not found at the time, when an investigation might have had the greatest chance of success. 
Authorities did not realize that the information had been stolen until 1995, when suspicions were aroused at the lab in New Mexico by an analysis of Chinese nuclear tests and when the Central Intelligence Agency obtained a document with esoteric computations indicating that Beijing had acquired nuclear secrets.
Mr. Lee emerged as a suspect because he was one of the few researchers in the area that is thought to have been compromised, computational fluid dynamics. 
Many people at the Energy Department were aware of the information. 
But officials said Mr. Lee was the sole scientist with full access who had also visited Chinese counterparts in Beijing.
From there the evidentiary trail followed a meandering course. 
Investigators pieced together an account of Mr. Lee's contacts with Chinese over the years, producing an outline of circumstantial information. 
Some of it seemed to raise questions about Mr. Lee. Some of it seemed too speculative to shed significant light on his activities. 
And none of it was solid enough to form the basis for an indictment, Government officials said.
One crucial component is missing. 
There is no direct evidence that Mr. Lee ever passed or tried to pass on to China any classified national security information.
Although the evidence is apparently insufficient to prosecute Mr. Lee, the Federal Bureau of Investigation thought that the case against him was compelling enough to ask the Justice Department in 1997 for permission to eavesdrop on Mr. Lee under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. 
The law lets the Government monitor subjects electronically, not to assemble evidence of a crime, but to gather intelligence in national security cases.
The still classified F.B.I. application cited questions about Mr. Lee dating from the early 80's, when he contacted a scientist who had been ousted from a weapons lab in California after an inquiry into the theft of secrets about the neutron bomb.
The application, made up of drafts of documents exchanged between the F.B.I. and the Justice Department, described how Chinese intelligence differed from espionage by the United States' traditional adversaries. 
The Chinese, the document said, usually seek information from overseas Chinese who are traveling in China through scientist-to-scientist contacts, a more elusive form of espionage because it does not rely on identifiable intelligence officers.
The F.B.I. request said Mr. Lee had failed to disclose the identities of all the scientists whom he contacted in China on visits in 1986 and 1988. 
The Energy Department had approved the trips and authorized his meetings and discussions of nonclassified matters with Chinese officials. 
After the trips, Mr. Lee and his wife met American security officials and identified a number of Chinese scientists whom they had met.
But counterintelligence officials apparently suspected that Mr. Lee might have held back some pertinent information about his activities during vacations taken after each trip. 
On the vacations, the officials said, Mr. Lee had undisclosed contacts with scientists, including one identified as Side Hu, a top official at an institute of engineering physics involved in nuclear weapons research. 
Other officials said the omissions might have been inadvertent, in light of the numerous contacts that Mr. Lee did report.
In 1992, Mr. Hu led a delegation of Chinese officials on a tour of Los Alamos that the Energy Department had authorized, documents show. 
On the visit, Mr. Hu spoke privately with Mr. Lee and embraced him in a congratulatory manner.
Later, counterintelligence agents surreptitiously analyzed Mr. Lee's spending and found what they thought might be another puzzle piece. 
They found two charges on a credit card at a travel agency while Mr. Lee was in Hong Kong in 1994. 
One charge was for $100, the other for $700, enough to pay for what officials said might have been an airline ticket to China.
Republican Senators like Fred Thompson of Tennessee and at least one Democrat, Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey, have expressed outrage that the Justice Department blocked the F.B.I. request for a warrant to eavesdrop on Mr. Lee, a step that they suggest would have accelerated the investigation at a critical time, before Mr. Lee realized that he was under suspicion.
In mid-1997, the Office of Intelligence Policy Review at the Justice Department found that the evidence was so nebulous and dated that it refused the F.B.I. request for electronic monitoring. 
After a bureau official questioned the decision, Attorney General Janet Reno ordered a second review by the Justice Department, which also found that the bureau had failed to produce enough evidence to justify the request.
Ms. Reno has said bureau officials dropped the issue. 
For her part, she said recently, "I assumed that since I did not hear from the F.B.I. that the matter had been resolved to their satisfaction."
Instead, bureau officials said investigators decided to pursue other avenues. 
An agent who was posing as a Chinese intelligence officer approached Mr. Lee. The scientist rebuffed an invitation to spy for Beijing, Government officials said, but he did not tell authorities about the contact until they had approached him to explain it.      
