
The United States won three of four events today on the final day of the Pan Pacific swimming championships and emerged as the top team in the first major test of the "fast" pool where Olympic events will be swum next year.
Twelve world records were set during the 8-day, 12-nation meet at the Sydney International Aquatic Center.
The American team -- led by the sprinter Jenny Thompson and the backstrokers Lenny Krayzelburg and Brooke Bennett, who among them won 11 medals -- edged out the host nation in medals, 35-32, and in points, 391-372.
However, the Australians, led by Ian Thorpe, Michael Klim and Susie O'Neill, matched the American gold medal tally of 13. 
The last time Australia bested the United States in total medals at a swimming competition was in 1956, at the Olympics in Melbourne.
Today, for the first time in these championships, no world records were set. 
Thompson earned her fifth and sixth gold medals of the meet, winning the 50-meter freestyle and swimming the butterfly leg in the women's medley relay. 
The American men's medley relay also won.
In the men's 1,500 freestyle, 19-year-old Grant Hackett of Australia won in 14 minutes 45.60 seconds, the second-fastest time ever.
The brightest star of the championships was Penny Heyns, the 24-year-old South African breast-stroke specialist who lives in Canada. 
Heyns set four world records at distances from 50 to 200 meters, bringing her haul of world records to eight in the last six weeks.
Swimming's oldest record survived the onslaught. 
Mary T. Meagher's 2:05.96 in the 200 butterfly, set in 1981, withstood a strong challenge last Thursday by O'Neill, the defending Olympic champion. 
O'Neill, 26, fell 0.64 of a second short.
However, the second butterfly record Meagher set in 1981 was finally broken. 
Thompson, 26, clipped five-hundredths of a second off Meagher's 18-year-old record in the 100 butterfly.
Meagher, now 34, said: "I knew this day would come. 
This now means that a part of my journey in swimming is over. 
There is a new record holder, and someone can go after Jenny."
The Chinese team was conspicuous for being almost invisible. 
Chinese swimmers qualified for only one final and finished last in that.
China originally named 20 swimmers for the meet, but sent only five. 
The reason given by Chinese authorities was the "conflicting domestic schedule" of the All-China Games in October.
The coach of the United States women's team, Richard Quick, and Australia's national coach, Don Talbot, were among officials here who expressed suspicions of the Chinese explanation. 
A series of Chinese female swimmers have been suspended for using performance-enhancing drugs in recent years.
However, the president of the Australian Swimming Federation, Terry Gathercole, said he was encouraged by the fact that in the last year Chinese officials had reported 10 instances of the use of banned substances by their own swimmers. 
"This indicates that China is trying" to act on the problem, he said.
