
Officials of swimming's world governing body yesterday criticized the United States, Canada and Australia for banning China from a pre-Olympic meet this summer in Atlanta.
In light of seven recent positive drug tests among Chinese swimmers, including two world champions, the three aquatic powers voted on Sunday in Honolulu to prohibit China from swimming in the Pan Pacific Championships in August. 
The Pan Pacs, as they are known, will serve as a test event for the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta. 
Japan cast the lone dissenting vote among Pan-Pac charter members.
Yesterday, two officials of FINA, the sport's governing body, said it was premature to ban China from the meet. 
Last week, FINA announced plans to control the drug problem in Chinese swimming.
First, it will send a commission to China in March to investigate the involvement of swimmers, coaches, doctors and team officials in the use of banned substances. 
Second, FINA will substantially increase the number of out-of-competition drug tests administered in 1995. 
Third, a special congress will be convened in Rio de Janeiro in December to impose stricter penalties for doping.
United States swimming officials have called for greater vigilance since the Chinese women won 12 of 16 gold medals at the world championships in Rome last September. 
While they applaud the latest steps taken by FINA, American officials said, the ban was necessary because harsher penalties for drug use would not be implemented in time for the Pan Pacific Championships.
"We believe that this is not premature; it is based on substantial evidence that there is some kind of structured or organized doping for sports in the People's Republic of China," said Ray Essick, the executive director of the United States Swimming Federation. 
"Until we are given absolute proof that this will no longer take place, or until appropriate rules or sanctions are in place from FINA to deal with it, we're not interested in having our athletes compete in an unfair competition."
Gunnar Werner, the honorary secretary of FINA, called the ban of Chinese athletes from the Pan Pacs "regrettable."
Cornel Marculescu, the director of FINA, said in a telephone interview: "Perhaps this is not the best way to solve these problems. 
FINA has already taken strong actions against doping."
Officials from FINA and the International Olympic Committee also made it clear yesterday that they have no intention of banning all Chinese swimmers from the 1996 Summer Games. 
The seven Chinese swimmers suspended after the Asian Games in Japan last fall will be ineligible, however, including the world champions Lu Bin and Yang Aihua. 
All seven tested positive for the anabolic steroid dihydrotestosterone, commonly known as DHT.
"Excluding a whole nation or a delegation because some athletes, or some in their entourage, break rules, I don't think would be an appropriate measure," Francois Carrard, director general of the I.O.C., said in a telephone interview from Lausanne, Switzerland.
