
Luggage belonging to a Chinese swimmer was seized yesterday by Australian custom officials who said it contained a substance labeled as human growth hormone. 
If the label is correct, the incident would reinforce the widely held belief that China's female swimmers have been using banned bodybuilding drugs.
Yuan Yuan, a breast-stroke swimmer who won a silver medal at the 1994 world championships, was part of a 29-person Chinese group flying from Beijing to Sydney to Perth for the world championships. 
The Australian customs service said a routine search of luggage in Sydney uncovered 13 vials packed in ice in a thermos flask. 
It said there were 13 more vials of a diluting fluid.
The spokesman said the vials, which were not declared, were clearly labeled in English as human somatropin, a human growth hormone that athletes have been known to use in place of anabolic steroids. 
All those drugs are banned by the International Olympic Committee and the international federations governing each Olympic sport, but there are no effective tests to detect the use of human growth hormone.
Athletes use the drugs to train more intensively, with a quicker recovery time. 
Used in conjunction with weight lifting and a high-protein diet, the drugs also promote muscle growth.
A laboratory analysis of the substance seized at the airport may be available today. 
The International Swimming Federation, known by its French initials as FINA, said it would have no comment until the vials had been analyzed. 
It also said it could not take action without proof that athletes had used illegal drugs.
It was unclear exactly who the vials belonged to, and there has been no official comment on the incident from Yuan or the Chinese swimming federation. 
Yuan told customs officers that the vials belonged to her coach. 
John Hawksworth, an Australian customs official, said a team coach said he packed the bag. 
A Chinese team official said Yuan was bringing in the substance for a friend in Australia.
Deryk Snelling, the national performance director for British swimming, said FINA should consider banning China from the championships, which began earlier this week. 
"It'll penalize a lot of people," he said, "but it's the only way they'll get the message."
Western swimming officials have insisted that despite denials by the Chinese, the rise of China's female swimmers in the 1990's is a result of illegal drug use. 
The reaction to the seizure in Australia was one of vindication.
"This time, they've been caught with their hands in the cookie jar," said Don Talbot, the Australian national coach.
"We dream of such moments," said Mark Schubert, an assistant coach of the United States team.
In last October's Chinese national championships, two world records were set and the women swam the year's fastest time in eight events, fueling suspicions that the Chinese were using banned substances. 
In 1994, the swimmers won 12 of the 16 gold medals in the world championships in Rome. 
Two months later, at the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan, seven Chinese female swimmers tested positive for the use of anabolic steroids.
In all, 23 Chinese swimmers have tested positive since 1990 for using steroids. 
Officials from other nations demanded that FINA establish out-of-competition testing, which it did. 
Shi Tianshu, the leader of the Chinese team at Perth, said his federation had conducted more than 100 out-of-competition tests in the last two months, more than 650 in the last year, with no positive results.
On Tuesday, Shi said his country was clean on the drug issue. 
"We compare with any nation in the fight against drugs," he said.
Hawksworth said the confiscated material was found by accident. 
He said one passenger on the plane fit a narcotics profile. 
That person's baggage was inspected and nothing turned up. 
Yuan's bags were on the same trolley, and, Hawksworth said, "We found the stuff."
A journalist from Hong Kong Star Television identified Yuan's coach as Zhou Ming and said he remained in Sydney after the vials were discovered. 
After questioning, the others went on to Perth, where they learned that 12 teammates who arrived two days before had been tested for drugs after practice that morning.
It was a bad day all around for FINA. 
It had lifted the world-championship accreditation of Winfried Leopold, the German coach, after he admitted he had given banned drugs to athletes in East Germany. 
Yesterday, an Australian court ordered the credential restored.
And in an interview to be published today in the German newspaper Chemnitz Morgenpost, Petra Kind-Schneider, a 1980 Olympic swimming champion for East Germany, said she had heart and liver problems as a result of years of drug use. 
She said she started taking drugs just after her 14th birthday and was told to take blue pills four times a day, but that no one told her they contained anabolic steroids.
