
The night Kerri Strug turned a bad ankle into a very good final vault at the 1996 Summer Olympics, Kristen Maloney was already asleep.
"I had a really obnoxious early-morning workout, and it was getting too late, so my mom told me I had to go to bed," Maloney said. 
"But I watched the tape of it the next day, and not just once."
Four years later, Strug has retired and Maloney is the one in the Olympics. 
Like most members of this American women's gymnastics team, she has a difficult act to follow and precious little chance of succeeding.
The 1996 team, which nicknamed itself the Magnificent Seven, became the first American women's gymnastics team to win the gold medal, and it had great depth, ample experience and a significant home-arena advantage. 
Two members of that team have returned -- Dominique Dawes and Amy Chow -- but the rest either failed to qualify (Shannon Miller), suffered injuries (Dominique Moceanu and Jaycie Phelps) or retired (Amanda Borden and Strug).
In their place is a new group of gymnasts, led by Elise Ray, the new national champion. 
But Ray and her teammates could finish only sixth in last year's world championships in China, behind traditional gymnastics powers like Russia, Romania and Ukraine and more troubling, behind the Chinese and weaker Australians.
Closing the gap on Russia and Romania, who finished second and third behind the United States in 1996, is almost certainly too much to ask. 
The Russians are led by Svetlana Khorkina, the reigning European all-around champion whose height, innovative moves and relatively advanced age (21) set her apart from her peers. 
The Russians also have two other gymnasts capable of winning all-around medals: Yelena Zamolodchikova and Yelena Produnova. 
The Romanians are led by Simona Amanar, a bronze medalist in the all-around and gold medalist in the vault at the last Olympic games, and the reigning world champion Maria Olaru.
"It's going to be a fistfight out there," Bela Karolyi, the United States team coordinator, said of the Russian and Romanian duel for the gold medal. 
"It's probably going to be one of the most disputed Olympic Games in history. 
The Russians have been improving for the past 20 years. 
But in Romania, it's still based on an incredible amount of repetitions. 
They have very nicely dedicated athletes."
Ukraine has produced the last two Olympic all-around gold medalists (Tatyana Gutsu in 1992 and Lilya Podkopayeva in 1996) and has another candidate this year in Victoria Karpenko. 
But Ukraine and China appear to lack the depth to challenge for anything but bronze. 
So a medal for the United States team would come as a surprise to the international gymnastics community.
"After the incredible victory in 1996, we probably celebrated a little longer than we should have and had less prominent results in the years after," Karolyi said. 
"But I believe coming down to sixth in the world was a temporary situation. 
I believe the federation handled the matter very well after the world championship. 
It reviewed the power and the unity of the team, and that definitely showed in our national championships and even more through the Olympic trial held in Boston in August. 
The team is strong and united."
The federation's most dramatic move was to lure Karolyi out of retirement and put him in charge. 
But in truth, the team did not look as strong as Karolyi would have liked in Boston, with gymnasts struggling with nerves and routines, particularly on the balance beam. 
Morgan White, one of the team's most consistent performers, was named to the Olympic squad but then had to withdraw because of a stress fracture in her foot. 
She was replaced by Tasha Schwikert, the second alternate. 
Schwikert is 15 but is eligible for the Games because she will turn 16 before the end of the Olympic year.
But Jamie Dantzscher, another member of the team, sprained her ankle in practice on Thursday. 
She is still expected to be in the competition, which begins on Sunday with qualifying. 
Nonetheless, Dantzscher's mishap was one more unsettling incident for a team that will need to be at its most settled and focused. 
Karolyi was also concerned that the team drawing a place in the first of the three qualifying groups would make the task even more difficult.
"You're so cold when you go out before the judges, and you get the cold judgment from the judges," said Karolyi, who as an administrator rather than a coach will not be allowed on the competition floor for the first time in his Olympic career.
The men's team competition, in which China is a heavy favorite to win its first gold, begins on Saturday.
