
The last event of the night was unfolding when the usually stoic Chinese gymnasts tilted their heads to the rafters like dust bowl survivors welcoming the first raindrop.
Suddenly, there was relief. 
Revealing untraditional emotion, they jumped around in a huddle on the side of the podium once they realized the 40-year spell that had left their mighty teams with nothing but Olympic consolation prizes had come to an end.
Tonight, the team gold medal in men's gymnastics belonged to China for the first time. 
Almost giddy, the Chinese gymnasts floated onto the podium at the Dome and saluted the collection of fans waving their country's flag in the seats. 
A moment later, several of the gymnasts glanced down at their priceless medallions, stared at every detail and held them in their palms, not wanting to let go.
"We have worked hard for several generations," Coach Huang Yubin said through a translator. 
"We have fought for this for 40 years. 
We think we should taste the fruits of the Champagne."
In every pocket of China, there was cause for celebration. 
After five world championships, but three Olympic silver medals since 1984, China could go home having conquered all the heavy expectations. 
Instead of buckling under the Olympic pressure as they had in the past, the Chinese thrived on the challenge, finishing a dominant 1.613 points ahead of the silver medalists from Ukraine and 2.062 points in front of the bronze medal winners from Russia.
"We were under some pressure," Huang acknowledged, "but this was our best chance today."
This was the Americans' opportunity, too. 
This was their moment to separate themselves from their position as background scenery to the popular United States women's program, and grab their first medal since their 1984 gold medal heyday. 
After their fourth-place position in the preliminaries, the Americans had a bronze medal on their minds.
But at the same time the Chinese began their celebration on one side of the arena, a snapshot of the United States' collapsible performance was developing on the horizontal bar. 
In need of a miracle as they entered the event, languishing in fifth position after five of the six apparatus, the Americans watched with horror as their top two gymnasts crashed to the mat during their routines.
The 17-year-old Paul Hamm blew his usually calm cover and fell twice on a difficult release move. 
Then, the team's star, Blaine Wilson, swung into his release move but could only swipe at the bar with his fingertips as he fell into the padding.
With that, the Americans' fate as the fifth-place team was sealed. 
In a sign of their inability to show progress, their finish was the same as it was in 1996. 
Once again, the American men couldn't find a consistent leader to guide them through the team competition. 
Wilson, the five-time national champion, wasn't up to it. 
Even on his signature event, the still rings, he wowed everyone with his strength moves but took a big step back on his dismount.
Although he scored a 9.7 on the vault and a 9.775 on the parallel bars, the Americans needed Wilson to be spectacular in every area. 
The horizontal bar, and his score of 9.050, only punctuated a disappointing night for him.
"We wouldn't be where we are without Blaine; he has carried us for a long time," said the three-time Olympian John Roethlisberger, who finished his gymnastics career with a 9.7 on the horizontal bar. 
"He's not disappointed for himself. 
He's disappointed for the team."
Wilson left his teammates to speak for him. 
He exited after the competition without answering questions. 
In his absence, Coach Peter Kormann took the blame for the team's inability to push for a medal.
"The guys did everything I asked them to do," Kormann said. 
"Obviously, my coaching just wasn't good enough. 
It was the coaching; they didn't screw up."
The team's lone triumph was on the parallel bars, where everyone posted scores of 9.7 or better, but it was too late to make up for the bobbles on the floor exercise and the mistakes on the vault. 
In the end, the catastrophes on the horizontal bar didn't doom them. 
The flurry of deductions along the way did.
This wasn't the way Kormann wanted to go out as coach of the team. 
Kormann said he is set to retire Oct. 
1, and does not know who his successor will be. 
If he could recommend someone, it would be the 30-year-old Roethlisberger, who gathered the group for an emotional team meeting after the competition.
"I felt like we were going to win a medal, to be honest," Roethlisberger said, his voice trembling with emotion. 
"I hope America is proud of us. 
We wanted to win for our country, for ourselves, for our family and friends."
In four years, the United States team will try again. 
For 40 years, that has been the mantra in China. 
Next time, next time.
"It's about time," said Peter Vidmar, an NBC analyst and former member of America's 1984 gold medal team. 
"I decided to give China one more chance. 
I said on TV, I'm going to pick them for the gold one more time and never again. 
For the amount of work they've put in, they've been deserving of the gold a long time."
And as the Chinese stood on the podium, the gold medals felt good in their hands.
"We've never touched the gold medal before," said Yang Wei, who led the team by posting no score lower than 9.575. 
"We've only seen it."
Tonight, they had ownership, at last.
