
At the height of cold-war intrigue in Africa between the superpowers, Ethiopia and Somalia switched allegiances almost overnight in 1977, in a stunning realignment of the continent's strategic checkerboard.
Somalia turned away from Moscow and toward Washington, while Ethiopia, the region's most populous country and long a conservative Western ally, suddenly became a confirmed friend of the East bloc.
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the struggle between East and West has given way to a new rivalry for African allegiances.
China, with the world's largest population and one of its fastest-growing economies, is competing for influence against Taiwan, a small, insecure, but cash-rich capitalist country that Beijing considers a runaway province.
For the countries of Africa, which have faced diminishing assistance from traditional aid sources in the West, the competition has meant a vital new source of assistance.
For the two Asian powers, what is mostly at stake is not ideology but Africa's rich lode of United Nations votes, and especially for long-isolated Taiwan, the prestige that comes from being recognized overseas.
Taiwan has been showering money on some of Africa's most cash-hungry countries, and the nation recently mounted a diplomatic blitz on the continent, managing to establish ties with 10 countries at the expense of Beijing, which automatically suspends relations with countries that open embassies in Taiwan.
In Taiwan's biggest breakthrough so far, Senegal, a diplomatic leader among French-speaking African countries, announced this month that it was establishing relations with the island, ending 30 years of cooperation with Beijing.
The move, which surprised diplomats throughout the region, came after years of cooperation between China and Senegal. 
Beijing built hospitals and a huge national stadium and generally used its weight in the United Nations and elsewhere to support initiatives important to countries in Africa, from anti-apartheid measures to debt relief.
On a tour of West Africa only a few weeks before the announcement, a Deputy Prime Minister of China, Li Lanqing, paid a visit to Senegal that Chinese diplomats said was "very fruitful."
Although the Senegalese Government has released no information about aid offered by Taipei, the country's vigorous opposition press has speculated at great length about monetary assistance.
If Senegal was enticed by monetary offerings, it would merely be following in the footsteps of other African countries like Gambia and Niger. 
Western diplomats say Taiwan gave Gambia as much as $35 million in assistance when it recognized Taipei, and Taipei is reported to have helped Niger pay civil service salaries at a time of fiscal crisis.
Chinese diplomats say with their own country's overwhelming development needs they face a handicap in a bidding war of this sort.
"We established relations with African countries in the 1960's and 1970's, at a time when these countries needed political and economic assistance, and we have been doing everything it is within our means to do," said Tian Xiang, the first secretary of the Chinese Embassy in Abidjan. 
"We don't understand this. 
We regret it very much."
But diplomats here say that even as some of the continent's poorer nations are being peeled off by Taipei, Beijing is consolidating its relations with many larger countries.
With Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, Beijing is pursuing a chocolate-producing joint venture that could sharply increase China's consumption.
In Zaire, ruled by a dictatorship that has engendered disapproval in the West for years, diplomats say China has recently been signing contracts for one huge project after another, opening the way for a piece of that country's markets in areas like transportation and mining. 
China has also been increasing its trade and investment in the Sudan, another large country that has had difficult relations with the West.
The same is true in Nigeria, which has been under attack in the West for human rights abuses. 
Last month, China signed a $520 million contract to modernize Nigerian railroads, and it has since agreed to build two major power stations in that country.
"Beijing might not like to see the Senegals and Gambias turning their backs on them, but just like the cold war, they see this is a battle of endurance," said one European diplomat with long service in the region. 
"What this erosion hides is that China still holds most of the strong cards, and is not likely to lose them."
      
