
Risking the fury of China, Taiwan has approved a Government overhaul that appears to move the island closer to full independence.
The National Assembly approved constitutional changes late Friday that will expand presidential power and virtually eliminate the provincial government, a superfluous level of government that has been maintained since 1949 and implies that Taiwan is a province of China.
The constitutional change has "set in stone a Taiwanese identity, which has fermented over the past decade of democratization," The China Times said in an editorial today.
China, which views Taiwan as a breakaway province, had warned against abolishing the provincial government. 
It sees such a move as another step toward abandoning the doctrine of reunification.
After Taiwan gave preliminary approval to the changes on Wednesday, Beijing warned that the move would not lessen China's claim to Taiwan.
The Nationalists, who fled here after losing a civil war to the Communists on the mainland, originally retained the provincial government to back its claim to be the legitimate Government of all China. 
President Lee Teng-hui pushed for the constitutional changes after winning a landslide victory in March 1996 as Taiwan's first popularly elected President.
The constitutional amendment was approved 261-8, with the support of both the ruling Nationalists and the Democratic Progressive Party, the main opposition, which favors independence. 
The Democratic Progressives hailed the act as "opening a chapter for a new Taiwanese history."
But the pro-unification New Party boycotted the vote, saying the amendment opened the way to formal independence. 
Mourning the passing of an era, 40 party members bowed three times before the statue of Sun Yat-sen, the founder of modern China, before walking out.
The constitution was enacted in 1946, three years before the Nationalists fled the Communist takeover.
With the amendment, the legislature cannot veto the President's choice of Prime Minister, but can pass a vote of no confidence against the Prime Minister. 
Governors and provincial assembly deputies will be appointed by the Cabinet rather than elected.
The Nationalists say the amendment is intended to increase government efficiency, not to change Taiwan's national identity. 
But many of party members have been cautious about that assertion.
 
 
 
