
There is an inevitability to autumn's arrival in New York. 
Green leaves turn brown and carpet Central Park. 
Diplomatic cavalcades clog midtown Manhattan once the United Nations convenes its General Assembly. 
And Taiwan tries to get back into the United Nations while China works just as hard to keep it out.
Today, China amassed enough support for the third year in a row to delete from the General Assembly's agenda a proposal that Taiwan's lack of representation be considered.
"The question of Taiwan is purely an internal affair of China," China's delegate, Qin Huasun, told the steering committee reviewing 164 items submitted for discussion. 
"To bring up the question of the so-called Taiwan's 'representation' at the United Nations on whatever ground and in whatever form constitutes a serious encroachment upon China's sovereignty and territorial integrity."
The United Nations Charter offers membership to all "peace-loving states" that are judged willing to carry out the Charter's obligations. 
But the recommendation for admission must come from the Security Council, where China wields a veto as one of five permanent members.
It did not go that far today, and Jason Hu, the spokesman for the Taiwan Government, had anticipated losing this round.
"Our goal in seeking a return for ourselves will not succeed soon," he said in an interview last week. 
"But we will go on because we think it is important for us."
Taiwan was thrown out of the United Nations in 1971 when the General Assembly recognized Beijing as the sole representative of China. 
Now Taipei, which conceded its claim to the Chinese mainland in 1991, wants to join the United Nations with the trappings but not the outright sovereignty of an independent state, which it fears could invite an attack from China.
So the Taipei Government pursued a subtler strategy, lobbying smaller member nations to propose that the General Assembly consider the lack of representation for Taiwan's 21 million people. 
"All we are asking at this moment is the option of a study committee," Mr. Hu said.
The agenda item that China defeated proposed that Taiwan's "exceptional situation" be considered by the General Assembly "in accordance with the established model of parallel representation of divided countries at the United Nations."
This alluded to West Germany and East Germany, which had separate seats before Germany's unification, and to North Korea and South Korea, which are both members.
But China argues that the island does not merit United Nations membership.
"Only after the reunification is accomplished can the Taiwan compatriots, together with other Chinese people of all ethnic groups, truly and fully enjoy the dignity and honor attained by their great motherland in the world," Mr. Qin said.
In all, 20 of the 185 General Assembly members voted to discuss the creation of a study committee, but they were outnumbered.
Mr. Hu had identified 15 initial supporters as Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Niger, Panama, Solomon Islands and Swaziland. 
Nearly all are poor and need the sort of development assistance that Taiwan can provide.
Mr. Qin accused the Taipei Government of resorting to "dollar diplomacy" to buy its way into the United Nations.
