
Taiwan's governing Nationalist Party suffered surprising losses to an independence-minded opposition party in local elections today, a result that could affect next year's national election and ties with China.
"This is a major setback for us," the party secretary general, Wu Poh-hsiung, said even before officials confirmed that the party had won just 8 of 23 contested municipalities.
Mr. Wu said the Nationalists, who have governed Taiwan since fleeing the Chinese mainland after being defeated by the Communists in 1949, had not expected the losses.
The Democratic Progressives, who oppose reunification with China and advocate Taiwan's eventual independence, called the vote a taste of things to come in the Parliamentary election due in late 1998 and beyond. 
"We are confident that we will become a ruling party," said the deputy party chief, Chen Chung-hsin. 
"We are full of confidence that we will win next year's parliamentary election and I think we stand a good chance in the presidential election in 2000.
"People identify with the Democratic Progressives' main platform -- public safety and welfare," he added.
Mr. Chen said the vote would force Beijing to take notice. 
But he also pledged to work to reduce tensions across the Taiwan strait. 
Beijing regards Taiwan as a renegade province and demands that it eventually be reunited with the mainland.
The Nationalists, who have fostered one of Asia's liveliest democracies since the 1987 lifting of martial law ended decades of authoritarianism, still remain in control at the national level. 
The party Chairman, Lee Teng-hui won the presidency in March 1996 in the first direct vote for the office, and the National Party controls Parliament.
But the vote today gave local power to the Democratic Progressive Party across great swathes of the industrially advanced but diplomatically isolated island of 21 million people. 
According to official results, the Nationalists lost 7 of the 15 municipalities they had held, while the Democratic Progressives gained 5 seats for a total of 12. 
Independents won 3.
Two of Taiwan's 25 municipalities, Taipei and Kaohsiung, will be contested late next year. 
Taipei, the capital, is held by the Democratic Progressives, and Kaohsiung by the Nationalists.
