
President Lee Teng-hui swept to an election victory today that exceeded all expectations and served as a forceful rebuke to mainland China. 
This island's voters gave Mr. Lee a strong mandate in their first democratic balloting for President.
Final results showed that 54 percent of the nearly 11 million Taiwanese who cast ballots voted for Mr. Lee. His tally was more than double that of his closest challenger in a field of four candidates.
A strong sense of crisis over mainland China's threatening series of military exercises apparently caused significant numbers of voters to defect from Taiwan's largest opposition group, the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party, to Mr. Lee's camp.
In Beijing, the official New China News Agency interpreted the election results as a sign that the voters of Taiwan opposed the idea of separation from the mainland. 
[Page 16.]
Mr. Lee's efforts to create a more independent international image for Taiwan have given him a broad appeal among voters of conflicting ideologies, including those who would like Mr. Lee to dump the island's longstanding commitment to a "one China" policy in favor of independence.
"This was a plebiscite without the label of plebiscite, and I hope that China got the message," said Parris H. Chang, a pro-independence member of Taiwan's legislature. 
"And the message is that Taiwan does not want to reunify with the mainland."
But other people watching the election closely said Mr. Lee would take the mandate and seek a new dialogue with Beijing in the hope of reducing military tensions.
Those tensions caused the Clinton Administration to send two aircraft carrier battle groups to waters near Taiwan to signal China that it should not interfere in Taiwan's democratic process.
[In Washington, a White House spokeswoman, Mary Ellen Glyn, said, "We congratulate the people of Taiwan on their first election."
She added: "We hope to see tensions in the Taiwan Straits greatly reduced in the days to come."
[But American officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that no formal congratulations would be offered, because the United States does not have diplomatic relations with Taiwan.]
Mr. Lee had said before the vote that the next president's main job would be to work on cross-strait relations, and many took that to mean that Mr. Lee was preparing a post-election effort to cool tensions.
But the 73-year-old leader has given no clue as to whether he is willing to make substantive concessions to Beijing, like moderating Taiwan's drive for a seat at the United Nations. 
Beijing considers that effort to be part of an unacceptable "two China" strategy.
The pro-independence candidate, Peng Ming-min, 72, a longtime dissident who was only allowed to return to Taiwan from exile in 1992, turned out the poorest showing the opposition has made in the last three islandwide elections. 
The Democratic Progressive Party chairman, Shih Min-teh, announced his resignation at a news conference tonight, saying, "Someone has to take the responsibility" for the loss.
Two other tickets, headed by Lin Yang-kang and Chen Li-an, both breakaway members of Mr. Lee's governing Nationalist Party, polled 15 percent and 10 percent, respectively.
In a victory appearance at his campaign headquarters in downtown Taipei, Mr. Lee greeted a cheering and flag-waving crowd and said: "This is a historic moment. 
The door of democracy is now completely open."
Speaking in turn in Mandarin Chinese, English and his native Taiwanese dialect, Mr. Lee made only one reference to the campaign of military pressure mounted by mainland China during the last 10 months to weaken his hold on power.
"In this very difficult and dangerous moment with threats coming from the outside, we have completed our mission," he said.
The election was cheered in other parts of the region.
"This is a proud day for all Chinese people around the world," said Martin Lee, head of Hong Kong's Democratic Party. 
"It is the first time in China's history that a leader is elected on a one-person, one-vote basis on Chinese soil."
During the day, a crush of voters streamed to polling places registering a turnout that surpassed 76 percent, election officials said.
The results reflected a remarkable response to Mr. Lee's plea for a mandate to open a new round of negotiations with Beijing over Taiwan's future.
"From now on we should focus on economic development and strengthen the cross-strait economic and trade ties and cooperation," said Taiwan's Economics Minister, Chiang Pin-kung. 
Taiwan's central bank governor, Sheu Yuan-dong, also sought to reassure the island's investors and business community that pressure on the value of the Taiwan dollar caused by the flight of capital in recent weeks would return to normal.
Some analysts said that the true measure of Taiwan's rebuke to Beijing's Communist Party leadership could be seen in adding Mr. Lee's and Mr. Peng's tallies together, which represented 75 percent of the votes cast.
"The message from 75 percent of the voters is that what the mainland tried to accomplish by coercion and the threat of force, failed badly," said Mr. Chang, the legislator.
While Mr. Lee's vote tallies were strong throughout Taiwan, his total in this capital city was among the weakest, at 39 percent. 
Mr. Lin and his running mate, former Prime Minister Hau Pei-tsun, registered their strongest showing in Taipei, with nearly 25 percent of the vote.
By contrast, in the southern port city of Kaohsiung, a hotbed of independence sentiment, Mr. Lee took nearly 51 percent of the ballots and Mr. Lin took only 13 percent.
Appearing on Taiwan television tonight from a studio in Washington, the former American Ambassador to China, James R. Lilley, said that the election would serve to make China recognize "that power does not grow out of the barrel of a gun," as Mao Zedong once said, "it grows out of the ballot box."
But Mr. Lilley added that he believed that Mr. Lee is now well-equipped with a mandate to "start talking to China again and get the relationship going again" in order to reduce military tensions in the area.
In conceding defeat, all of the other candidates congratulated Mr. Lee and his running mate, Lien Chan. 
Though deep personal animosities were visible during the campaign, each sought to take the high road, although Hsieh Chang-ting, the Democratic Progressives' vice presidential candidate, seemed to be reminding the winning ticket of its obligation to pro-independence voters who crossed over.
"We hope the people who got elected will not betray the people who voted for them," he said. 
Less than a week ago, Mr. Hsieh reminded voters that President Lee had referred to himself as Moses last year and had promised to lead the people of Taiwan out of the "red" sea, meaning a sea dominated by China.
Mr. Hsieh had warned voters in the pro-independence party not to cross over to support Mr. Lee because the defections might go to Mr. Lee's head.
"Lee Teng-hui thinks he's Moses right now, but if he gets a mandate, he will think he is God," Mr. Hsieh said.
But it seems that many voters did not take this advice.
"Of course I voted for Lee Teng-hui," said Chen Bo-jui, a 42-year-old businessman, after he cast his ballot in midmorning. 
"He is a strong leader, and we have to be strong in order to talk to mainland China. 
Otherwise, they will just tell us what to do."
