
The Taiwan ruling party's efforts to influence American policy by hiring a high-priced Washington lobbying firm and fostering donations to the Democratic Party seems to have backfired, and critics here fear they have done serious harm to Taiwan's image.
Taiwan, once widely seen abroad as a right-wing holdover from a past era, has proudly promoted a new image as a booming Asian democracy, under threat from the military might of China.
But officials and lawmakers here fear that this positive image has been tarred by several recent developments.
Best known in the United States is the controversy involving a senior fund-raiser for the Democratic National Committee, John Huang.
Mr. Huang, who was educated in Taiwan, took the unusual step of traveling here to solicit funds from Taiwanese corporations that operate in the United States. 
The donations were apparently legal, but have been criticized by some as inappropriate.
Another, murkier incident involved a fund-raising event on April 29 at a Buddhist temple in California that is an offshoot of a temple in Taiwan. 
At the event, attended by Vice President Al Gore, hundreds of thousands of dollars were raised, but the Democrats have returned some of the money because of questions about the source and legality of the donations.
In Taiwan itself, a furor was stirred up by allegations that the ruling Nationalist Party offered to donate $15 million to President Clinton's re-election campaign, after being solicited by a former White House staff member, Mark Middleton. 
The Nationalist Party has denied making the offer.
"Image-wise of course it has an effect," Shen Lu-hsun, the senior Foreign Ministry official in charge of north American affairs, said in an interview.
Some legislators are concerned that the problem is deeper than that.
"It has been rather unfortunate that the impression has been given that U.S. support for Taiwan by sending aircraft carriers to protect us, or granting a visa for President Lee Teng-hui, is due to money," said Parris H. Chang, an opposition party lawmaker.
Last spring, after China conducted a series of missile tests near Taiwan, the Clinton Administration sent two aircraft carrier battle groups to patrol the waters near the islands. 
The missile tests themselves occurred 10 months after a "private" visit by Mr. Lee to the United States, a visit that China denounced.
Taiwan, which has had no diplomatic relations with the United States since relations were severed when Washington recognized Beijing in 1979, treads a delicate path between the Administration and Congress.
But President Lee Teng-hui, who became the first popularly elected leader of Taiwan earlier this year, has reportedly been dismayed by what he believed was the timidity of his Foreign Ministry in presenting Taiwan's case to the American Congress and the Clinton Administration, according to people familiar with Nationalist Party affairs.
As a result, he ordered his ruling party to hire a high-profile, aggressive lobbying firm in Washington, Cassidy & Associates.
Close advisers to Mr. Lee said he believes that the lobbying efforts were ultimately successful in winning him a visa to visit Cornell University, his alma mater, in June 1995, the visit that enraged Beijing and catapulted United States-China relations into disarray. 
Mr. Lee's visa was issued by President Clinton only after an overwhelming vote by Congress, which also was an object of lobbying by Cassidy & Associates.
For its part, the State Department vigorously opposed Mr. Lee's visit, arguing that it would damage relations with China. 
But evidently the problems caused by Mr. Lee's trip to Cornell stirred disquiet at the White House as well.
In at least one meeting here in Taipei during the last year, Mr. Middleton, the former White House aide accused of soliciting donations, urged a senior Nationalist Party official, Liu Tai-ying, to dump Cassidy as the party's lobbying arm in Washington, according to those present at the meeting.
The Arkansas friend of Mr. Clinton's who was appointed chairman of the semiofficial American Institute in Taiwan, James C. Wood, told Taiwanese officials that Cassidy was a liability for them, according to people familiar with these discussions.
As far as Taiwan's Foreign Ministry was concerned, the sooner Cassidy was dismissed the better. 
In the Chinese-language Chinese Times last week, former Foreign Minister Fred Chien assailed Cassidy's hiring as causing "disastrous" problems for the Government.
Mr. Shen, the Foreign Ministry official, said that there was nothing the Taiwan Government could do to impede the Nationalist Party and Cassidy.
Yet even as the Foreign Ministry continued to fight a guerrilla war with the Nationalist Party over the conduct of foreign policy, Taiwanese business was insuring that it retained solid links with the Democratic Party, the party that throughout the last year seemed destined to retain control of the White House.
At a celebratory dinner after the Democratic convention, selected Taiwanese politicians and business executives were scattered at tables in $1,000 seats. 
Among them was Annette Hsiu-lian Lu, a member of the political opposition, but a rising political force here.
"I was at one of the head tables," said Ms. Lu, a former legislator who was a founder of Taiwan's women's movement and who spent years in Kuomintang prisons. 
"I was supposed to sit next to Mr. Clinton, but somebody decided that was not a good idea."
The political symbiosis was cemented by the frequent trips of Mr. Middleton to Taipei, where, according to people here, he approached many of the country's wealthiest business executives for donations.
The exposure of divisions within the Government and ruling party over approaches to American foreign policy as well as the criticisms of Taiwanese political contributions to the Democratic Party have, in the view of some lawmakers here, jeopardized the strength of Taiwan's links to Washington.
"My worry," said Mr. Chang, the opposition lawmaker, "is that in the future, any Senator or Congressman inclined to speak out for Taiwan may not because of the suspicion that they are on the take."
