
Taiwan's president, Chen Shui-bian, issued another appeal today to the Chinese government to reopen negotiations with his government. 
But Mr. Chen's overture -- the latest of several since he was elected in March -- was all but lost in the face of his deepening political troubles at home and evidence of mounting impatience in Beijing.
"If there is dialogue, there can be exchanges," Mr. Chen said at a news conference in Taipei. 
"If there are exchanges, there can be a consensus."
Despite the conciliatory words, Mr. Chen brushed aside Beijing's demand that Taiwan acknowledge a single China, of which it is a part. 
Instead, he asked China to embrace "the spirit of 1992" -- a reference to negotiations in which the two sides agreed to disagree about the meaning of "one China."
Experts say Mr. Chen's flexibility on relations with China was constrained last month when his party reaffirmed its support of an independent Taiwan.
But his party ties are the least of the president's problems these days. 
Mr. Chen's government has been battered by accusations of incompetence and thwarted by Taiwan's Legislature, which is dominated by the opposition. 
The 49-year-old leader's approval rating has plummeted in polls.
The most damaging incident was the government's bungled response to a recent flash flood in central Taiwan that killed four construction workers. 
The workers clung desperately to each other while the military and the police bickered over which agency should respond. 
Tens of thousands of Taiwanese watched on television as the four men were swept away by the raging waters.
Taiwan's deputy prime minister, Yu Shyi-kun, resigned to take responsibility. 
The prime minister, Tang Fei, stayed on only after Mr. Chen refused to accept his resignation.
"Chen Shui-bian's government is in deep trouble," said Andrew Yang, the secretary general of the Chinese Council of Advanced Policy Studies, a research group in Taipei. 
"His opponents, particularly in the Legislature, are taking advantage of his weakness on the mainland China issue."
Mr. Chen has described the tragedy as a "turning point," which will force his administration to confront thorny issues. 
Today, he said the government would reopen an investigation into a seven-year-old arms scandal, in which senior officials allegedly took bribes to approve the purchase of French-made frigates, German minesweepers and other military equipment. 
"People are eager to see a clean government," Mr. Chen said. 
"They are disappointed in the new government because they have yet to see any action."
The Chinese government is also showing new impatience with Taiwan's leader. 
Although Beijing did not respond to Mr. Chen today, the official state news media have sharpened their criticism of his advisers. 
Last week, the New China News Agency condemned the head of Taiwan's mainland affairs council, Tsai Ying-wen, for being a separatist and denying her Chinese heritage.
The agency said Ms. Tsai's "words and deeds mirror the true face of the new leader of Taiwan."
China is also holding firm on the "one China" principle in its pending agreement to join the World Trade Organization. 
Taiwan was expected to gain entry as a stand-alone member, shortly after China's admission. 
But Chinese negotiators are now insisting that Taiwan be classified as a "customs territory" of the mainland.
      
