
There must be a reason so many of the World Wide Web sites about Hong Kong open with a scene of that city's skyline.
Not that there is anything tedious about the view south from Kowloon toward downtown Hong Kong. 
Despite the prohibition on big blinking lights (to avoid distracting airline pilots), Hong Kong's panorama of steel and glass has long been one of the more beautifully crowded urban vistas.
But as the jewel of the British Empire prepares to be remounted in a Chinese setting, Hong Kong's skyline may be one of the few aspects of the place that is certain not to be changed after sovereignty shifts to Beijing on June 30.
And the fact that perhaps not everything is up for grabs may be a comforting thought to Web designers of all political flavors.
As put in a candid and readable essay on the American Chamber of Commerce's Hong Kong site: "In Hong Kong, there is widespread cynicism about the real intentions and agenda of the British colonial rulers in the final days of the transition. 
Paradoxically, there is also concern that Hong Kong will become a de facto colonial outpost of P.R.C. interests, with less autonomy than hoped and agreed."
P.R.C. stands for People's Republic of China, and China's official Hong Kong Web site, when it can be reached, makes quite clear the view that the territory should have been part of the P.R.C. a long time ago.
But beyond the flattering portraits of China's hand-picked leaders for the new Special Administrative Region, the press releases showing popular support for cutbacks in civil liberties and the clock counting down to the hand-over, the most interesting thing about the official China site is its roster of advertisers.
One day last week Intel, I.B.M., Eastman Kodak, Microsoft and U.S. 
Robotics all offered "warmest wishes for the prosperity of Hong Kong."
Bay Networks and Oracle went further, "commemorating the return of Hong Kong to the motherland."
The ad for Mitsubishi Motors, a Japanese company, was pointedly different, "commemorating the return of Hong Kong to China."
Whether or not China is the motherland appears to be of little concern to the British Government's Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which runs a Web site that is almost wry in its resigned but dubious attitude about the hand-over.
Hong Kong's civil authorities are much more enthusiastic. 
The Hong Kong Government and Trade Office's in San Francisco has a Web site that offers a wealth of business information and gives the impression that the hand-over will be little more than an administrative detail. 
Likewise, the Hong Kong Tourist Association assures visitors that English will remain on street signs and that visa requirements will not change.
The Hong Kong Government's information site offers next to nothing of the territory's history, but includes a long section dedicated to explaining "myths and facts" about the change-over.
For example, fact 16 says (in part) that "public demand for the democratic process to stay on course and develop after 1997 will be irresistible."
That is not much comfort to those who fear Chinese rule.
Emily Lau, a pro-democracy Hong Kong legislator who is almost certain to lose her job after the change-over, runs a site that is half personal campaign literature and half general human rights advocacy. 
The Hong Kong Democratic Foundation, which appears to be more libertarian think tank than political action group, also has a site.
The Hong Kong Democratic Party and pro-democracy groups called Frontier and the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic and Democratic Movement in China, among others, run extensive Chinese-language sites.
