
In the seas between Japan and China are potential oil reserves, fishing grounds, mineral deposits and a few specks of rock that together amount to prime international real estate.
The disputes about who owns the resources are becoming more serious, for Japan, China and South Korea will soon be tussling over competing claims under the Law of the Sea Treaty. 
No one expects war any time soon, but some diplomats and government officials warn that in the long term, the disagreements could become a source of major conflict.
"I think there's a potential here for more than just diplomatic wrangling," said Kent E. Calder, a Princeton University scholar who has just published a book, "Pacific Defense," (William Morrow & Company), about security risks in the region. 
"Beyond that, the disputed areas are part of a larger danger of tensions between China and Japan.
"This will be a central issue in Sino-Japanese security for the next 5 to 10 years and perhaps beyond."
The backdrop is the growing unease in Japan about the military implications of the rise of China. 
Japanese Government officials often say that in the long run, the most important external issue facing their country is China.
Just this month five Chinese research ships conducted sonar exploration of what Japan regards as its seabed. 
Last fall a Chinese ship searched for oil on what Japan considers its side of the dividing line in the seas between them.
Japan occasionally scrambles its fighter aircraft when Chinese warplanes approach the Senkaku Islands, a few uninhabited islets that both countries claim. 
But some Japanese officials acknowledge that their warplanes and warships are a bit like dogs chasing cars, and that if the Chinese ever fired a missile, the Japanese forces would beat a hasty retreat.
One complication is oil, for the East China Sea bears promising geological formations that some experts say resemble those of the North Sea, with its huge oil reserves. 
Japan is acutely aware of its vulnerability on imported oil, and China has been a net oil importer since 1993. 
So both sides are dazzled by estimates that the East China Sea may contain 10 billion to 100 billion barrels of oil.
China's oil exploration in the disputed area last fall may be a sign that it will try to exploit reserves in the sea. 
So far Japan's Foreign Ministry has discouraged Japanese oil companies from drilling in the area, but if China goes ahead there would be strong political pressure for Japan to do so as well.
Sadayuki Hayashi, Deputy Foreign Minister of Japan, said in an interview that it was important to work toward finding common boundaries under the Law of the Sea Treaty. 
But he added that Japan would draw its exclusive economic zone on the basis that the Senkakus are a part of Japan.
"It is very clear that this is part of Japan," Mr. Hayashi said. 
He noted that China had not much contested Japan's sovereignty until reports surfaced that the area includes a lot of oil.
The issue has arisen because Asia, like most of the world, is moving to the Law of the Sea Treaty as the new framework for determining who controls the ocean's resources. 
South Korea ratified the treaty late last year, China did so on Wednesday, and Japan is expected to do so in the coming month.
The treaty allows nations to establish 200-mile "exclusive economic zones" in adjacent waters -- but the problem is that China and Japan and South Korea are less than 400 miles apart. 
This means that they have to figure out how to draw the line dividing their zones.
China's claims are raising anxieties to its south as well as its east. 
On Friday the Philippines and Vietnam reportedly denounced Beijing's claims under the Law of the Sea Treaty to a vast stretch of water in the South China Sea.
Japan proposes drawing the line at the halfway mark, although for this purpose it conveniently ignores a sometimes-submerged island off the Chinese coast. 
China, on the other hand, makes a sweeping claim to "inviolable sovereignty" over its continental shelf, which it argues juts into the ocean most of the way to Japan.
China also has disputes about maritime boundaries with South and North Korea. 
Although North Korea and China often hail their friendship, North Korean gunboats are said to have fired on Chinese fishing boats that stray into what North Korea regards as its waters.
Ji Guoxing, a Chinese scholar in Shanghai who has written extensively about maritime disputes in the seas around China, said it would take China some time after it ratifies the Law of the Sea Treaty to fix its exclusive economic zones. 
Mr. Ji added that while disagreements may be difficult to resolve, a war is unlikely.
"This may be an area of potential conflict, but I don't see a real battle there," he said. 
"Both Japan and China will exercise restraint while sticking to their own claims."
To solve the disputes, the parties could refer the matter to the International Court of Justice or seek mediation or arbitration.
For now, though, the countries have been taking the alternative approach of bolstering their navies. 
China and South Korea have been pouring money into their navies in recent years, and Japan, which already has a very credible navy, is considering whether to upgrade it further.
