
"We hate China and we will fight to the death for Taiwan!"
Chang Ting-sen, an otherwise temperate-mannered professor of Chinese literature, shouted those words into the din of a packed stadium rally in Chiayi, a southern stronghold of Taiwan's pro-independence forces, and then smiled with satisfaction and yelled it again.
As the night sky crackled with fireworks and loudspeakers warmed up the crowd with a torrent of political bombast, he and 20,000 banner-waving Taiwanese packed the sports arena on Tuesday to cheer their candidate, Peng Ming-min, of the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party.
Like many in Taiwan, the crowd had been roused to indignation by the missile tests and war games China has carried out in an attempt to intimidate the 12 million voters of Taiwan, who on Saturday will hold their first direct presidential election.
But even many independence advocates conceded that they are not the real beneficiaries of the confrontation with China. 
No one has profited more than Lee Teng-hui, the incumbent and native-born Taiwanese leader, whose own vision of Taiwan's future with the mainland is ambiguous.
Fundamentally, this is President Lee's confrontation with Beijing, brought on by his pursuit of a distinct and independent image for the island of 21 million people. 
It has transformed the election into a referendum on who should lead Taiwan in its time of crisis. 
By all accounts, Mr. Lee will win the contest handily.
His critics say this is exactly what the 73-year-old President wanted, an international emergency that would insure his victory and mobilize the United States to strengthen its guarantee of Taiwan's security with a show of naval force and the sale of new weapons.
In whistle-stop appearances through the island and in rousing speeches with nationalistic themes, Mr. Lee, a prodigious campaigner, is siphoning off voters from the pro-independence camp, while holding on to an opposing constituency that simply craves stabilityII, the status quo and a strong leader to face China.
He does so without ever betraying whether he favors reunification or some form of independence.
With the balloting about to begin, the pollsters here say that only his margin of victory is in doubt.
Just a year ago, Mr. Lee's political fortunes were in decline. 
The legislative majority of his governing Nationalist Party, which has been in power here since 1949, when Chiang Kai-shek appropriated the island as his exile home, was splintering under an assault of anti-corruption sentiment and reformist zeal.
But Mr. Lee's trip to the United States in June, a first for any Taiwan leader and made possible by a well-financed lobbying campaign in Congress, touched off a bellicose response from Beijing that still may not have reached its militaristic peak.
The Communist leaders in Beijing assume that Mr. Lee's image-building campaign is just another way to declare Taiwan's independence and undermine the "one China" principle by which China and Taiwan have lived since 1949.
 
Vagueness on Goals Is a Lee Strategy
But Mr. Lee is deliberately vague about his true colors, so much so that even close associates who have known him for many years are unwilling to venture a guess as to his overall objective.
Chang Tso-chang, president of the island's most influential newspaper, described Mr. Lee this way: "In his heart, he wants independence, but he has never been able to say it. 
And he is not willing to reunify with the mainland, but he also has never been able to say that."
Added the chairman of a major Taiwan corporation who has known Mr. Lee for many years: "I think Lee Teng-hui shows many different faces to many different people. 
That's why people are confused by his statements."
Still others see an innate pragmatism in Mr. Lee and a wily political instinct to keep the Communist mainland guessing and at arm's length, while searching for more "living space" for Taiwan in regional and international affairs.
Most Taiwanese today are willing to support such a strategy until some form of greater Chinese democracy emerges in which Taiwan could be confederated. 
Until then, few people in Taiwan are willing to put themselves in Beijing's hands, as Hong Kong's residents must do in 1997 when the British colony reverts to Chinese rule.
Mr. Peng, the candidate of the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party, put it more bluntly at this week's rally in Chaiyi. 
"Lots of people in China are trying to escape their own country," he said. 
"Why would we want to be a part of China?
If you choose reunification, you are out of your mind."
This campaign is taking place in the midst of the worst political and military crisis here since 1958, when Mao Zedong's threat to send troops across the Taiwan Strait to reclaim China's long-separated province was blocked by the United States Seventh Fleet.
 
China and U.S. 
Exchange Demands
Now, with two American carrier battle groups steaming protectively in the western Pacific, one near Taiwan and the other expected to arrive this weekend, the crisis has led to harsh exchanges between Washington and Beijing.
Chinese Government spokesmen accuse the United States almost daily of "gross interference" in China's internal affairs, first for sending warships to the region and second for selling, most recently, Stinger missiles and other advanced, defensive weapons to Mr. Lee's 400,000-member armed forces.
In the final days of the campaign, the polemics have only increased with Chinese admonitions that American warships stay out of the Taiwan Strait and Washington's assertion of right of passage through the international waterway.
The Communist leadership in Beijing appears to expect that its display of military fireworks this month will reduce Mr. Lee's margin of victory or sober him to the threat China could mount against the island's economy. 
That, Beijing may believe, would render Mr. Lee more pliant in negotiations to open direct trade and transportation links across the strait, which China sees as the first step toward reunification.
But experience has shown that Mr. Lee, as a tactician, is not to be underestimated.
"Taiwan has created an economic miracle, and we have built a democracy without bloodshed," Mr. Lee told more than 600 foreign journalists who have arrived to cover what he characterized as democracy in the "shadow of war."
Mr. Lee has shrewdly said his victory would represent a mandate from voters to deal with Beijing from a position of strength. 
It appears he will get it.
"He has asked the Taiwanese to give him a mandate, to support him in this crisis," said Tim Ting, chief consultant to the polling company, Gallup Taiwan. 
"I believe he wanted a confrontation with the mainland because it has internationalized the problem of Taiwan. 
He is getting CNN live coverage, and he is drawing world attention to the threat of Chinese nationalism, while also building up Taiwanese nationalism."
In the field of four candidates, Mr. Ting added, it has been clear for some months that Mr. Lee has a lock on 40 to 50 percent of the vote, well ahead of any challenger.
But Mr. Lee's strategy is not without risks, and there are signs of stress fractures everywhere.
First, there was the sudden deployment this week of a phalanx of security men armed with M-16 rifles to protect all four presidential candidates after reports of an assassination plot detected by the National Security Bureau.
The details were sketchy, but Mr. Peng, the Democratic Progressive candidate, said he had been told that the plot involved a team of mainland Chinese infiltrators who were paid $5 million to kill one or more of the candidates. 
Government officials confirmed that a plot had been detected, but there was no allegation that Beijing was behind it.
Then, there was the Government intervention in Taiwan's stock market, where central bankers thus far have pumped more than $3 billion to give the appearance of stabilityII in this crucial week before the voting.
Mr. Lee has also sought to calm financial markets with hints that he will seek a new accommodation with the mainland to insure that the $25 billion to $30 billion in Taiwan investment on the mainland is protected.
Still, most of the island's business leaders are panicky over a drop in orders for Taiwan's exports and the flight of capital out of the country.
As a native-born Taiwanese, educated in Japan and the United States, Mr. Lee shows little affinity for the mainland or the mainlanders in his party. 
The mainlanders are often disparaged here as "wai sheng," or foreign-born, intruders who took over the island when Chiang Kai-shek fled the Communist victory and who, for many years, used martial law rule to suppress indigenous democratic stirrings and to build a corrupt party machine, which today is still accused of vote buying and "money politics."
 
Unpredictability Confounds Critics
With his 6-foot-plus frame, striking silver hair and a disarming, Cheshire cat smile, Mr. Lee continues to confound his critics with unpredictable political tactics. 
He has promised that he could make another landmark trip after the election to a capital that "no one could imagine."
"The people like Lee Teng-hui because he is a strong leader and he stands up for them in the face of China's dictators," said Chen Shui-bian, the popular mayor of Taipei who is a rising star in the pro-independence camp, but who concedes a grudging admiration for Mr. Lee's political style.
Aside from the fact that Mr. Lee sits atop a party machinery that controls the island's television networks and billions of dollars in assets, his greatest advantage is his own formidable campaigning skills arrayed against an opposition that is seriously diluted.
His appeal straddles the colliding politics of reunification versus independence, infuriating some in both groups.
"Mr. Lee Teng-hui directs and acts the play himself and leads the two sides to the edge of war," said one critic, Lin Yang-kang, the candidate of the New Party. 
Mr. Lin, 69, is among several stalwarts of the governing Nationalist Party who have given up party posts and privileges to work for Mr. Lee's defeat.
Mr. Lin and his running-mate, Hau Pei-tsun, 77, who were both deputy chairmen of the governing Nationalist Party and once close advisers to Mr. Lee, opened their presidential campaign this winter, accusing Mr. Lee of betraying the Nationalist cause, which is to work for the reunification with the mainland.
The Lin campaign now calls for "peace" with the mainland, but ever since the missiles were launched at target sites near Taiwan's ports this month, their approach has been portrayed by Mr. Lee as surrender to "terror."
In the south, where the independence movement was born, Mr. Lee has never uttered a commitment to declaring independence from the mainland. 
He does not have to. 
Taiwan's independence forces believe that he is with them.
He speaks the slang of the southern ports and factory towns, riding bull-horn trucks with local candidates and setting off firecrackers to please the deities of local temples.
"There is no question that he is a native of Taiwan and he thinks like us," says Parris H. Chang, a pro-independence legislator, "and there is nothing in his blood or his system that makes him want reunification."
