
President Jiang Zemin of China, a permanent smile on his face, basked today in the prestige of Harvard University, where the White House, fearing large protests, had urged him not to go.
But Mr. Jiang, ignoring silent protests in the church-like lecture hall where he spoke and much louder demonstrations outside, deflected questions about human rights, Tibet and the protesters themselves with humor, earning applause from some of the Chinese-Americans and American China scholars in the hall. 
Excerpts, page 14.
"Although I am already 71 years old, my ears still work very well," Mr. Jiang said when asked about the protesters outside in the blustery rain. 
"As I spoke, I did hear the sound of loudspeakers from outside, but I believed my only approach was to speak even louder."
He said that having been to Harvard as a young bureaucrat 40 years ago, he already understood "the general concept of democracy."
Then he added, "During my current trip to the United States, starting from Hawaii, I felt more specific understanding of the American democracy -- more specific than I learned from books."
That gentle allusion to the protests that have followed him everywhere produced laughter and applause, even as he steadily ignored a man who stood with his back to the stage in a T-shirt reading: "Taiwan not part of China. 
One Taiwan. 
Free Tibet. 
One China. 
Human Rights Now."
The demonstrators, pro-Jiang and anti-Jiang, numbered about 5,000, the Cambridge police said, making this the largest street gathering at Harvard since the Vietnam War.
Mr. Jiang's speech was a kind of summary of his weeklong state visit to the United States, and he stressed both China's new pride and its peaceful intentions. 
He called for deeper understanding and friendship between China and the United States, and he praised Harvard for being among the first American universities to accept Chinese students in the mid-1800's.
Reading roughly half his speech in English, Mr. Jiang vowed that China would work with the United States to "shoulder common responsibility on many important questions crucial to human survival and development, such as maintaining world peace and security, preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction, protecting the environment and combating international crime."
In their talks last week, he and President Clinton agreed to work together, Mr. Jiang said, "to build a constructive strategic partnership" that "will mark a new stage of development in China-U.S. relations."
But "to promote the development of China-U.S. relations," he said both politely and pointedly, "China needs to know the United States better, and vice versa."
He asked for a fuller American understanding of the deep roots of Chinese civilization, and also of its century and a half of "frequent bullying and humiliation by imperialist powers."
"However," he continued, "after a hundred years' struggle of the entire Chinese nation, China has stood up again as a giant."
To American critics of Mr. Clinton's policy of "constructive engagement" with China, that is precisely the problem, because they fear that Beijing's interests will inevitably clash with Washington's, and that a rising China will seek to shape the global order to suit its own priorities.
But during this visit, Mr. Jiang and Mr. Clinton have worked hard to try "to improve the relationship from a position of fragile public support in the United States," said Richard Solomon, a China specialist who directs the United States Institute of Peace in Washington. 
"They're trying to build a broader constituency in the American political mainstream for the relationship itself."
Mr. Jiang compared nations to sunlight, which he said is composed of seven colors. 
"We should respect and learn from each other and draw upon others' strong points to offset one's own deficiencies for achieving common progress," he said.
And in a clear riposte to Mr. Clinton, who said China's policy of repressing political dissent cut against "the current of history," Mr. Jiang said today that China's policy choices "are all based on both the reality and history."
"Therefore," he continued, "they are not only in conformity with the trend of the historical development of mankind and that of the times, but also reflect the characteristics of the Chinese nation."
A country of 1.2 billion people values stabilityI and security, he said, and China's choices "serve not only the fundamental interests of the Chinese people, but also world peace, stabilityI, prosperity and progress; this is the key to an understanding of the present China and its future."
Mr. Jiang, who goes from here to Los Angeles today for his last stop before returning to Beijing on Monday, has tried to do his part to give post-Tiananmen China a human and unthreatening face, as he paid tribute both to colonial Williamsburg and the shrines of American technology, like I.B.M. and Lucent.
For Mr. Jiang, clearly, Harvard is as much a shrine of American achievement as Wall Street, and he praised the late Harvard historian, John King Fairbank, for his work in understanding China.
Mr. Jiang said he would present Harvard's Fairbank Center for East Asian Research a set of the newly published "Twenty-Four Histories with Mao Zedong's Comments," which Mr. Jiang called "a rich heritage of philosophy, in understanding and drawing useful lessons from China's history."
In his responses to questions, Mr. Jiang denied that he had no dialogue with the Chinese people, citing his many visits as President "to grass-roots units in the countryside and the cities."
Denying widespread dissent, he said that "the people are very satisfied with the achievements we have scored under our program of modernization and opening up," and that the Government, despite its shortcomings, was simply trying to give the people what they want.
In what could have been an oblique reference to the crushing of protesters in Tiananmen Square, raised in a question, Mr. Jiang said: "It goes without saying that, naturally, we may have shortcomings and even make some mistakes in our work. 
However, we have been working on a constant basis to further improve our work."
Having defended the actions at Tiananmen Square in Washington on Wednesday, it is unlikely that Mr. Jaing would have changed the verdict of his party only three days later in answer to an extemporaneous question.
He also repeated that he would not meet with the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibet, because, "to my regret, the 14th Dalai Lama has not yet given up his efforts to split the country."
The questions Mr. Jiang answered had been chosen by a committee of four Harvard scholars led by Ezra Vogel, the director of the Fairbank Center, and Bill Kovach, the curator of the Nieman Foundation for Journalism. 
The Chinese had insisted that there be no questions from the floor during the 15 minutes they allotted to them, to reduce the possibility of a demonstration or speechifying, and Mr. Vogel decided to solicit questions from the Harvard community by mail and electronic mail.
The committee picked five questions it thought best represented key concerns, but did not forewarn Mr. Jiang of their content.
In the end, Mr. Jiang answered two of them and then called for a question from the floor. 
A protester in a T-shirt tried to ask a question, but Mr. Jiang said he wanted a question "from an American," and Mr. Vogel shouted the protester down, in the end calling on a Newsweek reporter.
Mr. Kovach said in an interview that all the questions were given afterward to the Chinese delegation, and that copies of all of them would be made available to the public.
After his lecture, Mr. Jiang went to a lunch in Boston with some 200 business executives that was sponsored by the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company. 
The United States is pressing China to open up its markets in services, too, including insurance.
