
If elected president, Al Gore says he will use America's military power to halt Bosnia-style massacres, its economic influence to press failing states to adopt democracy, and the carrot of trade accords to encourage adoption of Western-style labor and environmental standards.
Yet when asked in a recent interview how he would deal with all the festering resentments that American power engenders around the world, he paused for a moment and uttered two words: "Strategic humility."
He smiled at the phrase as he coined it, but never elaborated on how it would mesh with his interventionist inclinations.
George W. Bush, in contrast, argues that an overextended American military should gradually pull out of the Balkans -- a step that the Europeans view as abandonment. 
He insists on charging ahead with a national missile defense system -- which Russia and China have vowed to defeat by building up new nuclear forces to overwhelm defensive interceptors.
Yet Mr. Bush, asked in the second presidential debate to describe his philosophy for projecting American power, sounded startlingly like Mr. Gore. "If we are an arrogant nation, they will resent us," he said. 
"If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us."
At a moment of unchallenged American primacy, it is understandable that both candidates want to convince the rest of the world that they would step lightly. 
Beneath their words, however, lie very different priorities, and probably very different styles, in managing America's relations with both allies and enemies.
In his debate performances, interviews and speeches on foreign and economic policy, the vice president has repeatedly portrayed himself as a man who has come to believe in vigorous American intervention abroad, a reversal of Democratic philosophy for most of the time since the end of the war in Vietnam.
He describes how the experience of seeing the Clinton administration move too slowly to end the killing in Bosnia drove him to conclude that America must be prepared to prevent disaster, and how two successive global financial crises reshaped his understanding of the central role economic stability must play in the foreign policy agenda.
Mr. Bush has woven a middle ground between two battling factions of his party -- internationalists who support engagement with great powers like China and isolationists who are deeply suspicious of the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization.
Drawing on the advice of Gen. Colin L. Powell, widely viewed as a potential secretary of state in a Bush administration, Mr. Bush is far more tentative about committing American troops and rules out their use for what he dismisses as nation building. 
"There may be some moments when we use our troops as peacekeepers, but not often," he said in the final presidential debate. 
In the second debate he suggested a broader philosophical disagreement with Mr. Gore: "I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say, 'This is the way it's got to be.'
"
Any comparison of foreign policy between the two candidates is inherently unbalanced: Mr. Gore has a long record, in the Senate and as vice president, while during Mr. Bush's time as governor, his only real foreign focus has been Mexico, whose long border with Texas is a major matter of state and local politics.
Mr. Gore is always eager to mention his extensive dealings with foreign leaders and to analyze international events; he granted an hour-long interview for this article.
Mr. Bush took four weeks to consider repeated invitations to be interviewed on his foreign policy views. 
In the end he declined.
 
Seeing the World From Texas
The Texas governor has traveled frequently to Mexico, and says that as president he would focus on Latin America far more intensively than the Clinton Administration. 
But beyond those trips Mr. Bush, now 54, has left America's shores only three times in his adult life. 
He spent five or six weeks in China in 1975, on a break from graduate school when his father was American envoy to Beijing. 
When his father was president, he led an American delegation to the Gambia for a celebration of the country's independence.
In 1998, when he was considering a run for the presidency, he visited his daughter in Italy and then joined other governors on a tour of the Middle East. 
He stopped in Egypt and met President Hosni Mubarak, then went on to Israel, where he met the current prime minister, Ehud Barak and toured the West Bank with Ariel Sharon, a hard-liner now in negotiations about creating an emergency government with Mr. Barak.
The Bush campaign also provided a list of 150 foreign officials Mr. Bush has met with in Texas and elsewhere, mostly diplomats and trade officials, but also representatives of Russian energy firms. 
He saw the foreign minister of Russia, Igor Ivanov, this year.
Mr. Bush's aides say these meetings have left him at least as well prepared for the presidency as three past governors: Bill Clinton, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter. 
Nonetheless, Mr. Bush makes foreign policy by committee, and prefers to have his coterie of advisers answer all the questions.
Mr. Gore's eagerness to place America's imprint on the world has clearly grown in his seven years in the vice presidency, which have featured dozens of trips abroad and many meetings with world leaders. 
White House advisers recall him making an impassioned plea to President Clinton in the summer of 1995 to threaten bombing Serbian forces after they overran a United Nations safe area in Bosnia, a moment that one aide said was now "seared on the front of Al Gore's brain."
The former United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, recalls bringing Mr. Gore to meetings about how to confront Japan on opening its economy "so that I would sound like only the second-most vociferous guy in the room."
What Mr. Bush derides as nation building, Mr. Gore calls a natural evolution, decades later, of the Marshall Plan -- when American willpower and capital, and some American troops, helped rebuild Europe.
That difference was accentuated this month when Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said the Republican contender would, if elected, gradually pull the remaining American troops out of the Balkans, after consulting with NATO allies. 
That prompted Mr. Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright to shoot back that Mr. Bush would squander a nascent American victory in rebuilding the former Yugoslavia, where there are now some 11,400 troops, less than 20 percent of the total peacekeeping presence in Bosnia and Kosovo.
Lurking just beneath the surface of that dispute are questions that both candidates have left unanswered. 
Mr. Bush has never defined what kind of mission is in the "vital national interest."
Mr. Gore has never said how long he would keep troops in place to build a democratic state. 
Mr. Bush, in short, won't say when he'll wade into a crisis, and Mr. Gore won't say when he'll get out.
These positions reflect, in many ways, the advisers who surround the two men. 
Mr. Gore depends heavily on Leon Fuerth, his national security aide for two decades, who urged him to break with the Democrats and vote for going to war with Iraq in 1991. 
Richard Holbrooke, the United Nations ambassador, supported Mr. Gore's ill-fated run for the presidency in 1988, a political risk one aide says "the vice president has not forgotten."
He is often mentioned as candidate for secretary of state. 
And Mr. Gore has grown closer to Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers, the architect of the Clinton administration's biggest financial interventions, from the Mexican bailout to the Asian crisis.
Mr. Bush relies heavily on Ms. Rice and a large cast of other graduates of his father's administration. 
Their influence is evident: Long before Mr. Bush ever criticized the International Monetary Fund, another close adviser, former Secretary of State George P. Shultz, said it should be shut down.
Both candidates insist that they would never seek to throw America's weight around. 
When it serves their purposes, though, each is quick to jettison his commitment to American humility.
Mr. Bush has made it clear that he will go ahead with a missile defense shield no matter what America's allies think -- and despite the harm it might inflict on America's fundamental relationships with Russia and China. 
Mr. Gore has repeatedly expressed a desire to incorporate environmental and labor rules in every future trade accord -- even though poorer nations view that as an unvarnished effort to assure that developing nations remain less competitive with American manufacturers.
 
Gore and Globalization
Not surprisingly, Mr. Gore tries to portray himself as the candidate best prepared to delve into the newest and most complex territory of foreign affairs, the challenges of economic globalization. 
The vice president's aides whisper that Mr. Bush's advisers are lost in the thicket of 1980's era problems, and are unprepared for a world in which global capital flows can cause as much havoc as global arms sales.
In a speech last spring in Boston, Mr. Gore charged that his rival was "stuck in a cold war mindset," that "continues to view Russia and China primarily as present or future enemies."
At one point he said that "Governor Bush's foreign policy is noticeably blank."
Mr. Gore has never repeated that charge, but his aides do what they can to sow doubts about Mr. Bush's competence as a potential world leader and a recent New York Times poll indicated that roughly half of American voters have their doubts on that score.
Mr. Bush's campaign officials say that in the second presidential debate their candidate established himself as respectably conversant in the major international issues of the day. 
Mr. Bush himself was comfortable enough to joke shortly afterward about his trouble wrapping his tongue around the names of world leaders. 
"I was especially pleased that Mr. Milosevic has stepped down," he said after the Yugoslav leader bowed to a street revolt. 
"It's one less polysyllabic name for me to remember."
Mr. Gore, in his interview, showed that he indeed has absorbed seven years of daily intelligence briefings -- and that he can name names with ease. 
He spoke with authority about the differences between the separatist movements in two parts of Indonesia, and discussed what kind of opposition movements in Iraq the United States could exploit to help unseat Saddam Hussein.
But Mr. Gore frequently passes up opportunities to describe a sweeping vision of how he would position the United States in the world. 
Mr. Clinton, by contrast, has mastered that patter, rarely missing a chance to draw the link between economic integration and the spread of capitalism and democracy.
 
Managing the Nuclear Rivals
China and Russia are huge powers in the midst of huge transitions, whose weaknesses and strengths pose some of Washington's biggest challenges. 
In either nation, an economic collapse or a military buildup could cause tremendous instability, not only in Asia and Europe, but around the world.
Yet those challenges have hardly been discussed in the final months of the campaign, for different reasons on each side.
Mr. Gore knows Asia well. 
He talks about his priorities there more crisply than many of his foreign policy advisers do. 
(Sometimes, in fact, he is too crisp: When he backed anti-government protesters in Malaysia two years ago, using their rallying cry of "reformasi," in a speech, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad deftly used the moment to whip up a nationalist backlash against America that squashed the reform movement.)
But as one of his informal advisers says, "all the imagery is bad for him" in Asia. 
Raising broad visions of how to deal with China, for example, invites the Bush campaign to play up the photos of Mr. Gore bowing at the Buddhist temple in California that became the subject of lengthy campaign finance investigation. 
(The temple was linked to Taiwan, not China, but such subtleties are lost in campaigns.)
So Mr. Gore's campaign has indicated that he would continue in the Clinton mode of using economic ties to encourage China to greater openness, democracy and capitalism. 
But as China's leaders have stepped up the arrest of political and religious dissidents in the last year, Mr. Bush has homed in on the Clinton administration's oratory about a "strategic relationship" with Beijing. 
(Mr. Gore does not use that term.)
"China is a competitor, not a strategic partner," Mr. Bush often says. 
And he has indicated that he would sharply depart from the Clinton script in two ways: by pursuing the national missile defense, which China vigorously opposes and would counter with more and better intercontinental missiles, and perhaps by announcing a break with longstanding policy and pledging that the United States would come to Taiwan's aid if it was attacked by China.
Previous presidents have left that commitment vague, and critics warn that an explicit security guarantee would antagonize China while increasing the risk that Taiwan would take steps toward independence. 
Such moves, in turn, could increase chances of a conflict with the mainland.
There has been more talk about Russia, where Mr. Gore played a leading role, though a commission he co-chaired with former Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin. Mr. Gore knew from the outset that an active role in guiding Russia toward a new role in the world would distinguish him from any potential rival for the presidency. 
And the effort had some early successes, including an agreement to return to Russia the nuclear weapons that had been stationed in Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan. 
But American hopes of guiding economic reforms went off-track, and recent disclosures indicate that Mr. Gore failed to get Russia to halt arms sales to Iran by this year.
Mr. Bush argues that the administration was naive, "focusing our aid and attention on a corrupt and favored elite" that sometimes failed to fulfill promises made to Mr. Gore. "When Bill Clinton compared Boris Yeltsin in Chechnya to Abraham Lincoln, what signal did that send to states around Russia's periphery?" asks Ms. Rice, a Russia expert. 
"When the Russians didn't follow the favorable and attractive script we wrote for them, we continued to pretend they were carrying out their part of the bargain. 
They lost respect for us as a result."
(While Mr. Clinton in 1996 did make a glancing comparison of the Chechnya rebellion to the Civil War, he also said then that "a free country has to have a free association" and Russia would have to find "a diplomatic solution.")
Mr. Bush has offered only generalities about how he would handle Russia differently, and has never said how he would persuade Moscow to accept the missile defense system that could require quitting the Antiballistic Missile Treaty. 
(Ms. Rice says that Mr. Bush would review "the size of the American arsenal," and perhaps reduce it).
On the Middle East, Mr. Bush has gone to some lengths not to criticize Mr. Clinton's handling of a volatile and deteriorating situation -- at least not directly. 
And Mr. Gore has been almost completely uninvolved in managing the failed Camp David talks and diplomacy that followed -- until he flew back to Washington 10 days ago to sit in on the meetings planning Mr. Clinton's summit meeting with Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and Mr. Barak.
Indirectly, though, Mr. Bush has thrown a few jabs. 
"You can't put the Middle East peace process on our timetable," he said in a not-so-subtle suggestion that Mr. Clinton rushed into Camp David in hopes of a comprehensive agreement before he left office.
Both candidates are quick to tick off their criteria for sending America's troops to intervene. 
But ask them for their criteria for using taxpayer dollars to choke off a market crash or a global financial crisis -- the kind that struck Mexico in 1995, and Asia two years later, then spread around the world -- and specificity vanishes.
Mr. Bush stumbled when asked in the first debate how he would handle a stock market crisis -- and then announced that he would summon his top advisers.
Mr. Gore pointed to Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary, in the audience, a man regarded in Washington and on Wall Street as a cool manager of such crises. 
He seemed to suggest that he would call his old friend -- now a top executive at Citigroup -- and then he changed the subject. 
"He clearly wasn't prepared for that one," one of his close economic advisers said.
In his interview, Mr. Gore was similarly vague about his standards for economic intervention. 
"I'm not sure there is a handy cookie cutter on that one," he said. 
"I think there are so many variables that you have to know it when you see it."
He referred an interviewer to Mr. Summers, who said that he would recommend using America's financial might to right another country if "there was a material impact on the U.S. economy or the global economy," provided the loans came with conditions to assure reform in the country getting assistance, "a credible assurance we will be repaid" and a "prospect of success in restoring market confidence."
Ms. Rice said in an interview that Mr. Bush's first criteria for bailing out a foreign nation would be "whether the countries we are helping have the political will to make economic reforms."
Clearly Russia in 1998 -- a bailout Mr. Gore helped coordinate -- did not fit her test. 
Other Bush aides tick off economic criteria closely parallel to that of Mr. Summers.
 
Bush and the I.M.F.
Mr. Bush is more leery of the role of the International Monetary Fund. 
"I think a lot of times we just spend aid and say we feel better about it and it ends up being spent the wrong way," he said in the second presidential debate. 
He charged that the fund -- which the United States effectively controls as its largest shareholder -- often sends the message to international bankers that "if you make a bad loan, we'll bail you out."
He also charged that much of the $4.8 billion lent to Russia in 1998 ended up "in the pockets" of Mr. Chernomyrdin. Mr. Chernomyrdin denied it, threatening to sue Mr. Bush for defamation. 
The I.M.F. says independent auditors have found no evidence that the money was diverted, and the Bush campaign has cited no evidence to back up the charge.
Ms. Rice insisted that Mr. Bush's broader point was correct. 
"Once the Russians were flaunting it, cooking the books, and once their privatization effort went awry, we kept pumping I.M.F. money in," she said. 
"That weakened the I.M.F., and it allowed the Russians to have a kind of drug on which they became dependent. 
It was a mistake. 
A big one."
Economic sanctions create a sticky problem for both candidates. 
Mr. Gore defends the slow lifting of sanctions against North Korea, saying, "Incredibly enough, we have seen a positive response to initiatives there," but refuses to consider trying the same approach on Cuba. 
"I'm a hard-liner on Castro," he said, ticking off the Cuban leader's list of offenses, and ignoring a similarly long list for North Korea.
Cuba, of course, is a highly emotional issue in Florida, whose 25 electoral votes are hotly contested. 
So Mr. Bush has taken a similarly tough line. 
But he has also distanced himself from the views of his running mate, Dick Cheney. 
In 1998, while running Halliburton, the oil services company, Mr. Cheney said unilateral sanctions almost always fail and hurt the competitiveness of American businesses. 
He called for lifting sanctions on Iran, saying the United States could no longer rely on them "as a club that we can use to punish those who disagree with policies or goals or objectives of the United States."
Mr. Bush has said pointedly that he is not ready to lift sanctions on Iran.
 
Free Traders, but Not Always
Everyone in this race is a free trader. 
Except, of course, when campaigning in Michigan or West Virginia, or anywhere else where overseas competition seems a mixed blessing, threatening old jobs even as it creates new markets for American goods.
Mr. Gore is accustomed to weaving between his free-trading boss and the labor unions that make up his core support. 
Those unions have opposed every major free trade initiative by the administration, from the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 to the China trade bill that passed last month, and some threatened to bolt from Mr. Gore. In the end, they backed down.
This year, Mr. Gore backed the China trade legislation, just as he backed the North American trade pact in 1993. 
It did not include standards for protecting workers or preserving the environment that he said in his interview he would, if elected, try to get included in all trade negotiations. 
A free trade agreement with Jordan, signed by Mr. Clinton last week, is the first to include all of those standards in the core of the accord.
Mr. Bush insists that he would aggressively press new accords -- without labor and environmental provisions -- and expand the North American pact to include much of the rest of Latin America.
In short, he sounds like a true free-trader. 
Yet in coal country, Mr. Bush has also bent over backward to draw in union workers who have become disaffected with Mr. Gore. Earlier this month he visited a coal-rich area of West Virginia, and was introduced by a laid-off miner who is president of a United Mine Workers local. 
"This is an administration that fears coal," he said. 
"They see it as a threat. 
I see it as an opportunity to make us less dependent on big, foreign oil."
