
Chinese Pavilion Featured
Workers from Westchester's sister city Jingzhou in China completed construction of a traditional pavilion and garden in May at Lasdon Park and Arboretum in Somers, a property of the county's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation.
Called the Chinese Friendship Pavilion, it was built by Chinese artisans sent to Westchester along with all the construction and finishing materials they would need. 
The building, dedicated on June 2, will be featured on a free tour of the park today at 2 P.M. Typically Chinese in its architectural style, it is the sort of structure one would have seen in the gardens of royalty. 
Painted orange, turquoise and red, it has a tile roof and is open on all sides, the better to contemplate the surrounding landscape and a pond. 
The interior ceiling and overhang are painted with 108 dragons flying among clouds.
Also on the tour are the arboretum's many species of trees, shrubs and perennials and a native American chestnut tree grove where the American Chestnut Foundation does research.
In 1991 the 180-acre preserve established a continuing project called the Famous and Historic Tree Grove, where seeds taken from trees at significant locations or dating from centuries ago are planted.
Some of them are from the homes of American Presidents. 
Among them are an Overcup Oak from Abraham Lincoln's home and seeds from trees at the homes of George Washington and Franklin D. Roosevelt. A yellowwood seedling was obtained from John F. Kennedy's grave site at Arlington Cemetery, and a water oak seed was taken from the grounds of the Brown African Methodist Episcopal Chapel in Alabama, where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke at the start of the march to Montgomery.
Battles also figure in the collection of seeds. 
A Saratoga red oak represents a 1777 victory for the American Revolutionary forces at that site, and a northern white cedar seed was taken from Fort Ticonderoga, commemorating a 1759 battle in which the British took the fort from the French. 
A seed from the rare Franklinia Tree, prized for its fragrant white flowers, which bloom in July and August, is a descendant of the original, planted in the 1600's by John Bartram, an American botanist.
Admission to the tour is $3. 
Call 232-9147 for more information.
 
'The Waking Dream'
Teun Hocks's painted photograph "Untitled," exemplifies the theme of an exhibition opening Tuesday and remaining through Oct. 
25 at the Castle Gallery of the College of New Rochelle. 
"The Waking Dream: Psychological Realism in Contemporary Art" tries to explore the lighter and darker sides of life as expressed enigmatically by 21 artists. 
Viewers will read whatever they wish into the results.
D. Dominick Lombardi and Steven Lowey were the guest curators, and they will give free gallery talks at a reception on Sept. 
20 from 1:30 to 4 P.M. The artists' names would not be familiar to most people, but they are all professionals. 
They include Mike Cockrill, Julie Harvey, Antonio Petracca, Steven Skollar and Lisa Zwerling.
The college is at 39 Castle Place, and the gallery is open Tuesdays through Fridays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 4 P.M. It will be closed for the Labor Day weekend from Saturday through Monday. 
Admission is free. 
Call 654-5235 for more information.
 
Candid Shots in China
Forty-four color photographs of people in some of China's major cities will be on display in the Somers Public Library from Tuesday through Sept. 
29. They were taken by C. Richard Donahue, a clinical social worker who recently traveled through Hong Kong, Beijing, Xian, Guilin and Guangzhou with a group of colleagues.
"I'm a people person, and most of the pictures are of people I would see from the time they went to work at 6 in the morning through the rest of the day," he said.He photographed many fathers tending their children, which surprised him. 
"They are very family oriented," he said. 
"And they are doing simple, unusual entrepreneurial things that they would have been arrested for 20 years ago."
He recalled a man who had set up a little business by the side of a road well traveled by people on bicycles -- the most prevalent mode of transportation. 
"He had a canvas spread on the ground, with a complete set of bike repair tools."
Struck by the unexpected freedom that the Chinese have to travel, he said, "They were streaming into Hong Kong and experiencing unprecedented growth and expansion."
Unframed prints of the photographs may be bought for $25 each. 
An indication of their content is in the titles: "Haircut on the Street in Beijing," "Mother and Child at the Market in Guangzhou," "Life on the Li River in Guilin," "Young Girl in a Newsstand in Beijing," "Art Student at the Children's Palace in Xian," "Women Waiting for a Bus in Guilin" and shots of families in the temple, an old woman begging, a woman hanging wash and a customer in a butcher shop.
Call the library at 232-5717 for visiting hours.
 
The Flag as Chronicle
An unusual exhibition of antique American flags can be seen at the Darien Library through Sept. 
14. Ken Reiss, curator of the show, is co-owner with his wife, Catherine, of many of the flags on view. 
"It has often been said," he said, "that the American flag is unique in providing an ongoing chronicle of the growth of the nation it represents."
Upholding that premise are flags tracking 10 changes in design from 1861 to 1912. 
Different patterns of stars in rows or circles reflected individuals and manufacturers' concepts, sometimes to the point of adding new stars in anticipation of new states. 
The flags and related materials, some from the Darien Historical Society collection, mostly date from the half century after the start of the Civil War.
The exhibition can be seen on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. and Saturdays from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. The library is on Leroy Avenue, off Route 1. 
Call the historical society at (203) 655-9233 for more information, or call the library at (203) 655-2568 for directions.   ELEANOR CHARLES
