
Half a dozen barefoot peasants took a break during a fierce storm the other day, and as the rain pounded on the rice paddies outside, they lounged in a crude stone cottage and marveled at 20th-century technology.
"Last year we had only one girl born in the village -- everybody else had boys," Y. H. Chen said in a tone of awe, as the others nodded agreement. 
He explained that for a bribe of $35 to $50, a doctor will tell whether a woman is pregnant with a boy or a girl.
"Then, if it's a girl, you get an abortion," he said, succinctly reflecting the great importance that the Chinese place on male heirs.
In the China of the 1990's, the modern machine that is having the most far-reaching effect on society is probably not the personal computer, the fax or even the car. 
It is the ultrasound scanner.
 
A Skewed Ratio
Partly because of ultrasound scans to check the sex of fetuses, followed by abortions of females, the sex ratio of newborn children in China last year reached 118.5 boys for every 100 girls. 
In 5 of the 30 provinces, the sex ratio was more than 120 boys for every 100 girls.
That national statistic, based on an official survey of 385,000 people conducted last September and October, is a preliminary one, but it so shocked the authorities here that they ordered that it be kept secret.
Normally, women worldwide give birth to about 105 or 106 boys for every 100 girls. 
China's ratio last year was about 13 points off this international norm, meaning that more than 12 percent of all female fetuses were aborted or otherwise unaccounted for.
Based on a population of 1.17 billion, that adds up to more than 1.7 million missing girls each year.
Like medical workers in the West, Chinese doctors use ultrasound to look at patients' livers, to check that IUD's are positioned properly and to see whether fetuses are developing healthily. 
Chinese peasants use ultrasound to have sons.
"Ultrasound is just like nuclear technology," the Public Security News, an official newspaper, lamented a few weeks ago. 
"It is a wonderful thing for society, and yet it also brings great tragedy."
In a sign of alarm at the sex ratio, the official press is beginning to warn that today's infant boys will be unable to find wives in 20 years' time. 
Yet, aside from vague warnings about "bachelor villages" multiplying in the countryside, no one is yet exploring what social consequences may arise in a nation with a huge surplus of males.
China is not the only country facing this problem. 
Throughout Asia, with its traditional preference for boys, ultrasound scanners and other medical technologies are being used to check the sex of fetuses so that females can be aborted. 
Apparently largely because of ultrasound scans, the sex ratio of newborn children in South Korea is about 113 boys to 100 girls.
The practice of aborting female fetuses in India has led the authorities in Bombay to limit prenatal testing to women 35 years and older or those with a family history suggesting the possibility of birth defects.
 
The Sex Ratio
How the Balance Became So Skewed
Recent conversations with dozens of peasants in three provinces -- Fujian, Sichuan and Hubei -- suggest that for now the villagers are unconcerned about whether their sons will be able to marry. 
Instead, they are obsessed simply with the first part of the equation: having sons. 
Grandsons are important too, but first they want sons.
"When my wife was pregnant last year, she asked me what we would do if it turned out to be a girl," recalled Zhang Zhiquan, a 25-year-old boatman on the Yangtze River. 
"I said that would be no problem -- a girl is as good as a boy. 
But my wife was still worried."
The baby turned out to be a boy, and perhaps that is why Mr. Zhang sounded so magnanimous about girls. 
Asked if he and his wife would have considered killing the newborn baby if it had been a girl, he considered the matter thoughtfully before shaking his head.
"We wouldn't have killed the baby, because it would have been easier to give her away for adoption," he said. 
"Then we could have tried again."
This tradition of favoring males occasionally led to female infanticide in the past in China, particularly in times of famine. 
But over the last 15 years there have been two major changes in the situation.
The first was the introduction at the end of the 1970's of strict family planning rules that limit each couple to just one or two children. 
That makes parents fearful of "wasting" their quota on a girl.
This is particularly true since the authorities began a tough crackdown two years ago on unauthorized pregnancies. 
Based on data from last year, the average Chinese woman could be expected to have only 1.73 children in her lifetime. 
That is by far the lowest fertility rate in Chinese history, even lower than the Government's fertility target for the year 2010.
The second change is the spread of ultrasound scanners. 
China manufactured its first ultrasound machine in 1979 and by the end of the 1980's it was making 10,000 annually and importing more than 2,000 each year. 
One Chinese demographer estimates that 100,000 ultrasound scanners were in place around the country by 1990.
At the same time that ultrasound became more common, the sex ratio became increasingly unbalanced, at a rate that stunned demographers and Government officials alike. 
In the 1953 and 1964 censuses, the sex ratio at birth ranged from 103.8 to 104.9 boys for 100 girls -- roughly the expected level.
In the next census, in 1982, it rose to 107.5. 
In the 1990 census, it rose to 113.8. 
Then last year it soared to 118.5, although that figure has a wide margin of error.
Abortions of female fetuses are not the only reason the sex ratio is skewed: underreporting of girls, abandonment, "gifts" of baby girls to relatives who adopt them as their own, and to a lesser extent infanticide all play a role. 
But Chinese and foreign population specialists believe ultrasound is a major reason for the shortfall of girls.
More ultrasound machines are being installed all the time, particularly in the rural township clinics where peasants have most access to them. 
Consequently, the sex ratio could become even more unbalanced.
 
The Great Imperative
Peasant's Mission: Bearing a Son
Why do couples go to such lengths to have a son?
The explanation is rooted in the importance that peasants attach to producing a male heir.
"There are just two important things in life now -- making money and having sons," explained Y. S. Liang, a 30-year-old father of two in a village in Fujian Province.
"We believe that boys are more important than girls," he continued. 
"You've got to pass on your heredity, continue the family line, and you need a son to do that.'
In Chinese tradition, women marry into the family of their husbands and are considered to have left the family of their parents. 
Ask an old peasant how many grandchildren he has, and he will always tell you about the children of his sons, without even considering the offspring of his daughters.
Until about a century ago, rural girls were often not even given names. 
Instead they were called "eldest daughter," "No. 
2 daughter" and so on.
Even the mother of Deng Xiaoping, China's 88-year-old senior leader, never had a given name. 
As a child she was called "eldest kid," and later she was known simply by her surname, Dan, and called "Dan, wife of Deng."
These days, girls all get names, but in rural areas they are occasionally ones like Laidi or Zhaodi, both meaning "bring a younger brother."
Sons are preferred because it is believed that they can do more work in the fields, and because traditionally it is they who provide for aging parents. 
Sons, in other words, are the rural Chinese equivalent of retirement pensions, social security and individual retirement accounts.
In almost any Chinese village, the richest old people are those who have several sons; the poorest are those with none.
For these reasons, young women feel tremendous pressure to produce a son. 
If they have only daughters, they may be mocked and made to feel like lifelong failures, particularly by their mothers-in-law. 
So wives are at least as obsessed with producing sons as their husbands are.
"I've only had daughters so far -- three of them," a woman villager explained forlornly at a hamlet along the Daning River in Hubei Province. 
The third child was born without permission from the authorities, so they knocked down the woman's house as punishment.
That was apparently not a sufficient disincentive. 
Now the woman, who gave only her surname, Song, is evading the family planning officials who want to sterilize her. 
Asked if she would try again to have a son, she beamed.
"Maybe," she said coyly, in a tone that could scarcely be more affirmative. 
"It's hard to say."
 
The Technology
Market Encourages Use of Ultrasound
All of the peasants interviewed, even those with no schooling who lived in remote areas, knew that there was a device that could determine the sex of a fetus.
Doctors are officially banned from telling parents the gender of a fetus, but peasants say a gift of a carton of cigarettes will usually open the doctor's mouth.
"One family here in the village has five girls," said Y. C. Chen, a peasant in a hamlet of a few hundred people in the southern part of coastal Fujian Province. 
"They were desperate for a son, and so they kept on having another child in hopes that it would be a son."
"But now you don't need to do that," Mr. Chen added proudly. 
"Now technology is changing things."
Mr. Chen's brother-in-law is a private pharmacist who bought his own ultrasound machine last year. 
A Chinese-made machine costs only a bit more than $1,000, and he can charge pregnant women up to $50 each for a brief consultation on the sex of the fetus.
The growing influence of the market economy is partly behind the spread of ultrasound machines. 
More and more doctors are setting up private practices, and even state-run hospitals are becoming more attuned to the need to raise money.
In either case, they buy ultrasound equipment because such machines are among the most profitable medical equipment available. 
In a busy clinic, an ultrasound machine can be used on more than 100 patients a day, and the machine operator faces little risk of being caught taking bribes in exchange for revealing the sex of the fetus.
An ultrasound scanner uses a beam of high-frequency sound waves that pass through a part of the body. 
At tissue boundaries, some waves are reflected back, generating a two-dimensional image on a screen like a television monitor.
The procedure is not invasive and presents no known danger to the fetus. 
But one problem with ultrasound scans is that they are not very reliable for determining sex early in a pregnancy. 
Only in the second trimester, when an abortion is a much more complex than it is at the beginning of pregnancy, can a doctor make even an educated guess about the sex of the fetus.
There are many stories of women going to clinics late in the second trimester to ask for abortions. 
Usually the fetuses turn out to be female, but when one is a boy -- about 20 percent of the time, presumably because the ultrasound operator made a mistake -- the mother may become hysterical with shock and grief.
A Chinese newspaper, China Information News, reported that ultrasound was used in 2,316 cases in one county to determine the sex of a fetus, resulting in abortions of 1,006 female fetuses.
 
Beijing's Attitude
Worried Leaders Lack a Solution
The sex ratio of 118.5 boys to every 100 girls was based on only nine months' data for 1992, so there is a relatively wide margin of error. 
The average sex ratio for 1991 and 1992 together was 116.5, a figure that is based on a larger sample and therefore carries a smaller margin of error. 
Because the trend is rising, the figure presumably was lower than 116.5 in 1991 and higher in 1992.
While nature provides about a 5 percent surplus of boys at birth, males suffer higher mortality rates than females from the moment they are conceived. 
In most societies a rough balance is reached by marriageable age, and women outnumber men thereafter.
Peng Peiyun, the Government minister in charge of family planning, has acknowledged that the sex ratio is a problem and has suggested tighter monitoring of ultrasound equipment.
But the Government has tried for years to prevent the use of ultrasound scanners for sex selection, and most experts doubt that there is much it can do to ease the problem. 
Corruption is so widespread, among doctors as well as officials, that peasants seem confident they can find someone to tell them the sex of the babies they are carrying.
"The authorities recognize the problem and will try to do something about it," said a Western population specialist in Beijing. 
"But they will not succeed. 
Ultrasound is all over and extremely difficult to control."
