
THE fever over Asian Internet stocks came close to delirium here yesterday as tens of thousands of Hong Kong residents besieged local banks to buy shares in the stock offering of Tom.com, a one-month-old Chinese-language Internet service.
By the time the offering expired at midday, it had been oversubscribed more than 1,000 times, putting Tom .com on track to be the most sought-after initial public offering in Hong Kong history. 
The last such stock mania occurred in May 1997 when Beijing Enterprises, a mainland Chinese company known as a red chip, issued shares amid a wave of euphoria over the return of Hong Kong to China.
A tiny Internet start-up and a sprawling state-controlled conglomerate would seem to have little in common. 
But market watchers here were struck by the parallels.
"It's very reminiscent of the red chip craze in 1997," said David Webb, the editor of Webb-site.com, a site that tracks stock offerings. 
"We've got a huge speculative frenzy in a single category of stocks."
At a branch of HSBC in Kowloon, nearly 50,000 people lined up after dawn to submit forms. 
As the noon deadline approached, the crowd became restive and 100 police officers were summoned to keep order.
Tom.com and Beijing Enterprises have something else in common: Investors are less interested in their business than in the perceived value of their political connections. 
Beijing Enterprises is controlled by the Beijing municipal government; Tom .com is majority owned by the two flagship companies of Li Ka-shing, a Hong Kong billionaire who is almost as well known for his ties to Beijing as for his business acumen.
Among the minority investors in Tom.com is Pacific Century Cyberworks, an Internet firm controlled by Mr. Li's son, Richard Li. 
Pacific Century is negotiating to take over Hong Kong's main telephone company, Cable and Wireless HKT, and its shares have also rocketed in recent weeks.
"I bought the stock only because of Li Ka-shing; I believe in the Li dynasty," said C. M. Law, 37, a homemaker who is one of the more than a million applicants. 
"I don't really know what kind of business they're in. 
I know it is some sort of technology company, like Amazon.com."
Tom.com is not an online bookseller like Amazon.com. 
But that may be one of the few businesses it does not plan to enter, judging from the company's 200-page prospectus, printed in Chinese and English. 
It aims to be "the leading multilingual China-related new-media mega-portal," with Web sites in cities with big Chinese populations, like Singapore; San Francisco; Sydney, Australia, and Vancouver, British Columbia.
At the moment, though, Tom.com operates a single Web site that broadcasts programming from a Hong Kong radio station. 
For 1999, the company reported losses of $10.3 million on sales of $6.7 million. 
The company only acquired its catchy three-letter domain name in December, buying it from a Nevada company, Vortexx, for $2.5 million and stock options.
"There's not very much there, frankly," Mr. Webb said. 
"They seem to be promoting 'push' technology, which I thought went out with Pointcast."
Still, its operations seem beside the point. 
After slogging through more than two years of economic misery, Hong Kong residents have recovered their appetite for speculation. 
That coincides with the emergence of Internet start-ups like Tom.com and Pacific Century Cyberworks. 
Analysts said the speculative surge could just as well have been set off by a rally in property prices.
"Hong Kong adjusts instantly to any change in the market," said William H. Overholt, the head of Asian research at Nomura International. 
"This is a population that has survived by being fast on its feet."
The overwhelming response will allow Tom.com to price its stock at the high end of its offering range, though still only 23 cents a share. 
The company will issue 428 million shares, plus a possible extra allotment of 64.2 million shares, so it could raise a total of about $113 million. 
The stock is to begin trading on Hong Kong's new technology exchange on March 1, and analysts expect it to rise tenfold the first day.
In an interview with Dow Jones Newswires, the chief executive of Tom.com, Carl Chang, said, "We're going to build the Time Warner of China, only using the Internet as a starting point."
      
