
LAST week, while governments and the press abroad dwelled on the harsh sentences meted out to Chinese dissidents, exuberant middle-class couples crowded into the newly opened Ikea warehouse store here, snapping up stylish, modestly priced furniture and housewares.
As the Chinese and American Governments sparred over human rights, moviegoers rushed to see the season's hit, "Be There or Be Square," a romantic comedy filmed in Los Angeles that affectionately caricatures the United States and the Chinese who go there to seek their fortunes.
Among ordinary Chinese people, it would seem, the current crackdown on democracy activists has registered only faintly, if at all. 
Ask even well-educated professionals what they think about people like Xu Wenli or Wang Youcai, two of the four democracy advocates who received prison terms of a decade or more, and they are apt to call them brave but stupid men who sacrificed themselves with no chance of success. 
Many Chinese are bewildered by all the attention outsiders give these cases, asserting, as one lawyer did, that "these things just have no affect on our daily lives now."
It's not that people are entirely unaware of the virtues of free speech and politics. 
But they know that while there is little room for dissent these days, they can pursue exciting new options in their own lives. 
Many of them just assume that the society will eventually have to liberalize. 
The biggest threat to their personal freedoms, many say, would be a souring of Chinese-American relations that might strengthen conservative forces here.
Though audiences are streaming to see "Be There or Be Square" for a good laugh rather than for a sociology lesson, the movie's popularity and themes are revealing. 
The film, which is directed by Feng Xiaogang, deftly plays on Chinese stereotypes about America and about themselves, and viewers are sophisticated enough to see past the caricatures.
The image of Los Angeles is horrid: Robbers lurk around every corner and wide-eyed immigrants at first seem destined for drudgery or jail. 
But as the two main characters zoom about in their cars, have amusing encounters with the police and create their own niches, the essential, refreshing freedom of California shines through.
The male lead, played by the comic actor Ge You, is an appealing but shiftless man who has spent a decade living in a trailer, selling other Chinese immigrants everything from dubious insurance policies to graveyard plots. 
When the female lead, played by Xu Fan, arrives in town, pretty but penniless, he warns her that there is good news and bad news about America.
"Go back to China," he says. 
"This is a terrible place."
"O.K., so what is the good news?" she asks.
"That was the good news," he replies. 
Then: "Do you want to work as a stripper?"
She declines the offer and after years of perseverance she achieves a decent living in the promised land and, of course, the two fall in love. 
America is a land of opportunity after all.
Americans here sometimes have a hard time understanding how many Chinese can simultaneously appreciate the freedom of the West -- a growing number of professionals have studied in the United States -- and readily dismiss the dissidents as foolish idealists. 
The vast majority feel they are finally getting a chance to savor freedom in their personal lives and work, and they want to enjoy the fruits of modern society. 
The last thing most of them want is upheaval.
Unlike most Chinese, dissidents like Xu Wenli are devoting their lives to an abstract cause. 
The late philosopher Isaiah Berlin famously said there are two types of intellectuals, the foxes who know many things and the hedgehogs who know one big thing. 
Mr. Xu and many of his colleagues in the democracy movement are hedgehogs, with their minds focused laserlike on their quest and a determination that transcends bravery.
Mr. Xu has already spent 12 years in prison and he assumed, when he started speaking out again this year, that he would probably be imprisoned again. 
In the face of repeated warnings and detentions, he stepped up the organization of a new political party and other activities to promote freedom.
And what did he talk about after his sham trial on Dec. 
22, when he was granted a final half-hour with his wife before starting a 13-year prison sentence?
"He said that the charge of subverting state power made no sense," his wife later said in an interview.
"He said it was legally irrational because state power comes from the citizens," she said as she recounted, proudly, the detailed legal and political analysis her husband gave her in their final minutes together. 
He told her his prison term would give him time to "think things over very calmly and reflect on what has happened and what should be done."
He did, before he was finished, express concern about their daughter and tell his wife -- a remarkably dedicated person in her own right -- to look after her health.
IN interviews, some of the veteran dissidents sound almost robotic ticking off their latest analysis of the global forces and domestic politics that affect the democracy movement. 
But the analysis is often brilliant, and the monotone reflects minds that are wholly concentrated.
What sustains these dissidents is an article of faith: that freedom of speech and association is central to the good of a modern society. 
If a single idea drives them, it is a big idea, however pushed aside it is in today's China.
As many citizens and even Government officials will tell you, Chinese today can think what they want and say what they want so long as they do not organize against the Communist Party. 
First-time visitors, having read about repression here, are often surprised at how ordinary things appear: lively newspapers and magazines, fast-paced television news programs and endless commercials for cosmetics and electronic gear. 
Severe repression singles out a small number of people, and most of the rest accept the Party's limits, with little apparent pain.
Harder to gauge is the cost to people in terms of cynicism and even moral corrosion of blanking out certain kinds of thoughts; of mouthing hackneyed party phrases in some settings while speaking one's true mind in others, and of taking it for granted that all news is subtly crafted to serve the interests of the Communists.
It may be true that social evolution, propelled by economic and technical change, will eventually bring a free and democratic China, though there is no sign this will happen any time soon. 
In the meantime people like Xu Wenli and Wei Jingsheng, who is now in exile in the United States after spending much of his adult life in prison, will keep pushing as they can. 
Only time will tell whether their countrymen will some day honor them for their persistence, and their suffering.
