
Following are excerpts from a question-and-answer session after a speech at Harvard today by President Jiang Zemin of China.
Q. Jiang Zemin asked the West not to engage in confrontation but dialogue. 
However, why does he refuse dialogue with his own people?
Why did the Chinese Government order tanks in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, and confront the Chinese people?
A. In China there are various channels for us to learn about people's views. 
For instance, when I was the Mayor of Shanghai, I had frequent contact with the People's Deputies there. 
And after I went to work with the Party's Central Committee, I visited almost all the 30 provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions of China.
China is a large country, with different levels of development in different parts of the country, and there are some places in China that I have visited even more than three times.
I have been to many grass roots units in China's countryside, in the cities, and in the factories, and have had extensive contacts with people from different walks of life, and therefore, the people are very satisfied with achievements we have scored under the reform and opening-up program of China, and the policy of the Government is to serve the people.
Therefore, we have to reflect on the people's requests and do everything that will meet the people's requests. 
And also, as a result of our effort along that line, we have enjoyed the support of our people.
It goes without saying that, naturally, we may have shortcomings and even make some mistakes in our work. 
However, we have been working on a constant basis to further improve our work.
Q. You said before you would not meet with the Dalai Lama if independence was addressed. 
Given that the Dalai Lama has now said he is willing to meet you without discussing independence, why, therefore, do you still refuse to meet with him?
A. Our policy toward the 14th Dalai Lama is a very clear-cut one, and you also referred to part of it in raising your question. 
That is, he must recognize publicly that Tibet is an inalienable part of the People's Republic of China; that he must state publicly his willingness to give up Tibet independence, and that he must stop all activities aimed at splitting the motherland.
However, much to my regret, up until this date, the 14th Dalai Lama has not stopped his separatist activities.
Q. (In a question that was mostly inaudible, President Jiang was asked about his reaction to the protest occurring outside the hall.)
A. I do have my understanding about the general concept of democracy. 
However, during my current trip to the United States, starting from Hawaii, I felt more specific understanding of the American democracy, more specific than I learned from books.
Although I am already 71 years old, my ears still work very well, so when I was delivering my speech, I did hear the sound from the loudspeakers outside. 
However, I believe the only approach for me is to speak even louder than it.
