
The first time Charlene Barshefsky found herself sitting in the waiting room outside the office of China's president, Jiang Zemin, her mind was suddenly flooded by an image from a different time and a different place: Chicago in the 1950's.
"The girl who lived down the street used to come over so we could play 'Digging to China,' " recalled Ms. Barshefsky, the slight, intense woman who has been at the center of American trade policy since 1993. 
"And I kept wondering, how did I get from digging with my mother's kitchen spoons in the backyard to negotiating with Jiang?"
This morning, Ms. Barshefsky completed her dig.
At once jubilant and exhausted, she announced that the 13-year-long quest for an accord that would usher China into the global trading system was finally over. 
For the 49-year-old former trade lawyer, it is the capstone deal of her tenure in a once-backwater cabinet post -- a post that, a decade after the cold war's end, has made its occupant a central player in American foreign policy.
After all, as Ms. Barshefsky regularly reminds both Congress and her White House colleagues, these days trade accords are "the new organizing devices for our international relationships."
"This is a perfect example," Ms. Barshefsky said today from Hong Kong, where she was changing planes on the way home. 
"Since 1979, when we recognized China, there has been no agreement to anchor the Chinese-American relationship in any concrete way. 
I'm not sure this is an anchor, but it's a start."
But as the Clinton administration has discovered time and again, China defies diplomatic organizing devices of all sorts. 
And some of Ms. Barshefsky's battles to get to this deal were not fought across the negotiating table, but in the White House.
In April, she engaged in an embarrassing public disagreement with her boss, the president, who rejected her advice to take China's trade offer in April, a decision Mr. Clinton immediately regretted. 
She seethed with frustration for months as the administration tried repeatedly to rebuild relations with Beijing, which went into the deep freeze during the war in Kosovo.
She told Congress the other day that this is what set the negotiations off track: "Men never ask for directions, and we mistakenly bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade."
Not for the first time, her White House colleagues winced.
But by the time the endgame began last week -- days and nights of caffeine-driven talks about the intricacies of American investment in Chinese telecommunications companies and the need for American auto companies to set up financing subsidiaries so that ordinary Chinese can afford cars -- Ms. Barshefsky was in her element.
Moving between the Palace Hotel in Beijing and the Trade Ministry, she conducted the three-dimensional chess of modern trade negotiations: There were the arcane rules of "accession" to the World Trade Organization. 
Then there were the political realities of the concessions China needed to make to get the deal through Congress. 
And there were also the concessions that the Chinese leaders feared they could not make without destabilizing their own economic reforms.
And finally there was the difficult problem of making sure that Mr. Clinton got the credit for an agreement very much like the one he walked away from.
"She's a one-woman phenomenon," her predecessor, Mickey Kantor, said recently about the woman he first hired as deputy and then helped promote after he became secretary of commerce. 
"I've never seen anyone who can operate better on no sleep, still talk in perfect paragraphs, and just grind down the other side."
But as Ms. Barshefsky found during the long negotiations, in the end the deal hinged on relationships -- relationships with Mr. Clinton and with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji of China.
The Chinese knew that Ms. Barshefsky has never had the kind of close relationship or long history with Mr. Clinton that Mr. Kantor enjoyed. 
They knew she was overruled in April. 
And thus they had reason to question her authority to negotiate one of the biggest trade deals in history. 
She resolved that by bringing along as her co-negotiator Gene Sperling, the president's top economic adviser and a man they knew had urged Mr. Clinton to walk away from the first deal.
"It changed the mix," she said. 
"And it sent a message. 
And in a negotiation, every message you send counts."
It is a lesson Ms. Barshefsky learned as the daughter of immigrants from Russia and Poland who arrived on the northwest side of Chicago with little English but a passion for education. 
They were not thrilled when she got a law degree -- "it wasn't intellectual enough for them," she once said -- but quickly she had a job at the Washington law firm of Steptoe & Johnson that paid half a million dollars a year for running the firm's international division.
She tossed away the cash for the chance to be Mr. Kantor's deputy, constantly juggling trips to Japan -- where she became as popular as a case of the plague -- with shuttling around her two daughters, Mari, now 16, and Devra, now 11. 
When abroad, she would review their homework with them nightly by telephone.
She is married to Ed Cohen, the droll deputy counsel at the Department of the Interior, who will not be seeing much of her anytime soon: She heads from the China negotiation into the global trade talks that start in Seattle in two weeks, an attempt to start a "millennium round" of trade barrier reductions.
But this morning, going to see Mr. Jiang on her way out of Beijing, Ms. Barshefsky said her mind once again drifted away from the talks and back to her childhood excavations. 
"I'm sure the only thing I knew about China then was that it was halfway around the world and that it was important," she said. 
"It was a start."
