
Amid the battering of stock markets around the world this week, Hong Kong has seemed strangely stable -- an oasis of calm at the eye of the storm. 
But appearances are deceiving.
In a climax to an unprecedented two-week-long direct intervention in the stock market, Hong Kong's government spent at least $8 billion today on a buying spree to prop up shares and foil speculators it accuses of manipulating its market.
On Thursday, an earlier round of intervention had managed to push the Hong Kong stock market up while every other market around the globe was down. 
Today, for all the money spent, the benchmark Hang Seng index still declined 93.23 points, or 1.2 percent, to 7,829.74.
Hong Kong has always been unusual in Asia, a rare outpost of free markets in a region of state-managed capitalism. 
The government, while committed to a fixed exchange rate with the United States dollar and prepared to support the property market the way South Africa's DeBeers regulates the price of diamonds, historically has gone to great lengths to avoid meddling in its markets.
So, in a city where tracking the Hang Seng is a favorite parlor game, today's wild ride -- by far the market's biggest trading volume ever -- left people slack-jawed. 
At moments during the morning trading session, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange seemed less a market than a giant clearance sale, with the government buying everything in sight.
"They did this at a time when there is gloom around the world," said Glenn Lesko, the director of regional sales and trading at ABN Amro Securities in Hong Kong. 
"I think they ran into far more sellers than they expected."
Government officials, however, claimed victory. 
They said the intervention had stabilized the Hang Seng, even as markets across Asia, Europe and the United States were plummeting because of fears about the financial turmoil in Russia and other emerging markets. 
That stymied traders who had taken short positions on shares and futures contracts on the bet that the Hong Kong market would tumble.
For Hong Kong, today's action was the boldest step yet in a costly effort to erect a wall between itself and the financial typhoon raging around it. 
Although Hong Kong has already been whipsawed by the Asian crisis, the territory's leaders are determined not to be sucked into an even more calamitous vortex of currency attacks followed by a stock market collapse.
Traders estimate that the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has spent at least $12 billion since it began buying shares and futures contracts on Aug. 
14. Nonetheless, Sir Donald Tsang, Hong Kong's financial secretary, said the government was ready to continue intervening. 
Hong Kong has already spent more than 10 percent of its $100 billion in foreign reserves on the effort.
Tung Chee-hwa, the chief executive of Hong Kong, held open the possibility that China might support Hong Kong's campaign, with its $140 billion worth of reserves. 
"The central Government has said many, many times openly that they are very willing to support us if there is a need to do so," he said.
In fact, Hong Kong seems determined to drive out the currency traders, even if it means intervening indefinitely. 
It is unclear, however, whether the government has an end-game strategy. 
And at today's rate of buying, it will run out of reserves in about 13 trading sessions.
Hong Kong's tough stance came in the wake of more bad economic news. 
The government released data confirming that Hong Kong had slipped into a recession in the second quarter, as the economy contracted 5 percent. 
It also projected that the economy would shrink 4 percent in 1998 -- the first full year of contraction since Hong Kong began keeping records in 1961.
But it was the government's intervention that had analysts rattled. 
Several said the stock market would plummet as soon as the government stopped supporting it. 
And some argued that Hong Kong was squandering both its reserves and its reputation as the freest market in Asia.
"In the short run, if you pour billions of dollars into stocks, you can pump up the market," said Steve H. Hanke, a professor of applied economics at Johns Hopkins University. 
"But in the long run, this is doomed to fail because it convinces speculators that Hong Kong can't take the pain."
Indeed, no less prominent a currency trader than George Soros seems to view Hong Kong's intervention as a quixotic effort. 
Stanley Druckenmiller, the manager of Mr. Soros's Quantum Fund, said in an interview on Thursday with CNBC: "No matter what they do in their market, when they wake up on Monday morning, they're still going to be in a depression."
Hong Kong may not stop at simple intervention. 
Sir Donald announced that the government was considering measures to curb "manipulative practices."
These could include restrictions on the short-selling of stocks and increased disclosure requirements in the trading of index futures.
Hong Kong would not be the first Asian market to place restrictions on certain kinds of trading. 
Japan, Korea and Malaysia all do it, just as they intervene in their markets. 
But Hong Kong has long prided itself as the New York of Asia -- a market where Wall Street openness meets Chinese entrepreneurialism.
As it happens, some analysts believe the government has been forced to act by Hong Kong's most prominent entrepreneurs -- the property tycoons -- who have seen their share holdings decline in value by 50 percent since last year. 
Two months ago, the government announced it would suspend sales of land, in an effort to halt the downward spiral of property prices.
"The irony is that the government is taking the people's money and using it to bail out the property developers," said Marc Faber, an investment adviser and managing director of his own brokerage firm.
Sir Donald dismissed the suggestion that the government was putting Hong Kong's reserves at risk. 
He noted that the Hang Seng index has risen 1,200 points since the intervention began, which means that the government's owns more in shares than it did in cash before it began buying.
Still, the government's buying spree has put it in the uncharacteristic -- and potentially awkward -- position of being a major shareholder in many blue-chip Hong Kong companies.
Sir Donald said he was not concerned about owning large stakes in Hong Kong companies, nor about the potential negative effect of dumping those positions on the open market once the intervention was over.
Hong Kong's battle with the currency traders has mutated from a guerrilla skirmish into a full-scale war of attrition. 
Several traders said the government had recruited an unidentified expert to help it plot moves to thwart even the shrewdest of hedge funds. 
Beyond buying blue-chip shares like HSBC Holdings and Hong Kong Telecom, the government has taken a complex set of long and short positions on August and September index futures contracts.
Beyond the mechanics of the market, Hong Kong's intervention has rekindled a debate about how much governments can -- and should -- intervene to protect themselves from the vagaries of the global marketplace.
Ronnie Chan, a prominent Hong Kong property developer, said the government had an obligation to protect its citizens from a wave of speculation that was threatening to swamp the stock market and the local economy.
"The total annual output of Hong Kong is dwarfed by the daily capital flow of the markets," Mr. Chan said. 
"At will, the market can destroy an economy overnight. 
Is Hong Kong being destroyed?
No. But is it suffering hugely?
You bet."
In Hong Kong's case, however, the debate is complicated by the fact that it has set itself up as a mecca for global capital. 
Last year, the Hang Seng index rocketed to 16,000 points as foreign investors poured money into shares of "red chips" -- Chinese companies with publicly listed Hong Kong subsidiaries.
The Hong Kong dollar is another example of the territory's supposed openness to the global economy. 
The currency is pegged to the United States dollar at a fixed rate. 
The price for preserving that link at a time when most Asian countries devalued their currencies has been a spike in interest rates, which drove down property prices and the stock market.
Until this summer, Hong Kong had seemed ready to absorb those blows. 
But then in June, the government announced it would stop selling land. 
And two weeks ago, it waded into the stock market. 
After today, some market experts began talking about the "nationalization" of Hong Kong.
