
Meeting on the sidelines of the United Nations anniversary celebration, President Clinton and President Jiang Zemin of China made their best effort yesterday to repair a relationship that has been seriously strained by disagreements over Taiwan and human rights.
No concrete agreements emerged from the two-hour session at Lincoln Center, and there was no public display of unity comparable to Mr. Clinton's joint appearance on Monday with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia at Franklin D. Roosevelt's Hudson Valley estate.
But White House officials expressed confidence that the momentum developed at the intense session yesterday would allow the two nations to move forward with further discussions in a range of areas of concern, from arms control to trade relations.
Michael D. McCurry, the White House Press Secretary, said Mr. Clinton described his encounter with Mr. Jiang as a "very good, very positive meeting and the best of three meetings he has held to date" with the Chinese leader.
"He's confident that we have begun a process that will lead to a series of dialogues that will help improve the opportunity for comprehensive engagement with China," Mr. McCurry said.
Chen Jian, the spokesman for President Jiang's delegation, told reporters at a separate briefing that the meeting had been "candid, friendly, positive and useful."
"It will be useful for the improvement and growth of the bilateral relationship," Mr. Chen said.
Clinton Administration officials said the two leaders covered a range of issues including Taiwan, human rights, China's desire to join the World Trade Organization and nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. 
The officials said Mr. Clinton emphasized that while the two major powers were bound to have their differences, they can manage them better through honest dialogue.
"Neither side would claim that there aren't serious differences remaining," Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord said after the meeting. 
"There are serious differences."
But he said the relationship had "resumed momentum."
The Administration had hoped to capitalize on Russia's agreement on Monday to halt all nuclear testing in 1996 as a way to persuade China to do the same. 
But the Administration received only a promise to pursue the issue further. 
Though China has agreed to pursue a comprehensive test ban in 1996, it is the last of the five major nuclear powers not to sign on to the idea of zero testing.
Mr. Clinton raised the issue of human rights with China, bringing up specific cases as well as the issue of Tibet, which has been under Chinese control since 1950. 
But at a briefing after the meeting, Mr. Lord refused to identify the specific human rights victims discussed. 
That was in marked contrast to Mr. Clinton's meeting with Mr. Jiang in Seattle in 1993 where the public announcement of names helped get dissidents freed.
Mr. Clinton deflected questions about human rights issues and Taiwan from reporters who quizzed him and Mr. Jiang at a picture-taking session before their meeting.
"The important thing is that we're going to have this meeting," he said. 
"These are two great countries that have a real interest in maintaining a constructive dialogue with each other and wherever possible a partnership, and we need to go to work on it.'
Mr. Chen sidestepped a question about whether President Clinton had raised individual human rights cases with President Jiang.
"It is true that both countries have different views" on human rights, Mr. Chen said. 
"We can have dialogue on it instead of confrontation."
As expected, the Chinese brought up the issue of Taiwan, and Mr. Chen described it as "the most major and sensitive issue affecting the relationship."
But American officials said they were gratified that it did not dominate the agenda as it did in the aftermath of the United States' decision to allow the Taiwanese President, Lee Teng-hui, to make a private visit to the United States this spring.
Despite the Administration's insistence that the visit did not constitute a break with Washington's longstanding "one China" policy, Beijing recalled its Ambassador in protest.
Mr. Clinton's aides said that at the meeting today the President reaffirmed that the United States recognized only one China, but that the United States would not promise to ban any visits by Taiwan officials. 
He said such visits would remain "unofficial, private and rare."
Ever since Mr. Clinton took office the relationship with Beijing has been one of the most difficult to keep on track. 
With the end of the cold war and the breakup of the Soviet Union, China and the United States no longer have the same pragmatic need to use each other as counterweights against the former adversary. 
China's leaders have been unsettled by a struggle over who will be the successor to the 91-year-old Deng Xiaoping. 
And the personal relationship between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang has been cool, Administration officials acknowledge.
The United States has also been concerned about China's arrest and trial of Harry Wu, an American human rights advocate who was jailed in China and convicted of stealing state secrets.
Since then both countries have moved back from the brink. 
Beijing released Mr. Wu; Hillary Rodham Clinton visited Beijing for a United Nations women's conference, and China announced in late September that it would suspend a contract to sell two nuclear power reactors to Iran.
Still, a successful meeting between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang yesterday was not assured.
At the last moment, the Chinese demanded that the meeting site be changed because the planned venue, the New York Public Library, was featuring an exhibit that included a handbill from the 1989 student democracy movement, which was crushed in Beijing's Tiananmen Square. 
The exhibit also contains footage of the Chinese military suppression of the demonstrations, in which hundreds were killed.
And just hours before the two world leaders sat down together, Mr. Jiang used his speech at the United Nations celebrations to charge that "certain big powers, often under the cover of freedom, democracy and human rights, set out to encroach upon the sovereignty of other countries, interfere in their internal affairs and undermine their national unity and ethnic harmony."
Mr. Jiang also repeated Beijing's longstanding position that Taiwan remains an "inalienable part of China's territory."
Nonetheless, both the American and Chinese officials were eager yesterday to bring relations back to the point where the two nations could have normal diplomatic exchanges.
Other issues that came up yesterday included joint law enforcement efforts, narcotics enforcement and trade relations. 
China's admission to the World Trade Organization is one of Beijing's major diplomatic objectives. 
And Mr. Lord said the President stressed that China needed to make more progress in the area of intellectual rights protection as a step toward its goal.
Mr. Chen said that the two leaders would meet again at the summit conference of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Group in Osaka, Japan, next month. 
"The Osaka meeting will build on this meeting and move the process forward," he said.
      
