
ONLY a few months ago North Korea seemed like a pathbreaking example of how the world's great powers can set aside other differences to make sure that fanatical leaders and nuclear bombs are kept apart. 
Faced with overwhelming evidence that the hard-line Communist regime of Kim Il Sung was building a bomb, the United States harnessed the West, and then Russia and China, to stop the project from turning into a nightmare. 
For most of last year, it looked like the strategy was working.
Beneath his usual cloud of defiant oratory, the 80-year old Mr. Kim finally agreed to live up to his obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 
He allowed international inspectors to visit the mysterious nuclear site called Yongbyon. 
His motives seemed clear. 
He sought the trade and investment he desperately needs, especially now that there are reports of food riots and troops stand on rail-side coal piles to keep the residents from stealing enough to heat their homes.
On Friday, though, it was Washington's seeming success that turned to coal -- and along with it, much of the world's confidence in the workability of the treaty that 153 nations have signed. 
In an unnerving and perhaps self-destructive act of defiance, North Korea became the first nation ever to renounce the treaty, barring the door completely to international inspectors who were on the scent of a secret cache of plutonium. 
Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok Ju declared that the North had signed the accord in 1985 to reduce what he termed a nuclear threat from South Korea and the United States, and said "We are now withdrawing from it because it is being abused to destroy our republic."
Surprised and more than a little scared, Japan and South Korea denounced the action as destabilizing and dangerous. 
At the same time, though, there were second thoughts about whether the safeguards designed 25 years ago, in an age of superpower patrons for countries like North Korea, still have any teeth.
 
Something Fishy
What use is a treaty that allowed a country to develop nuclear weapons for seven years while it barred inspectors -- and that is renounced as soon as the first inspectors in the door smell something fishy?
Is the International Atomic Energy Agency, a United Nations affiliate with no enforcement powers, the right institution to keep countries like North Korea in line?
And even if the issue goes to the Security Council, what can you take away from a country that has nothing?
"The treaty is no longer quite so sacrosanct today," said Leonard Spector, head of a project on nuclear proliferation on the Korean Peninsula at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
"Now that one country has pulled out, others obviously can begin to think about it."
In many ways the North Korean experience is significantly different from the challenges the West has faced in dealing with nonsignatories -- including India, Pakistan, Israel and Algeria -- and even with countries that have signed and dodged, like Iraq. 
First, by all accounts, Saddam Hussein seems much farther from realizing his dreams than Kim Il Sung is. 
Estimates vary widely, but more and more analysts in the United States Government seem to agree that North Korea already has the raw material for at least one bomb, and a few think some crude, still-untested devices may have already been built. 
Second, North Korea has turned weaponry into its only successful export business; it ships home-grown missiles to the Middle East, and presumably would have few qualms about shipping nuclear weapons.
But perhaps most important, rather than play an Iraq-style game of hide-and-seek with the inspectors, the North has used the access to its nuclear facilities guaranteed by the treaty itself as a bargaining chip. 
In its statement Friday it said it would only return to the regime if "the United States stops its nuclear threats against the North" -- which was interpreted as a reference to the annual "Team Spirit" military exercises now under way between South Korea and the United States -- and if the atomic energy agency "returns to its principle of independence and impartiality."
In short, Mr. Kim turned a situation in which it held no cards -- he was trying to hold off a "special inspection" of two sites that American spy satellites have identified as waste dumps that would probably show how much plutonium he has produced -- into a situation in which he now holds at least one: re-entry into the treaty. 
In fact, once a three-month waiting period to exit the treaty expires, his bomb-development work will become legal.
"From the start it was always assumed that if a country did withdraw from the treaty, it would be a signal that they had decided to make a bomb," Gary Milhollin, the head of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, said recently. 
"If not, why take the political heat?"
What got everyone to this point is a 25-year-old system that acknowledges the right of every nation to use nuclear materials for peaceful purposes, even if those same materials, especially plutonium, are relatively simple to rework into weapons. 
It is the "safeguards" system of inspection that is supposed to assure that materials intended for civilian plants stay in civilian use.
The biggest advocates of that system are countries like Japan, which is already extracting plutonium from nuclear waste, much as North Korea is trying to do, as part of its aggressive civilian nuclear power program. 
These days the Japanese find themselves in the diplomatically embarrassing position of arguing that they have every right to do so because the world recognizes them as a solid international citizen, while at the same time arguing that their North Korean neighbors must be denied the right because they have an attitude problem.
 
Plutonium Politics
The North Koreans, naturally, say that their intentions are benign and that the I.A.E.A. is "tacitly approving" moves by Japan and South Korea to secretly arm themselves.
"We are seeing the breakdown of a regime that believed that plutonium and bomb-grade material are O.K. as long as they are under safeguard," said Paul L. Leventhal, president of the Nuclear Control Institute and a harsh critic of the precedent set by Japan's plutonium effort.
Officials in Japan and South Korea, naturally, say they have no interest in nuclear arms. 
The Japanese have long renounced them, and South Korea stopped developing them after the United States got wind of its project in the late 1970's. 
But preventing such an arms race has always depended on Seoul and Tokyo remaining unshakably confident that the United States' support, and its nuclear umbrella, extends over them.
Though few will say it publicly, that is what the Team Spirit exercise, which was suspended last year when the North looked like it was beginning to cooperate, is all about. 
This year the United States brought the B-1B bomber and other nuclear-capable equipment to South Korea for the exercises, presumably to make a point. 
And it was exactly that which sent the North into a frenzy, declaring early last week that they were going on a "semi-war footing" because invasion was imminent.
Now Washington is in the position of having few attractive options. 
Some officials, including many in Japan and a few members of the two-week old South Korean Government, argue that going ahead with the 125,000-troop Team Spirit exercise this year is an unnecessary provocation. 
But it is too late to back down. 
Though the American military has endless scenarios for eradicating Yongbyon, everyone acknowledges they are of little use: If the North retaliated on Seoul, only 35 miles from the border, or on South Korean civilian nuclear plants, it would be disastrous.
Economic sanctions are likely to have little effect on a country that is already isolated from virtually all of its neighbors except China. 
Getting the Chinese to seal off that border, and with it food and fuel, is unlikely.
"It may not be over yet," said Mr. Spector. "We are about to see an intense diplomatic effort to get this turned around."
But it may be, he said, that the world has little cause to be optimistic: Perhaps the North Koreans knew that they were about to get caught, he said, and the only solution was to jettison the one treaty that could betray them.
