
MAYBE it depends which side of the Pacific you're on.
In the days since China and the United States signed a deal that may lead to Chinese admission into the World Trade Organization, the Chinese stock market has made small gains, with indexes of mainland stocks up about 1 percent. 
Hong Kong stocks did better, with the leading index of such shares up 3.6 percent since Friday.
But most of the relatively small number of Chinese stocks traded on major American stock markets have risen sharply. 
In some cases they have gone absolutely berserk. 
Suddenly, any stock with China in its name seems to have willing buyers.
The biggest gains have gone to stocks that previously had been of little interest to American investors. 
By contrast, China Telecom (Hong Kong), which provides cellular telephone services in China and has been an institutional favorite in America, rose on Monday and Tuesday but fell $5.9375, to $86.5625, yesterday, and is up just 2 percent for the week.
But such languid performance is more than offset by other stocks that have skyrocketed. 
A list of nine stocks -- all traded on the New York Stock Exchange or Nasdaq and all with the word "China" in their names -- shows increases of at least 60 percent for six of the nine since Friday. 
Investors who put an equal amount of money into each of the stocks on Friday -- the last trading day before the W.T.O. agreement was announced -- would have more than quadrupled their money by yesterday's close.
The most amazing move came in the shares of China Prosperity International Holdings, a company that does property renovations in China -- but that has also been talking about doing something related to the Internet.
China Prosperity was once something of a hot stock, moving as high as $37 a share in Nasdaq trading in 1996 -- adjusted for a later reverse split. 
But it had fallen out of investors favor, and by Monday was trading at $1 a share.
Then on Tuesday, the stock leaped to $11.06, trading as high as $14, and volume rose to 521,100 shares, or more than had traded in the previous year. 
That however, was just the prelude. 
Yesterday, volume totaled 4.4 million shares, or more than the total volume in this country since the company went public in 1995. 
The price leaped as high as $80, then began to slide before ending at $32.0625.
There was no announcement from the company, but the same could not be said for another suddenly highflier. 
China Resources Development, a distributor of natural rubber, reported that its losses were growing. 
It added that it had no explanation for the stock's movement in Nasdaq small-cap trading.
That stock jumped $19, to $25 a share, in trading yesterday, on volume of 906,800 shares. 
That volume is nearly twice the total number of shares outstanding.
Another amazing performance was turned in by the Dransfield China Paper Corporation, which rarely trades on Nasdaq. 
During October, there were only two days when shares in the company, which distributes paper products and is building pulp mills in China, were traded. 
The price then was $1 a share. 
It fell to 43.75 cents on Monday, and then did not trade Tuesday.
But yesterday, with anything named China looking hot, 1.3 million shares were traded -- more than triple the total volume traded since the company was listed on Nasdaq in 1997 -- and the price rose as high as $29 before closing at $12.
China.com, a company based in Hong Kong that provides a portal for Chinese users of the Internet, leaped from $58 on Friday to a close of $105 yesterday, trading as high as $137. 
It had gone public, at $20 a share, in July.
Even China Tire, a company that makes car and truck tires, got in on the action. 
Since Friday, it is up 77 percent, to $10.625.
It is not easy to explain such moves based on expectations of what will happen if China is successful in entering the World Trade Organization, something that could yet be derailed by Congressional opposition. 
Changes in the Chinese economy will arrive over a period of years, and the opening of the economy to competition from foreign companies may damage some Chinese businesses even as others are helped.
But there seems to have been little in the way of such analysis regarding many of the stocks that were moving yesterday. 
Instead, Internet chat rooms were full of comments about how certain stocks were sure to keep moving because there were relatively few shares available for trading. 
Traders were chasing performance, and in the process they were creating it.
