
IN the wretchedness of the Cau Mong animal market in Vietnam's largest city, another band of smiling foreign tourists has arrived. 
The boisterous tour group from Taiwan is not here simply to browse among the dingy, foul-smelling cages crammed with exotic wildlife -- baby chimps and doe-eyed gibbons, sea turtles and tangles of lime-green jungle snakes, scaly anteater-like pangolins and squawking birds with plumage in every color. 
The Taiwanese are here to buy.
"If you can wait a couple of weeks, we can also get you a tiger cub or a bear," said one of the Vietnamese merchants.
"The Taiwanese people like Vietnam because they know that there are still many animals in the forest here," said the merchant, who knew better than to give his name. 
"Sometimes they buy these animals to eat them, sometimes for medicine. 
This is a very good business for us."
Vietnam has much to be thankful for in the newfound prosperity of its ethnic Chinese neighbors -- Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and China itself. 
The Taiwanese and Hong Kong Chinese are the largest foreign investors in Vietnam's newly free market, and they are helping Vietnam emerge from generations of poverty.
But what delights many Vietnamese is alarming environmentalists. 
They see the Chinese rush into Vietnam and other undeveloped, wildlife-rich Asian nations as a threat to some of the world's rarest, most beautiful animals -- creatures that in traditional Chinese culture are more valuable in the cooking pot or in the pharmacy than in the wild.
 
 
Rhino Broth, Anyone?
"The prognosis is not very bright," said Steven Broad, director of the Southeast Asia office of the environmental group Traffic. 
"This view of animals is very deeply rooted in Chinese culture."
The fate of Asia's exotic wildlife "is going to come down to whether Chinese societies can see biodiversity as a priority," he said.
For decades, Africa provided the bulk of animals and animal products for the vast Asian market for traditional medicine. 
But in the 1970's and 1980's, several African nations moved to save what remained of their wildlife. 
And so traders and smugglers turned to Asia, especially to Vietnam, then opening its economy to the world.
For some species in Vietnam, it is already too late. 
Tigers and rhinos, once plentiful, are near extinction as smugglers roam the countryside for the bone, flesh and horn that are sought in Taipei and Hong Kong.
In the reductionist view of Chinese medical practitioners, you are what you eat. 
Tiger eyes are said to improve vision; a tiger penis boiled in soup brings virility; crushed tiger bone is believed to cure everything from impotence to ulcers, while rhino horn dissolved in broth is a treatment for high blood pressure and stroke. 
The succulent meat of a bear's paw is said to give strength. 
Snakes are treasured for the tonic made from their blood.
Under international pressure, the governments of Taiwan, Hong Kong, China and Singapore -- as well as South Korea and Japan, where folk medicine is also popular -- have all announced crackdowns on animal trafficking.
But the pull of tradition is proving too strong. 
Many Chinese exposed to modern medicine are still convinced that their physical and spiritual well-being depends on the consumption of exotic animals. 
And they can pay for it; hundreds of millions of ethnic Chinese now have the income to buy what once were unimaginable luxuries.
The belief in traditional medicine is nowhere more potent than in Taiwan, widely seen as the epicenter of the illegal animal trade. 
In April, the Clinton Administration imposed sanctions on Taiwan for its failure to halt the use of tiger and rhino products. 
While protesting the sanctions as unnecessary, Taiwan did toughen its laws. 
The legislature voted in October to raise the maximum fine for trading in rare animals to $93,000, up from $1,800, and raised the prison term from five to seven years.
 
 
Big Taiwanese Appetites
But the new laws may simply encourage more Taiwanese to travel abroad to find what they want. 
The Government commissioned a conservation group earlier this year to send investigators to Vietnam to see who was buying up exotic wildlife.
"In the trade of bear's paws, tiger's penis and bones, Taiwanese sadly play a major role among consumers," the group said. 
Many travel to villages in Vietnam's central highlands to restaurants renowned for their broiled tiger, roasted anteater and fresh bear paws. 
The bears are kept caged outside the restaurants to convince guests of the meat's freshness, with each paw selling for the equivalent of about $40.
While its animal-protection laws are relatively strict, Vietnam is at a loss to stem the animal trade. 
Forest rangers earn roughly 50 cents a day, leaving them susceptible to bribes, and there are not nearly enough to patrol thousands of square miles of jungle.
The situation is much the same in other nations rich in animal life, notably Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.
"It has become very hard for us to protect our animals," said Le Duc Thuan, a wildlife officer in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. 
"In the 1970's, we had 3,000 tigers, and now maybe we have 200. 
We had 300 rhinos in the 1975; now we have between 10 and 25. 
There are now so many smugglers. 
And the problem is getting worse, not better, because the demand from mainland China is growing, because China is getting rich."
Along Vietnam's northern border, there is a brisk one-way trade in exotic animals, all headed to the markets of China. 
At the crossing known as the Friendship Pass, thousands of Vietnamese traders gather every day to cross the border, many carrying wriggling burlap sacks meant for China's newly prosperous millions.
