
WHEN William Lipton talks about Chinese bamboo furniture, he sounds more like a philosopher than a merchant. 
"They say without meat, a man grows thin; without bamboo, he can't build a house," he said this week. 
"And when you sit in a bamboo chair, it should sing. 
You know bamboo chairs were built to make that creaking sound."
Mr. Lipton, 44, a New York dealer, has been thinking a lot about bamboo furniture since he came upon a few rare pieces in two warehouses in Beijing in 1993 and realized there might be more. 
Over the next two years, and several trips back to China, he amassed enough to put together the first exhibition of such furniture in this country.
"Honorable Gentlemen: Bamboo Furniture and Objects from China," a show in Mr. Lipton's shop at 27 East 61st Street, offers some 50 chairs, tables and cabinets that were produced for use in Imperial palaces and homes of wealthy merchants, mostly in the 18th and 19th centuries. 
These pieces have the dignity and proportions of formal hardwood Chinese furniture. 
They imitate its lacy look in the use of latticelike panels to fill the backs of chairs, form the bases of tables and embellish the fronts of chests.
Mr. Lipton said this style of bamboo furniture flourished only in Shanxi province in northern China and largely remained there until recently because of the difficulty and expense of shipping goods in China.
His below-street-level shop in a converted town house is chockablock with furniture. 
Round tables, octagonal chairs, squarish footstools and rectangular cabinets are grouped together or stacked, covering every inch of the tiny shop.
"The layering and density achieve a certain effect," he said. 
"It's calculated to produce a sense of mystery."
Always the merchant, he added, "I also want people to see how things are different, how things are not alike."
The shop is supposed to look like an old Chinese tea house with a garden out back planted with bamboos and Chinese plants. 
Mr. Lipton said that in China many people lived in heavily furnished rooms, combining very simple pieces with ornate ones "as we have in this shop."
The earliest piece on display is a lacquered Ming cabinet of woven split bamboo embellished with a dragon on top from the 17th century. 
"We know the bamboo tradition goes back further than that," Mr. Lipton said, noting that there are tables and chairs depicted in Song paintings from the 13th century. 
Most of the early bamboo furniture has not survived. 
"Bamboo is so vulnerable, and because it was so common throughout China, people didn't treasure it as they did rarer pieces," he said.
Even so, Mr. Lipton's shop offers an amazing selection, in both the types of furniture and the detailing of the bamboo patterns. 
There are chairs with horseshoe-shaped or square backs, others with hexagonal seats. 
Tables come in all sizes and shapes. 
Some were used for serving tea, others in scholars' studies.
Each piece of latticework on the bamboo furniture is carved with little pins and slots that function like mortise and tenon joinery. 
The legs are made of bamboo, and the stretchers are also single pieces of bamboo that are wrapped around them. 
"I think the way bamboo furniture is lovingly embellished with this wrapping technique shows how the makers in Shanxi prized this material," he said.
Everything in Mr. Lipton's show is for sale. 
The prices range from $2,000 for a tea stand to $12,000 for a side table. 
The exhibition runs through October. 
(A catalogue will be available on Nov. 
1 for $50.)
Coincidentally, the Lipton show comes at a time when there is growing international interest in Chinese furniture. 
A major exhibition is currently on display at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, and when the Shanghai Museum reopens in its new building next week, it will feature a gallery devoted to Chinese furniture. 
Last month, the first comprehensive collection of such furniture brought record prices at Christie's.
Mr. Lipton traces his interest in Chinese furniture to his childhood, when he tagged along with his parents on their weekly visit to an antiques shop in San Francisco's Chinatown. 
He says the tiny lacquer boxes, the porcelain cups and carved jade buckles he saw in the glass cases "looked so mysterious."
He studied textile design at the School of Art in Basel, Switzerland, and then went to Bangkok, Thailand, where he was the design director at the Jim Thompson Thai Silk Company in the 1970's. 
Later, he designed textiles for General Motors in Southfield, Mich. 
He came to the antiques trade after honing his eye for 20 years as a collector of Asian decorative arts and opened his shop in 1990.
When Mr. Lipton began buying bamboo furniture in Beijing he was reminded of an encounter he had had with an old Chinese furniture maker in Thailand. 
"He had a chair that had belonged to his father, and I wanted to buy it," Mr. Lipton said. 
"But he couldn't sell it because he liked the noise it made."
Mr. Lipton also likes the noise. 
"The creaking happens as the bamboo stretches and the joints squeak, the way crickets sound rubbing their legs together," he said. 
"Crickets are prized in China for their song."
Now, with Mr. Lipton's help, the gentle squeaking of bamboo furniture may be valued, too.
