
IN their new book "Preventative Defense" (Brookings Institution Press), former Defense Secretary William J. Perry and a former Pentagon colleague, Ashton B. Carter, argue that 10 years into the post-cold war, Washington forgets that some nations matter a lot more than others.
There is a short "A list" of nations that could some day pose a threat to "the survival or way of life of Americans" -- a Russia that goes the way of Weimar Germany, or a China that becomes a hostile superpower.
Then there is a well-stocked "B list" of "imminent threats to U.S. interests," including the fractious Persian Gulf states and North Korea.
And finally comes the "C list," which the authors say is composed of "the Kosovos, Bosnias, Somalias, Rwandas and Haitis" -- all urgent, but places where American interests are usually hard to define.
On paper, it sounds reasonable and orderly. 
But the C list looms vivid onlive TV, making it all-consuming for Washington while less dramatic A list problems go to the back burner.
And that appears to be exactly what happened over the last 10 days as China's savvy Prime Minister, Zhu Rongji, drove up to the White House ready to resolve one of the most complex issues in Sino-American relations -- a huge trade deal that is really about China's influence in the world and America's influence on China. 
Problem was, he arrived at a moment when a President who has pressed "engagement" with China was elsewhere engaged.
The result was a weeklong White House fumble that left the Chinese angry, the President embarrassed, the business community enraged and Congress in disarray. 
In the end, Mr. Zhu left the United States with a hastily telephoned assurance from Mr. Clinton that China would get into the World Trade Organization this year, with American blessing, if China kept its promises and gave a bit more. 
But the whole messy handling of China's premier reformer left some Administration officials wondering whether this White House can bomb Belgrade and negotiate with Beijing at the same time.
"This was a classic case of distraction," one White House official conceded late last week, trying to explain why the White House had to issue three separate joint statements with Mr. Zhu in five days.
Mr. Zhu, the man bringing market reforms to China even as millions wander the countryside unemployed, decided earlier this year that China was either going to get globalized fast or get lost in the race. 
"Either we look like Singapore or we look like Russia," one of his aides commented recently. 
"And that's not a choice."
So Mr. Zhu offered market-opening concessions in agriculture, telecommunications, banking, insurance and other industries that go far beyond what most American officials thought possible. 
And the morning of his arrival here, Mr. Clinton made the strongest case yet for ushering China into the World Trade Organization, arguing it would not only mean billions for American companies, but that it would bring the rule of law to China. 
And, breaking new ground, he argued that an economically weak China was more dangerous to America than a strong China.
HOURS later, though, Mr. Clinton walked away from the deal, at least for the time being. 
China had not given enough, his aides argued. 
He was worried, his advisers say, that the Democratic left, backed by the unions, would kill off any deal once they allied with conservatives saying there should be no deal with a China that steals nuclear secrets and represses dissidents.
"The critical middle that you need to support a deal like this is shrinking," said Commerce Secretary William Daley, explaining why the White House needed what he called "a bulletproof deal."
But in trade, nothing's bulletproof. 
American textile makers will never like a deal that lets China expand its presence in the American market. 
Nor will steel makers, or steel unions. 
Many in Congress argue that China has no intention of fulfilling its market-opening promises. 
But the vast majority of big businesses say that if Mr. Clinton doesn't sign soon, the huge gains made in many areas will be eaten away as soon as Mr. Zhu returns to Beijing and faces bureaucrats screaming: "You gave away what?"
"That's what makes this such a critical moment," said Edward S. Steinfeld, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor who has studied China's state-owned enterprises. 
"This agreement puts tremendous pressure on China to change its industrial structure, and to some degree its politics.
"It will be painful. 
And the question is, how can you say that you want a market-based China, enmeshed in a global legal system, and walk away from this?"
