
There does not appear the slightest probability that, under any circumstances, Hong Kong will ever become a place of trade. 
It is worse than folly to persist in a course begun in error, and which, if continued, must eventually end in disappointment and in national loss and degradation.
-- Robert Montgomery Martin, the British colonial treasurer, reporting home during a visit to Hong Kong in 1844.
SO perhaps not every Brit who sailed into the glorious cavern of Victoria Harbor after the Opium War immediately grasped the magnificence of what his country had just stolen. 
Eventually, though, the defenders of the 19th century's biggest drug cartel figured the place out. 
And even today, at a time when business lives by modem, Hong Kong serves as living proof that in politics, trade and the creation of great cities, geography still matters.
 
Magic
Though many have tried -- from Singapore to Vancouver to Taipei -- no one has ever managed to replicate the formula that transformed Hong Kong from a steep, humid, scarcely populated island into one of the world's capitals of commerce.
But what exactly is the magic of Hong Kong?
Its success, of course, is all about proximity -- to the most complex, the most infuriating and now the fastest-growing emerging market on earth. 
The source of its dynamism, though, is far more complex. 
Hong Kong thrived precisely because it was on the edge of, but never mired in, the politics and turmoil of China. 
That separateness allowed it to create one of the world's most wired, global cities -- a narrow, ridiculously crowded place where Western law, Asian culture, Japanese design, American financing and greed from seven continents all mixed together to make money.
So China celebrates Hong Kong's return not only because it ends a century and a half of humiliation, but because the barren island it lost to gunship diplomacy returns to Chinese control tomorrow as the city of the future. 
The question is whether the magic can survive the transition.
When Britain's sovereignty ends amid fireworks and network-TV special reports at midnight on June 30 -- noon on the East Coast of the United States -- so does the detachment that long insulated Hong Kong from the political control, rampant corruption and endemic cronyism of modern-day China. 
But it may take decades to answer the question looming over the ceremonies -- whether as Hong Kong and China converge, the country will come to look more like the island or the island more like the country.
In the sunny study of his official mansion recently, Christopher Patten, the 28th and last Governor of Hong Kong, who will sail into the sunset tomorrow as President Jiang Zemin and his army take control, framed the issue this way: "In 10 years' time, will Hong Kong be more than just the richest city in China?"
"The way China treats Hong Kong," he added, "goes to the heart of what China will be like -- whether it can move from boomtown capitalism to a well-regulated, sophisticated economy that is able to accommodate political change."
Both China and the Hong Kong tycoons who have spent millions preparing the ground for its assumption of control say such comments are arrogant. 
It is Chinese energy more than British foresight that made Hong Kong, they argue, and that explains why Hong Kong's per capita income, an astounding $27,500 last year, long ago outstripped Britain's. 
Having battled Mr. Patten's five-year campaign to create democratic institutions, one of the city's pro-Beijing millionaires suggested recently that Mr. Patten's departure tomorrow night will be his greatest contribution to Hong Kong's future.
The markets don't exactly disagree: they hit heights last week so dizzying that the head of the colony's central bank, in his last act as a servant of the Crown, offered a warning to investors against "undue exuberance."
 
An Elusive Formula
The truth, though, is that no one is quite sure what will happen to Hong Kong because no one is quite sure which ingredients made it both Asia's greatest trading center and one of the world's most captivating cities. 
Maybe it's the majesty of the setting -- the glass set against rock, the winding streets, the cacophonous markets improbably etched into a mountain rising from the South China Sea. 
Or perhaps the style of the place -- the chic restaurants, the escalators that run at double speed so that no one is late to a deal, the Mao watches (his mechanical hand waves once a second), the impish spirit that gives rise to fast-food restaurants named the Deli Lama.
Or maybe it is the sight of starched investment bankers and dock workers simultaneously yammering into cell phones in English and Cantonese on the lumbering Star Ferry, where a commute across the worlds most fascinating harbor still costs only 13 cents.
Those are all images television viewers can expect to see today and tomorrow. 
But the formula that has made Hong Kong work -- first as a British outpost in Asia and then as a Chinese city with American and Japanese capital and British eccentricities -- is far more opaque.
The obvious factor is location: Hong Kong is a quick boat and train ride from the biggest labor force and the biggest market on earth, yet it has not had to pay the social costs of sustaining either. 
But there is more.
British rule of law created an advanced framework for capitalism in Hong Kong before anyone thought that capitalism comes in different flavors -- Asian, Western, global. 
British law meant the markets were regulated well enough so that investors were willing to take the risk of putting their money into companies. 
It meant companies were willing to sign contracts, knowing that they could seek enforcement through an independent judiciary where precedent mattered more than who your friends were.
 
Low Taxes, Iron Hand
Those were only the start. 
Hong Kong's taxes are among the lowest in the developed world. 
Until Mr. Patten introduced his democratic reforms, which China now threatens to undo, the territory was ruled with an iron hand that limited domestic politics, eliminating a distraction from making money. 
(This is an inconvenient fact for those in Washington who argue that democracy is integral to Hong Kong's economic success.)
None of the country's productive resources went toward national defense -- that was Britain's problem. 
Nor was it spent on a burdensome social security system. 
That's why Hong Kong's phenomenal wealth -- count the Daimlers parked outside the bars of Wanchai -- is mixed with considerable urban squalor, a jarring contrast that the territory's new, Beijing-appointed leader, Tung Chee-hwa, says is no longer acceptable.
It's no wonder that Milton Friedman, the famed economist, once said that "If you want to see capitalism at work, go to Hong Kong."
There are many imitators, but none has quite pulled off another Hong Kong. 
A few years ago, Vancouver, another spectacular city on the sea, was a favorite site for jet-setting "astronauts" who insured themselves against China's takeover of Hong Kong by establishing residencies in that safe corner of the British Commonwealth.
The sleepy Canadian outpost benefited from an injection of capital, entrepreneurial spirit and great Cantonese restaurants. 
But Canada and Confucianism were a marriage of convenience. 
Astronauts earned their title by parking their families and their brokerage accounts on Vancouver's quiet streets and rocketing back to the fray.
Taiwan, where the British briefly considered building a Hong Kong when the island was still known as Formosa, also aspired to be a great financial center. 
It succeeded at creating tremendous wealth. 
But until recently it had no direct trade links to China. 
That limitation, combined with tremendous trade barriers, deep corruption, huge defense costs and deeply divisive politics, meant Taiwan never made the leap.
 
Singapore: Tough Option
Hong Kong closest real rival is Singapore, another glittering, onetime British colony, which impresses first-time visitors with its cleanliness, efficiency, spectacular airport and corruption-free traditions. 
Its location, between Indonesia and Malaysia, takes second place to Hong Kong's.
But while Hong Kong is about risk, Singapore is about order. 
It is run by control freaks who believe prosperity can proceed quite nicely, thank you, without political freedom -- which is exactly why the Chinese so admire the "Singapore model."
In response, American and British officials are telling the Chinese that politics and economics cannot be separated if the aim is a truly vibrant market that investors around the world will trust; they have to know they can wake up in Hong Kong and read about a financial scandal in Jiang Zemin's family, then flip on CNN and see uncensored footage of an uprising in Tibet.
China clearly has its own ideas about Hong Kong's future, and most involve Shanghai. 
For years now, China has been importing what it likes from Hong Kong -- the stock market, the glitz, the entrepreneurial spirit -- but it has left behind the political freedom, strict regulations and clean courts that Western investors demand. 
It is unclear whether the ultimate plan is to supplant Hong Kong as the international financial center or simply use Shanghai as a faucet to tap the savings of Chinese in a market that requires less disclosure and runs by Chinese rules.
And what of Hong Kong?
Perhaps its tycoons are right: all this handwringing is the preoccupation of a Western press fixated on individual liberties instead of common prosperity. 
Or perhaps Hong Kong's first newspaper, Friend of China, was closer to the truth in 1842 when it said Hong Kong was destined to "revolutionize, or subvert, the existing state of things in China."
