
A NEW way of measuring the world's economies has vaulted China from the ranks of third-world nations to those of the economic powerhouses. 
Under calculations being introduced by the International Monetary Fund this week, relying on the buying power of each nation's currency rather than its dollar value, China's economy comes out four times bigger than most previous estimates. 
That makes it the world's third-largest, after the United States and Japan.
But the confirmation of China's enormous economic power helps to obscure the unevenness of the nation's economic development. 
China may be the world's fastest-growing economy on its way to becoming the world's largest market, but that represents primarily the activity along the country's coastal rim, from the northeastern tip of Manchuria all the way down past Hong Kong.
In fact, what has emerged in the past few years is a two-tier economy that is broadening the gap between rich and poor. 
This is worrisome to China's leaders because the same sort of gap prompted Communist guerrillas like Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping to fight to overthrow the old order in the 1930's and '40's.
In its more Communist days, China was relatively egalitarian as countries go, for no one had much of anything. 
Indeed, the economic restructuring begun in 1978 by Mr. Deng, the nation's senior leader, initially created a more equal society. 
By stimulating growth in the countryside, it raised living standards closer to those of the cities.
But last week, Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji warned that over the past six months disparities between China's different regions had "widened to some extent."
That seems an understatement. 
All indications are that income disparities have been growing since the mid-1980's, and that the pace is now accelerating.
"That could provoke a great deal of disenchantment and impatience among those whose lives are lacking," said Carl A. Riskin, a specialist on the Chinese economy at Queens College in New York.
In Guizhou, a landlocked southern province, the poverty is striking. 
In the mountainous countryside surrounding the city, a handful of children, their small bellies slightly distended, run around half-naked because their parents can't afford to buy them clothes. 
Huts are made of tree trunks, branches and straw. 
The typical resident's income was $123 last year, about one-sixth the average income in Shanghai.
China's 30 provinces were never all that much alike in the first place, but in their earlier years the Communists diligently played Robin Hood. 
They milked rich places like Shanghai to give to poorer regions. 
But the policy has shifted dramatically over the years, and now the contrast is sharp. 
The coast is vibrant, with executives striking thousands of deals every day with the outside world. 
The interior is crawling -- admittedly, faster than before -- yet even Chinese refer to this four-fifths of the nation as "China's third world."
 
Rich Get Richer
Guizhou belongs to this other world. 
For the past dozen years, while provinces like Guangdong and Jiangsu were given economic privileges to develop, Guizhou was asked to supply its coal, timber and other raw materials at fixed state prices. 
The logic was that economic activity would "trickle in" to remote areas, as land, labor and transport costs rose in more developed regions.
The problem is that such a process is likely to take decades. 
Meanwhile, poorer areas are still subsidizing richer coastal areas with cheap raw materials. 
Officials tacitly acknowledge this phenomenon, but they defend it as imperative for progress.
"Development must be stable and orderly," said Zhao Jiaxing, vice director of Guizhou Economic Commission. 
"Actually, China can't develop evenly. 
But after the coastal areas get rich, their people will come here."
By some accounts, the nation has four or five million millionaires as calculated in local currency. 
(A million yuan is equivalent to about $175,000 at the official rate of exchange.) Some Chinese believe that such estimates, reported in the Chinese press, are exaggerations, but they have aroused some resentment.
"A certain level of gap encourages people to work," said Zhu Qingfang, who researches income differences at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. 
"But if the gap is too big, it makes people feel uneasy."
In any case, the disparities are creating strains. 
Conspicuous consumption is growing in the cities, leading official newspapers to denounce "money worship."
Huge migrations are creating headaches, as millions of peasants flock to cities in search of work. 
In the past, China restricted labor movements, but it has relaxed those rules, partly to allow urban economies along the coast to soak up surplus labor in the countryside.
One result is a talent drain from the poorer inland regions in China's northwest. 
The "floating population" has also made it tricky for the Government to control the birth rate. 
The Government's overriding fear is that the new inequities will provoke unrest. 
But some Chinese argue that even the poor are better off and therefore will not challenge the system.
"We know from TV that life in Guangdong may be better than here, but Guiyang is better than before," said Zhang Jinghui, a peasant who recently got a job as a vendor in this city in Guizhou. 
"And anyway, you can't believe everything you see on television."
