
The Clinton administration and business groups prepared an intense campaign today to win approval in Congress for China's entry into the World Trade Organization, facing opposition from conservatives who object to almost any dealings with China and liberals who say the trade pact would be bad for workers.
Members of both parties said the deal would most likely be approved in the House, the more difficult of the two Congressional battlegrounds, based on the solid bipartisan majority that granted China a one-year extension of favorable trading terms earlier this year. 
The Senate tends to be more supportive of free trade measures than the House.
But neither the supporters nor the opponents were taking the outcome for granted, given the volatility of the relationship between the United States and China and the political sensitivity of trade issues heading into an election year.
"It's going to take an awful lot of work," said Representative David Dreier, a California Republican who is chairman of the House Rules Committee and a leading advocate of bringing China into the trade group.
Congress would not vote on the agreement itself, but on whether the United States should permanently grant China normal trading privileges, which is in effect a condition of the deal. 
Since 1974, Congress has had to vote annually on whether to retain a normal trading relationship with China, a process that critics of China have used to express their displeasure with Beijing.
Eager to win greater access to the huge market in China -- and stung by criticism that they had been ineffectual in rallying support for past trade votes -- business groups promised an all-out campaign to get the deal enacted.
"We were asked by the administration if we could deliver the votes," said L. Craig Johnstone, senior vice president for international economic and national security affairs at the United States Chamber of Commerce. 
"We said we could and we will."
Many industries -- commercial banking, auto and aircraft manufacturing, farming and food processing, investment banking, electronics, money management, filmmaking -- hailed the agreement today as an opportunity to expand rapidly into the giant Chinese market. 
Business groups had complained to the administration last spring when the president rejected an earlier deal with the Chinese. 
Mr. Clinton had walked away from the proposal fearing that he would have been unable to secure sufficient support in Congress.
Republican Congressional leaders have been generally supportive of a deal with China, but were cautious in their reaction today. 
Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, said that there were still "significant questions" about the deal's effects on human rights, religious freedom and the economic relationship between the two countries, and that he was reserving judgment until he could study the agreement.
Even if, as expected, the Republican leadership ultimately joins the White House in pushing for the agreement, the proposal is still sure to set off a bitter debate uniting some of the most conservative Republicans and the most liberal Democrats against centrists in both parties.
Citing what they said were human rights abuses, the spread of nuclear and conventional arms, a lack of concern for environmental issues and the prospect that increased trade would result in some American workers' losing their jobs, a spectrum of groups said they would try to block or modify the agreement.
John Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., called the deal "a grave mistake," and said it was "disgustingly hypocritical" of the administration to claim to be keeping the interests of working people in mind even as it negotiated with a regime that routinely violates human rights.
Opposition to the deal by human rights advocates could also give an opportunity to conservative Republican candidates like Steve Forbes and Gary Bauer to win support from the right wing of their party, whose leading candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, supports the deal.
Representative Dana Rohrabacher, a Republican from California, said the agreement was a "raw deal" for workers and consumers because it would institutionalize tariff advantages held by China.
"On top of that, we'd be putting our stamp of approval on having a gangster regime coming into yet another international body and thinking that in some way that body is going to civilize the regime," he said, "when in fact it's more likely that the organization itself will be corrupted by having the world's worst human rights violator in its midst."
Administration officials said they would press hard to get the deal approved, probably in the first few months of next year.
Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, told reporters in Turkey, where President Clinton was traveling today: "I believe that when Congress has an opportunity to study the terms of this, recognize the tremendous benefits to American industry and American workers around the country, and the protections that we obtain for import-sensitive industries in this agreement, that there will be broad support for it."
The administration won support today from Human Rights Watch, an advocacy group that said China's entry into the trade organization "could increase pressure for greater openness, more press freedom, enhanced rights for workers and an independent judiciary."
But the White House is primarily counting on business groups. 
Administration officials have consulted with business lobbyists to gauge support for a deal in Congress and to plan strategy for winning approval.
The Business Roundtable, which represents the country's largest corporations, has readied a plan to tout the benefits of the deal in 71 key Congressional districts. 
In Iowa, for instance, the group has hired a political organizer, Bill Menner, to get businesses and interest groups working on behalf of the agreement.
Mr. Menner said he planned to turn to groups like the Iowa Farm Bureau Federation and other employers in the state, like Diamond V Mills, a soybean processor in Cedar Rapids, and the headquarters of Roto-Rooter in West Des Moines, to make a public case for the deal and call their members of Congress.
The Business Roundtable also plans to run newspaper advertising in Iowa emphasizing the economic benefits the deal would bring to farmers and other groups.
"We hope that when push comes to shove," Mr. Menner said, "the case we can make about the benefits of trade with China will carry the day."      
