
EVER since Balboa sighted the Pacific Ocean from a hill here in 1513, this has been one of the world's great geopolitical battlegrounds. 
The competitors may have changed, as the colonial rivalry of Spain and England gave way in the 1800's to a struggle to build the Panama Canal that pitted France against the United States, but the link between control of the isthmus and dominance in world trade has remained constant.
Now, with the United States having formally handed the canal over to Panama last week, a new phase of that Great Game is beginning. 
This time it is the trading powers of East Asia who are emerging as players -- reflecting the waterway's diminishing importance to American commerce and its growing strategic value to export-dependent economies on the far side of the Pacific.
Before the canal was built, a United States emerging as a world power envisioned it as the best way to get people and goods between its Atlantic and Pacific coasts, and to unify a new two-ocean Navy. 
But today, not only are aircraft carriers too big to fit through the Canal (and missile submarines normally too secretive to use it), but American companies increasingly prefer overland routes or air freight for shipping goods between their two coasts.
For Asians shipping exports across two oceans, however, the canal is now indispensable. 
The United States remains its largest user, but the big trading nations of Asia are catching up fast. 
China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan are all in the top ten, and a typical cargo nowadays is likely to be soybeans from Brazil or oil from Venezuela on their way to East Asia in exchange for automobiles or electronic goods destined for the Colon Free Trade Zone here.
The result has been a conspicuous burst of Asian investment here. 
Taiwanese and Korean consortiums are building separate industrial parks, and a pair of Chinese shipping tycoons with competing political loyalties are now solidly installed in the ports that command both approaches to the canal: Chang Yung-Fa, a Taiwan loyalist, and his Evergreen Maritime Corporation in Colon at the Caribbean entrance and Li Ka-shing of Hong Kong's Hutchison Whampoa Ltd., who is cozy with Beijing, in Balboa at the Pacific entrance.
"Panamanians have an easier time relating to U.S. businessmen than Chinese or Japanese because culturally they feel more at ease with Americans," said Roberto Eisenmann, a prominent business leader here who advises President Mireya Moscoso. 
"But the governments of Asia have been much more aggressive than the United States" in seeking opportunities here.
In Washington, only the conservative Republicans who opposed the Panama Canal Treaties in 1977, and who now fear that the People's Liberation Army is sneaking in as the Southern Command moves out, seem interested in Panama these days. 
Former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger warned this month that China is seeking "a foothold in one of the world's three major chokepoints," while the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, fears that "U.S. naval ships will be at the mercy of Chinese-controlled pilots and could even be denied passage through the canal."
Supporters of the turnover counter that such a focus on the military ignores the fact that the United States is the only country with a treaty right to intervene should such an unlikely scenario occur.
More interestingly, perhaps, a narrow emphasis on the military plays down the underlying mercantile factor; it is, after all, by expanding its economy that China has the best chance of becoming a global power in the next few decades, rather than by challenging the United States militarily in the Western Hemisphere.
Perhaps the most significant contest developing here, according to Ricardo Arias Calderon, a former vice president of Panama, is "an intense competition between Taiwan and the People's Republic of China to advance a broad array of interests" that are fundamentally political and economic.
"I think the Chinese have learned the lesson of 19th-century England, which understood that it had influence in the Mediterranean to the extent that it commanded the entrance and exit" at Gibraltar and Suez, he added. 
"China and Taiwan are already competing in the South China Sea, and now both are seeking a presence at the exit on the other side of the Pacific."
Of course, power and influence today can be exercised in a more subtle manner than by establishing colonies or sending in the fleet, as the British so often did. 
Neither Chinese state is in a position -- or even appears to want -- to supplant America's role as protector of the canal. 
So their rivalry has centered on the commercial facilities in and around the canal and on penetrating Latin American markets.
Japan, too, is bidding for influence and profit here. 
It has underwritten a feasibility study for construction of new canal locks, and is offering to finance a new bridge on extraordinarily generous terms.
YET neither Panama, which abolished its armed forces following the American invasion to overthrow Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega 10 years ago, nor the Asians can guarantee the security of the canal. 
That has historically been an American responsibility -- just as it is America that guarantees that the sea lanes remain open in Asia. 
But defending the canal is a role that has changed enormously in the last century, if only because the nature of war has changed.
Panamanians say there is virtually no possibility of building a foolproof military shield these days, a point American military planners concede privately.
Flying over the canal in a helicopter with Nicolas Ardito Barletta, the director of the Inter-Oceanic Regional Authority, the Panamanian government agency that oversees the former Panama Canal Zone, and looking down on the network of dams and locks that hold back the man-made Gatun and Madden Lakes, the waterway's vulnerability in the missile age is evident. 
If they were to be blown up, "the canal would be shut down for two years," Mr. Barletta acknowledged. 
That is why, he added, "the best guarantee for the canal is its neutrality."
These days that solution may be as attractive to the United States as it is to Asian users of the canal. 
But it begs another question: the instability in Latin American countries that are neighbors of the canal, and the fear that terrorism or sabotage there could spill over.
Outfits like the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia are not likely to be restrained by any declared neutrality. 
As if to underline their capacity to make trouble, that group last week overran the Colombian Navy base closest to Panama. 
There have also been incursions by Colombian guerrillas and paramilitary death squads into Panama's Darien province, and Mr. Eisenmann said Panamanians "have to be very cautious" about how they respond, lest they come under foreign pressure to revive a national military that has always proved corrupt and repressive.
At the canal, the favorite buzzword of its new masters these days is "diversification."
Amid the profusion of new Hyundai cranes and Mitsubishi locomotives as modernization of the canal is planned, it is not clear whether the United States will emerge as first among equals or something less.
"We owe a lot to the United States," Ricardo Martinelli, the Panamanian government's minister of canal affairs, said in an interview. 
" We'd like American companies to offer the best terms. 
But we are living in a globalized world that is very competitive. 
That's the new reality, so welcome to the jungle."
