
THERE was a moment that was so moving it actually sent shivers into the scalp at the Chinese New Year celebration last weekend at the County Center here. 
Ke-Zaheng Wen, a 70-year-old internationally known bass-baritone originally from China, was singing "Ol' Man River."
The power of his voice was wonderful, but most stunning were his inflections and phrasing, the way he sang the words, in Chinese-accented English, as if they had been written for him:
"I get weary and sick of trying, I'm tired of living and scared of dying, but Ol' Man River, he just keeps rolling along."
This quintessentially American song, he said after the performance, moves him from the heart. 
Although in Jerome Kern's "Show Boat," it is sung by a poor 19th-century black man, Mr. Wen said he found in it something pertinent to his life. 
"In China, when the Cultural Revolution came, it was not the workers who were oppressed and persecuted, it was the artists and intellectuals," he said through an interpreter. 
"For many of us, it was a nightmare."
The river, he added, could have been the Yangtze as well as the Mississippi; the fatalistic sorrow, his own at the time of China's upheaval. 
In English, he said, "This song, I have very much deep feeling for."
In similar but less dramatic ways, the blend of Chinese and American and Eastern and Western cultures was evident throughout the evening. 
Sponsored by the local branch of the National Organization of Chinese Americans, which focuses on immigration and other legal issues, and the Westchester Chinese Association, a nonprofit cultural group, it was a festivity heralding the arrival of the Year of the Rabbit. 
Virtually everyone there had been born either in China or Taiwan or had parents who had been. 
There were plenty of traditional Chinese dances and songs; almost all of the 600 people attending wore at least some red, the traditional color of good luck.
But there were many American influences as well. 
Teen-agers who on stage wore silk robes and pajamas of fuchsia and lime appeared afterward in blue jeans and leather jackets. 
Not everyone munched red bean cakes or dumplings, the traditional New Year's foods, but pizza and fries from the concession stand. 
And the night ended with adults and children doing the macarena to music played by a disk jockey.
"It's really good to feel both Chinese and American," said Petula Shyu, a 16-year-old student at Scarsdale High School and, on Saturdays, at the Chinese School of Southern Westchester in Edgemont, where she learns Mandarin Chinese. 
"I was born here. 
I am an American, but I'm also Chinese. 
With my family, a big part of that is respecting your ancestors. 
On the actual New Year -- this year, it was Tuesday, Feb. 
16 -- we go to see my maternal grandmother in Brooklyn. 
She is 88. 
Then we go visit other relatives and friends, in the traditional way."
Smiling and nodding approval were Betty Hsieh, who works at International Business Machines, and her husband, Wen Hsieh, who owns a consulting company. 
The Hsiehs, who live in Scarsdale, have children in college and high school. 
"I grew up in Taiwan," Mr. Hsieh said. 
"Chinese culture stresses family values, a lot of respect for the family. 
This is good. 
In America, everything is so individualistic. 
But that too is good. 
Nowhere else is society so open, so full of opportunity. 
The best thing is to combine the best of both worlds."
Petula was among the teen-agers who performed on the stage of the little theater. 
She and Vivian Yee, also a 16-year-old from Scarsdale, were part of a folk dance called "Embroidered Purse."
As the girls executed graceful movements, Rose Kaung, a mathematics professor at Westchester Community College, whispered to an audience member, "This is the story of a young woman whose love is far away, who embroiders a silk purse for him."
Suddenly a tiny brocade pouch struck someone lightly on the shoulder. 
"Oh! that is good luck," Mrs. Kaung said. 
"The dancers throw those into the audience and whoever gets one is supposed to prosper in the new year."
Folk music is also performed by Hsing Lih Chou. 
Mr. Chou, an entertainer clad in black slacks and a collarless jacket -- "the students' 'uniform' in China," he said -- played guitar and sang Taiwanese songs. 
Born 48 years ago in Taiwan and now living in Manhattan, he teaches Asian-American studies in Manhattan and is principal of the Chinese School of Southern Westchester. 
Like its counterparts, the Chinese School of Northern Westchester in Somers and the Huaxia Chinese School in Hartsdale, it holds classes on weekends for elementary, middle and high school-age youngsters in Chinese language and culture.
"I like to put emotion into what I do," Mr. Chou said, after his spirited performance. 
"One of these folk songs sounds like something by American Indians, don't you think?
The same kind of sad, wailing, chanting sound. 
In school when I teach, I try to make the students feel things. 
You cannot just tell them things, you need to relate them to what they know. 
I don't focus on, say, the word for lo mein; instead, I will teach them how to say spaghetti in Chinese.
"When I first came to America, Oct. 
29. 1976, I experienced culture shock. 
I flew into J.F.K. 
A friend picks me up and we go through Queens and across the Queensboro Bridge. 
I see a subway car. 
I see all this ugly, dirty graffiti. 
I said to my friend, what is this, the train that goes to the garbage dump?
He said, get used to it. 
That's the train you'll be traveling on every day. 
Not only did I get used to it, now I love it."
For some, the transition was not so easy. 
Generally, people of Chinese descent living in Taiwan who came to America did so completely voluntarily, for a chance at a better career or education. 
For some from the mainland, however, the situation was more complicated. 
Mingjian Gao, a 40-year-old United Nations translator now living in Scarsdale, left Beijing when he was 28. 
His mother, who was visiting Scarsdale for the New Year, still lives there.
"She likes to stay among her friends and what is familiar," he said. 
No permission was needed for Mr. Gao to leave -- "By then everything was reformed," he said -- but he does have memories of the Red Guard ransacking his house when he was a child. 
"My father was a math teacher," he said simply as an explanation. 
"It only happened once."
Like so many others, his life is now a mix of Chinese and American customs. 
For the New Year, he ate dumplings, considered in northern China to be a lucky New Year food. 
He did not, however, get to see the glowing displays of fireworks as he once did in China. 
"That we could not provide," Brenda Sun, a real estate broker from Scarsdale who is one of the festival's organizers, said with a laugh. 
Mr. Gao added: "Even in New York City, this year, they could not have fireworks in Chinatown. 
People missed them. 
I understand they used fake ones, little paper explosions, which was all the Mayor would allow. 
That's too bad. 
It was part of a Happy New Year celebration."
