
American and Chinese negotiators reached a landmark agreement today that would open the economy of China, the world's most populous nation, to foreign competitors and would also make it a full partner in the world's trading system.
After six days of arduous negotiations, the United States trade representative, Charlene Barshefsky, and China's trade minister, Shi Guangsheng, signed the papers at 3:50 p.m., shook hands and raised a Champagne toast to an agreement that capped 13 years of on-and-off negotiations on China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
Under the deal, Beijing would reduce tariffs on various industrial and agricultural products. 
It would also lift many of the barriers that have hamstrung American banks and insurance and telephone companies that want to expand their operations and investments in China.
In exchange, the United States agreed to support China's bid for membership in the global trade group, the 135-member organization that sets the rules for international commerce.
China still must complete agreements with the European Union, Canada and some developing countries, including Brazil, before its application can be taken up by the group's member states.
"Let me just say that this is a profound and historic moment in U.S.-China relations," said a clearly exultant Ms. Barshefsky, adding that the agreement would not only aid the economies of both countries, but also serve as an anchor in their tumultuous political relationship.
The last six days of day-and-night negotiations were conducted in a "win-win spirit," Mr. Shi said, "and finally we reached an agreement that serves the interests of both China and the United States."
For all the rejoicing, the agreement faces tough resistance in the United States, where it is opposed by labor unions and some critics of China. 
Congress will not vote on the deal itself, but must vote to put an end to its annual review of Chinese trade and to establish normal -- and permanent -- trade relations with Beijing.
For China, membership in the trade group would mean a long-sought acceptance into the "club" of world powers. 
The W.T.O.'s elaborate rules would help protect China from unfair trade policies abroad, but would also impose a body of international rules on China's own fitful progress toward a market economy.
The accord goes to the heart of China's transition to an open, market economy. 
It would put Beijing, for the first time, under the jurisdiction of the rules set by the World Trade Organization, which are enforced by a trade court.
Full membership would be a victory for President Jiang Zemin, who sees achieving economic modernization as his legacy even as he tries to ensure continuation of Communist rule. 
At the same time, membership would cheer the more liberal, reform-oriented factions led by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, since it locks China onto a path that could force China's state-owned industries to become efficient.
The step is a politically risky one for China, coming at a time when those state-run companies are already shedding millions of workers.
For President Clinton, today's agreement provides a badly needed centerpiece to his fraying policy of engagement with China, offering the prospect of tangible gains to many companies and to consumers. 
It is also a stunning recovery from what his own top aides describe as a huge mistake: his decision to walk away from the surprisingly sweeping deal, largely identical to today's, offered in April by Mr. Zhu.
After the signing today, Ms. Barshefsky and Gene Sperling, the White House chief of economic policy -- who opposed the April deal and attended the talks as a symbol of Mr. Clinton's renewed commitment -- were driven to the secluded leadership compound for a brief meeting with Mr. Jiang, who twice in the past month conducted telephone talks with Mr. Clinton.
Speaking in Turkey today, Mr. Clinton said: "I think this is a good agreement for China, for America and for the world."
But Mr. Clinton's struggle to make this accord a central foreign policy achievement is far from over.
Congress will essentially review the accord when it prepares to vote on the biggest single American concession: granting permanent trading rights to China rather than reviewing those rights annually, a Capitol Hill ritual that has turned into an annual debate about human rights and arms proliferation.
Mr. Clinton has spoken often of "integrating China into the world economy" and gradually getting the country to embrace "the rule of law," starting with commercial law. 
But without closing a World Trade Organization agreement, his aides said, he would have little progress to point to.
The agreement may also help to repair the damage done to Chinese-American relations by charges of Chinese spying in the United States, the American bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in May and China's continuing suspicion that the United States is attempting to "contain" Chinese military and economic power.
"Successful completion of W.T.O. will go a long way to smooth out some of the extreme oscillation that we have seen in Sino-American relations in recent years," said Joseph Fewsmith, a China expert at Boston University. 
"I think it gives us a chance to build some substance into a relationship that has been badly damaged."
Today's agreement is a huge step toward membership for China, but it very likely comes too late, experts said, for China to be admitted before Nov. 
30, when a new round of global trade talks begins in Seattle.
But today's accord means that China can take a larger role in setting the agenda there. 
And past trade rounds have lasted for years.
From the beginning, the American goal was not just to press China for large reductions in tariffs on imported farm products and industrial goods like automobiles. 
In measures that may ultimately have a far more profound impact, China had to commit itself to allowing foreign companies to take majority investments in many industrial and service sectors.
The final six days, and usually nights, of negotiations went through several rough spots. 
Several times Ms. Barshefsky and Mr. Sperling suggested they were packing up to leave, threats Ms. Barshefsky said in an interview today were "largely tactical, to force the Chinese to make some progress."
"Clearly," she said, "they were not going to let us leave."
In an interview from Hong Kong today, Ms. Barshefsky said that the key Chinese player in the talks appeared to be Prime Minister Zhu, who twice stepped in to break an impasse and ultimately directed his negotiators to make several key concessions -- allowing American companies to take a 50 percent stake in China's booming telecommunications companies, for example. 
But all his decisions, analysts here said, were almost certainly cleared by the top party leadership.
The outlines of an agreement had been worked out last April, when Mr. Zhu visited Washington. 
But President Clinton backed away from any agreement at the time, fearing Congressional opposition. 
Most of today's pact follows the April understandings, and in resolving areas of continued dispute, Ms. Barshefsky asserted -- in a statement sure to be scrutinized by skeptics in Congress -- "I think we achieved an overall strengthening of this agreement."
The agreement involves a general reduction in China's import tariffs from the current average of 22.1 percent down to 17 percent, with tariffs on major American farm products cut sharply to 15 percent or less.
Tariffs on automobile imports, which now range up to 100 percent to protect China's inefficient producers, would be reduced over a six-year period to 25 percent, with the quickest reduction in the initial years. 
That is one year longer than China offered in April.
But equally important, American officials said, foreign auto companies and banks would for the first time be able to offer consumer loans for cars, a critical concession in a country where few can lay out the money for such a large purchase.
Thus, Chinese consumers may soon be buying General Motors cars, for example, with the "G.M.A.C." loans so familiar to Americans.
Two of the most contentious issues in recent days, Ms. Barshefsky said, involved the American demands for ways to respond to surges of imports into the United States and for use of a method to identify when the Chinese might be illegally selling products below cost, or "dumping."
China wanted such measures to phase out quickly, but in the end agreed to surge protections for a 12-year period, and the anti-dumping regime for 15 years. 
Without those concessions, Ms. Barshefsky told her Chinese counterparts, Congress could easily balk at the accord.
For the first time, China also agreed to allow foreign companies to distribute their own goods, rather than forcing them to distribute food or industrial components through Chinese companies. 
They would also be able to repair and support their products directly.
In terms of textiles, one of the most politically sensitive topics in the United States, it was the Americans calling for restrictions on free trade. 
The Chinese wanted to scale back the American demand to continue existing textile import quotas for another 10 years. 
In the end, the United States agreed to end quotas after five years, but with special anti-surge safeguards for another four years after that.
The anti-dumping and textile provisions are charged issues for Vice President Al Gore. 
He hopes to keep the support of organized labor in his presidential bid, but such groups oppose the trade accord.
Foreign investment in China's telecommunications sector had become a sore point inside China, where some saw it as an issue of national security. 
The Americans fought for 51 percent ownership rights -- which Mr. Zhu had offered in April -- but finally agreed that foreign firms could take up to 50 percent ownership of companies in this booming sector, beginning two years after China enters the trade organization.
"It became clear that this was an incredibly emotional issue for the Chinese," Mr. Sperling said in an interview.
Important provisions would open Chinese retail banking to foreign firms over several years, and also improve market access for insurance companies, and legal and accounting firms. 
But the American negotiators got far less in China's infant and high-risk financial securities market, where they would be limited to minority stakes in activities like underwriting stock issues.
For China -- which is still unraveling the legacy of Mao Zedong's cloistered, command economy -- entry into the World Trade Organization will carry profound implications.
Many economists here compare entry to Deng Xiaoping's landmark opening of the economy to market forces and foreign influence in the late 1970's.
"The opening of China to the outside world began with Mao Zedong's meeting with Richard Nixon in 1972," said Hu Angang, a leading economist here at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. 
"The second major stage was marked by Deng Xiaoping's visit to the United States in 1979."
"Joining W.T.O. will represent a whole new stage in China's opening to the world," he said. 
"It will signify a shift from partial to comprehensive opening and reform," he said, "and a shift from an opening based on domestic rules to an opening based on internationally defined rules."
China's embrace of more open markets reflects the desire of President Jiang and other top leaders to push ahead with a radical overhaul of the domestic economy, opening it to global competition and bringing in more foreign capital and technology.
President Jiang and his fellow Communist Party leaders see economic transformation as vital if China is to become a great power in the century ahead. 
They also know that if they do not provide steadily rising incomes to their people, the party's rule is in trouble.
So the renewed opening is perhaps unavoidable, but it is a risky step for the leaders, who can expect to see some cherished state enterprises crushed even as others are energized. 
In the short run, at least, already impoverished farmers may be harmed by cheap imports and more urban workers might lose their jobs.
The impact of today's agreement on the power of Mr. Zhu, who is nominally number three in the party hierarchy, is unclear. 
Over the last six months or so, his influence appeared to slip, as the country took a more conservative and nationalistic turn, and Mr. Jiang took a stronger role in economic matters. 
By many accounts, Mr. Zhu lost his former control over policy on the World Trade Organization and the reform of state enterprises.
But Ms. Barshefsky said today that in a phone call between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang last month, "Jiang said that Zhu Rongji is in charge of these negotiations."
"And," she said, "it looked very much as if he had taken ownership of it."
Today's agreement put Mr. Zhu and his ideas back in the limelight, but Chinese television reports this evening featured President Jiang, and both Chinese and foreign analysts continue to speculate about power shifts in the secretive Communist hierarchy.
On paper, the changes China has promised are breathtaking in scope. 
But even the most optimistic American officials concede that threatened ministries and provinces are likely to find ways to delay implementation of many provisions. 
This suspicion is likely to feed controversy in the United States about the pact.
Still, both Democrats and Republicans say the agreement will almost certainly be approved in Congress sometime early next year, after a spirited debate.
