
The Japanese yen weakened to 140 to the dollar for the first time in seven years yesterday, extending a yearlong decline that is now threatening the economic recovery of the emerging markets in Asia that were battered by their currency devaluations last year.
Despite the fallout from the weakening yen, many currency traders and strategists expect its value to decline further because the Japanese Government has not come up with a convincing program to stimulate the economy. 
Many economists have already said Japan is in a recession, which could be confirmed Friday when Tokyo is expected to report its second consecutive quarterly decline in growth.
Economists and analysts said the falling yen was hurting Asia's recovery in two ways: One, the decline is a reflection of a weakening Japanese economy that means Japan will not be a big buyer of products from the troubled countries of South Korea, Thailand and Indonesia.
The weakening yen also means South Korean, Thai and other Asian manufacturers will have a harder time competing against Japanese goods sold elsewhere, especially in the United States.
A weakening currency makes that country's products less expensive abroad. 
But the advantage that South Korea and other Asian countries gained with their devaluations has been reduced by the 18 percent fall in the yen since last July, when the Asian crisis began.
"The competitive edge that South Korea has obtained is minimal," said Desmond Lachman, the head of emerging-markets research at Salomon Smith Barney. 
And, he said, "If the yen slides toward 150 we can be sure we are going to have real regional currency turmoil."
He said that one important unknown was how the Chinese would react to the yen's weakness. 
The Chinese said they would not devalue in the wake of the Asian devaluations. 
But Mr. Lachman said that he believed China's restraint was based on the assumption that the yen would remain relatively stable and not damage China's competitiveness. 
A Chinese devaluation now could set off another round of devaluations.
The yen's latest decline came after Koji Tanami, Japan's Vice Finance Minister, indicated that finance ministers in the Group of Seven industrialized nations were not going to discuss the yen's problems in Paris today and tomorrow. 
In addition, Mr. Tanami said it was unlikely that the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada would take action to support the yen.
"The main topic of the meeting will be Russia," he said.
In late trading in New York, the dollar cost 140.71 yen, up from 139.75 Friday. 
The dollar also rallied against the German mark, rising to 1.7794 marks from 1.7745.
In contrast to its strength against the yen, the dollar had been falling in value against the mark since April.
"There is not a whole lot the G-7 can do for the yen without the Japanese Government providing the policy for support," Mr. Lachman said. 
Even a surprising round of central bank intervention to support the yen after these comments would only have a temporary impact if Japan's policies are not changed.
Despite a succession of fiscal stimulus programs, the Japanese Government has not yet done enough to stimulate the economy or to deal with the mountain of bad loans that is undermining its banking system, said Jeremy Fand, senior foreign exchange strategist at BankBoston.
"Fundamentally, there is no reason why the yen should strengthen," said Mr. Fand, who is forecasting that the dollar could strengthen to 180 yen in the next 12 months. 
But he also said that the yen had fallen so much recently that it might be in line for a sharp rebound in the near term before resuming its decline.
The impact of the dollar's strength was also highlighted yesterday in a report by the Bank for International Settlements, which coordinates the activities of the world's central banks. 
The bank said the dollar was overvalued by 33 percent against the yen and 21 percent against the mark, which makes American exports less competitive and increases the likelihood that the American trade deficit will keep growing.
