
He sniffs the cigarettes first, draws them lengthwise under his nose and then lights them one after the other, the smoke curling in the soft bronze light that flows through his west window. 
"River light," the novelist John Cheever called that luminescence peculiar to New York City mornings. 
It does seem to rise off the Hudson before it enters the room where Wei Jingsheng sits and talks about the regime that imprisoned him for all but a few months of the last 18 years, before releasing him into exile in November.
"The Chinese Communist Party is indeed the evil empire," he says, echoing President Reagan. 
"If the Soviet Union was the evil empire, then the Chinese Communist regime is an even greater one -- or at least a slyer one."
That's a reference to the recent scandals involving the satellite industry and campaign contributions by Chinese nationals to the Democratic Party. 
"The Chinese Government is continuously trying to spread its influence and build its strength," he says. 
"The Chinese Communists have always used these methods. 
Perhaps only now with this evidence will more Americans pay more attention to it, and to their schemes. 
It should serve as a very clear warning."
Under the circumstances, Wei says, President Clinton clearly should have canceled the trip he is scheduled to embark on this week. 
"I believe Clinton, under these conditions, should not go. 
Clinton has not said what he plans to say or do, so I feel that he won't stray from the path of the wishes of the Chinese Communists. 
If he doesn't say clearly what he will do, then I believe it is a mistake to go under these conditions.
"If he does finally appear at Tiananmen Square -- although I think that would be a major political mistake -- then he should state clearly his support for the struggle, his sympathy for those who were killed and injured and his commitment to pressing for the release of the democracy activists still in prison. 
If he doesn't do these things, then his appearance may damage his standing in the eyes of every single Chinese. 
He should not adhere to the conditions attached by the Communists."
The President's trip is a kind of benchmark for Wei, who, with Wang Dan, a leading figure in the 1989 Tiananmen Square uprising, shares billing as China's most famous dissident. 
Clinton's presence in China, surrounded by his beaming hosts, provides a platform that has been largely missing in Wei's seven months of exile. 
The attention could help him press his campaign against Clinton's policy of "engagement" and cement his position as the primary spokesman for the dissidents. 
But it could just as easily backfire, if his ideas are brushed aside or, as Beijing so fervently hopes, dismissed as irrelevant.
Certainly, Wei is not silent; his recorded message to a crowd of thousands in Hong Kong in early June -- commemorating the ninth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre -- made headlines around the world. 
But the questions linger: How many are listening?
Whom does he speak for?
And not just in the West, but in China as well. 
More immediately, did Wei make the right decision when he relented and accepted Beijing's offer of exile?
To most people, there would have been no choice whatsoever: whether to remain in prison or to accept an offer of medical parole and exile. 
But Wei is not like most people.
If he were, he never would have been imprisoned in the first place, for the crime of speaking his mind. 
He never would have endured, merely for refusing to recant his belief in democracy, solitary confinement in a cell where a bright light burned 24 hours a day, frequent beatings from other inmates and conditions so abysmal that he lost a dozen teeth and contracted high blood pressure, heart disease, arthritis and hepatitis during his two separate incarcerations.
In 1995, at the beginning of his second prison term, he was made an offer that few thought he could refuse: he would be freed if he accepted exile in the United States. 
He had become an international cause celebre, and the regime of President Jiang Zemin wanted to be rid of him. 
He had written, besides his incendiary public essays, impertinent (and often humorous) letters to Deng Xiaoping, China's late paramount leader, and was now making Jiang his new pen pal.
Execution was one option, but Wei was too famous to be dealt with so crudely. 
China wanted trade with the West, and international respectability. 
Clearly, the only thing to do with Wei was to export him. 
But he declined the offer, not once but twice.
"Wei didn't want to leave China because by being there, he would be a player," explains Philip Cunningham, a journalist and China scholar who edited a collection of Wei's prison letters to Deng and Jiang. 
"He wanted to be there even in jail rather than free in exile because the danger of exile is that you become irrelevant."
But last fall, Wei finally accepted banishment. 
On Nov. 
16, 1997, he was released from prison, taken to a Northwest Airlines plane in Beijing and flown to the United States.
What made him change his stand?
We are in the small but comfortable apartment he occupies at Columbia University, where he is a visiting scholar. 
He is a stocky man of about 5 feet 8 or 9 inches, 48 years old, with a full head of black hair. 
There is no hint of gray. 
His youthful, robust appearance is miraculous, considering what he has been through.
"Two reasons," he answers through an interpreter. 
"My health was quickly deteriorating. 
So I had two choices. 
One was to leave the country, the other to die in prison. 
I felt there was no reason for me to die in prison for no worthy cause."
Wei slips another Marlboro out of the pack and lights up. 
"The second, which is more important, is that in recent years, the position of the Western countries toward the Chinese Communist Party has been softening, which has dealt a blow to the confidence of the Chinese people. 
It is important for me to come out and tell Western Governments the real situation, the realities in China and what effective roles they can play, and also to convey what the Chinese people would really like to say to the people of the Western countries."
That ought to be enough to keep 10 men busy. 
But after some thought, Wei gives me a third reason: he hopes to coordinate the activities of pro-democracy dissidents abroad. 
In effect, he would become the leader of the dissident movement, which could be far more difficult than persuading Western Governments to amend their China policies. 
The 500 or so active dissidents in this country are hopelessly fragmented by petty squabbles, jealousies and differences in opinion about how best to deal with Beijing.
It's a difficult agenda for a man who has little support other than his name and the enormous respect and good will it commands. 
Columbia provides Wei with an office and clerical assistance, but he does not teach or lecture on a regular basis. 
Rising at 9 A.M., he usually works late into the night, conferring with other dissidents.
Wei is determined not to retire to the scholar's cloister, as many other exiled dissidents have done. 
And yet, looking at him, dressed in slippers, a beige cotton shirt and gray trousers held up by black suspenders, his legs folded on a threadbare couch as he sips tea and smokes and smokes, it is hard to picture him maneuvering in the corridors of power.
He has tried, but to little effect. 
This winter, he traveled to London, Paris and Brussels, where he lobbied the European Union to ratify a United Nations resolution condemning China's human rights record. 
In the spring, after the 15-nation European Union voted not even to introduce the resolution, much less to pass it, Wei embarked on a 12-nation, seven-week tour of European capitals, calling on foreign secretaries and members of parliament to explain their decision.
He fared no better with the Clinton Administration, which in a reversal of longstanding policy, also withdrew support for the resolution this year. 
And now, in a further disappointment, President Clinton is off to China.
To Wei, there is no compromise with Beijing, no engagement and no partnership. 
"Clinton has an opportunity. 
I want him to make his support for human rights and democracy clear. 
If he does not do this, then he will not help the movement and he will not help the standing of himself and the United States in the eyes of the Chinese people. 
I think that Clinton's use of the word 'partnership' is completely wrong, since the Chinese Communists use the word 'enemy' in describing the United States. 
I don't think the American people want a partner like the Chinese Communists."
When Wei speaks, his baritone barely changes inflection and, whatever may be going on inside him, he gives an outward impression of serenity. 
Yet the position he has staked out for himself is nearly impossible. 
Here is a man without a political party or power of any kind beyond the moral authority vouchsafed by his sufferings, appointing himself roving ambassador for one-fifth of the world's population, trying to shape American foreign policy. 
I wonder if I'm in the presence of a Chinese Don Quixote, or a man who could become to China what Vaclav Havel is to the Czech Republic or Nelson Mandela is to South Africa.
There is a certain purity about Wei, but it's hard to tell sometimes if it is the purity of an egomaniac or a saint. 
Others have commented on Wei's saintly qualities: his lack of bitterness, his heroic readiness to sacrifice himself on the altar of principle, his unflagging composure. 
But in time, I realize that Wei is neither saint nor egomaniac. 
He is a man of integrity -- integrity in its fundamental meaning: he is united within himself. 
God knows, he had plenty of time, in the isolation of his cell, to think things through. 
He has emerged as a man with a seamless confidence in himself and in the truth of his ideas.
Wei has hundreds, if not thousands, of admirers and supporters in the West. 
Among many Chinese dissidents, he is an icon. 
Even those who disagree with his views on China are in awe of his courage and his ability to write and argue in clear, direct, forceful language.
But will that be enough?
Now that Wei is out of prison and no longer a myth, there are dissidents as well as Western diplomats and scholars who think that his ideas are outdated and that Wei himself, though unquestionably a hero, is a hero from a bygone era. 
They question whether he is the right candidate to lead the dissident movement and to convey realities in China to Western leaders. 
They say that Wei, having been isolated for so long, clings to views and rhetoric frozen in the amber of the cold war.
"The more Wei speaks out, the more he reveals that he doesn't know the current situation," says Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University and an expert on the dissident movement. 
"Through no fault of his own -- he was in prison for all but a few months of the last 18 years -- he has no clear idea what is going on in China or abroad."
The China of the 1990's is not the China of the 1970's under Mao, she notes. 
A rudimentary democracy has taken hold at the village level, where elections have been held this year. 
Although open dissent is still prohibited, citizens privately criticize the Government in ways that would have been unthinkable 25 years ago. 
It is a much more prosperous and at least somewhat freer country. 
When I mention to her that Wei has said that "millions of workers and peasants in China are truly starving," she exclaims, "That's not true!" and adds that Wei's penchant for injudicious comments like that could undermine his credibility.
Wei's defenders say it's too early to judge him, after only a little more than seven months in exile. 
"We're honoring him for his courage, not necessarily because he's an astute politician," says Robert Bernstein, the founding chairman of Human Rights Watch. 
"We don't know about that yet. 
Wei has sacrificed for his ideas and deserves a chance. 
Besides, it never hurts to put pressure on the regime."
Chen Xiaoping, a 36-year-old former journalist and law professor now studying at Harvard, was forced to leave China because of his pro-democracy activities. 
He says the youngest dissidents -- of whom Wang Dan is the most prominent -- almost literally don't understand the language that Wei speaks. 
When Wei gave a talk at Harvard, Chen says, "Some students asked him: 'Where are you coming from?
This is traditional, not modern discourse.'
He was talking like somebody from the Cultural Revolution.
"Wei is too old," Chen adds flatly. 
"In jail for 18 years, and because he was in prison for such a long time, he cannot understand the modern China."
The obvious implication is that the 29-year-old Wang, who was serving an 11-year sentence when released to American doctors this spring, understands China better -- the China, that is, of young entrepreneurs bearing cell phones instead of Mao's little red book. 
Wang's opinion on Clinton's visit does seem to be more nuanced than Wei's. 
"I feel extremely uncomfortable when I think about President Clinton walking on Tiananmen Square," Wang says. 
"But I understand that United States policy toward China should represent the interests of the American people. 
I just hope it also represents the moral standards of the American people."
Aware of the force his words carry in the dissident community, Wang, who is spending the summer at Harvard, adds diplomatically: "Both Mr. Wei Jingsheng and I believe that to promote a peaceful transformation toward democracy in China, international influence is crucial."
Almost no one disagrees with Wei's objectives: building a China where people aren't arrested without charges and tortured in prison, where workers trying to organize independent labor unions aren't crushed and freedom of speech and expression are not repressed.
Besides, as Bernstein points out, it's not as though the younger dissidents are accomplishing any more than Wei. 
"They aren't getting results, either," he says. 
"Of course there's more economic freedom. 
Of course the party is giving ground politically -- it has no choice."
The difference between Wei and his loyal critics is in figuring out how to get there from here. 
For Wei, the correct approach -- the only approach -- is to get tough. 
But this does not mean the complete suspension of relations, says Xiao Qiang of the organization Human Rights in China. 
"We don't want to fall into the trap of isolation versus engagement," he says. 
"We want a strong and effective human rights policy, on an equal footing with trade and security policy."
Wei puts it more succinctly. 
Dealing with China, he says, is like dealing with a "scoundrel on the street": the nicer you are, the more likely you are to get mugged.
Wei's history is a history of fighting dragons. 
He was born in 1950 in Beijing, where his father was a high-level official in the foreign ministry while his mother was a party cadre in a shoe-and-hat factory. 
A self-described "fanatical Maoist" as a teen-ager, he graduated in 1966 from a top high school reserved for party higher-ups and went into the countryside as a Red Guard during the tumultuous Cultural Revolution. 
But the stunning poverty he saw, and the unspeakable horrors wrought by Mao's policies -- like a village so ravaged by starvation that people sold their dying infants as food -- led him to condemn the Great Helmsman.
Wei gained international fame with the publication of his classic essay, "The Fifth Modernization: Democracy."
Posted on the Democracy Wall in Beijing on Dec. 
5, 1978, the essay exploded the myth that Deng Xiaoping's "four modernizations" -- radical economic reforms that excluded any political change -- would improve the lot of the masses. 
Wei argued that without true democracy all promises of a better life for China would remain just that.
Later, in another essay, "Do We Want Democracy or New Autocracy," he dared to attack Deng by name. 
Within a week, he was arrested, and then was sentenced to the first of his prison terms. 
Though he'd been held incommunicado, he remained defiant at his trial. 
Refusing to repudiate his criticisms, he proved himself to be not the passive victim of an authoritarian state but an agent of history, the author of his own tragic destiny.
Orville Schell, a China scholar at Berkeley and a strong Wei supporter, portrays him as both militant and ascetic, a kind of warrior monk who "stripped himself bare" of material possessions and emotional attachments so he could wage his lonely battle with despots unencumbered.
My own impression is of a solitary existential rebel straight out of the pages of Camus. 
Martyr, warrior-monk, existential rebel, I can hear all three incarnations speaking to me in the Manhattan apartment as he tells me that Clinton should demand greater democratization from Jiang's Government as a quid pro quo for a greater share of the American market.
So far, he says, the only beneficiaries of United States-China trade have been a few large corporations -- and Jiang's regime. 
The profits reaped by companies like Boeing and Motorola, as well as from European enterprises in China, have strengthened Beijing's hand and emboldened it to stifle all political opposition. 
"It's these corporations coming to China and cooperating closely with the Chinese Communist Party that has created a very bad image among the Chinese people of the U.S., of the American people, who they think care only about money and don't care about democracy and human rights."
Proponents of engagement contend that modernization is creating a middle and professional class that could eventually form the nucleus of a political opposition, and that a take-no-prisoners policy would isolate China and prove counterproductive. 
The examples of North Korea, Iraq, Libya and Cuba suggest that isolation, embargo, military action and other hardball tactics tend to perpetuate dictatorships rather than eliminate them.
But Wei finds his critics' arguments lacking in substance. 
Rather than re-examine his thinking, they should "re-examine their thinking," he says. 
"I don't believe my thinking at any point over the past 20 years has once been outdated. 
But I ask, What evidence is there to support their new thinking?
Is the new thinking to cozy up to the Chinese Communist Government and turn away from their behavior?
Where has that gotten us?"
Each year, gathering around a polished oval table in the Art Nouveau meeting room of the Norwegian Nobel Institute in Oslo, five members of the Nobel committee decide who will be the recipient of its Peace Prize. 
The award is given to pioneers of organized peace work, politicians and, in recent times, to human rights advocates. 
Wei has been nominated for the prize four years in a row, the last two years in concert with Wang Dan.
"Wei has stood up in the finest traditions of an Andrei Sakharov," Schell says. 
"All alone, he has stood against the gale force of a very powerful and intimidating state with dignity and intellectual clarity."
Former laureates like Oscar Arias Sanchez, Elie Wiesel and the Dalai Lama, American legislators like Jesse Helms and Nancy Pelosi, a Democratic representative from California, and several hundred professors from around the world have signed on to Wei's nomination.
In its glossy official booklet, the Nobel Institute makes it clear that well-organized campaigns have little influence on the committee's decisions and "may in fact be counterproductive."
Thus, the effort to promote Wei's candidacy is almost by design low key and ad hoc.
The Chinese Government, meanwhile, has been doing what it can to undermine the nomination. 
Its campaign is also low key, for if the committee frowns at stumping for a particular candidate, attempts to knock a candidate out of the running really make it bristle.
But it is no secret that one of the last things President Jiang wants to see on CNN this December is Wei Jingsheng marching side by side with Wang Dan into the Oslo Town Hall to make a laureate's speech. 
Such a scene would represent several dangers for the Chinese Communist Party. 
For one, the prize could enhance Wei's already considerable stature, turning him into a giant around whom the fragmented dissident movement abroad might finally rally and unite. 
Pelosi notes that the prize would also encourage dissidents inside China.
Finally, there is the danger to China's pride.
The Nobel Prize sounds prestigious to people in China," says Xiao Qiang, of Human Rights in China. 
The 36-year-old former astrophysicist, who turned dissident after the Tiananmen Square crackdown, notes that no citizen of the People's Republic of China has ever won a Nobel in any category. 
It would be a symbolic blow to Jiang and his Government if the first were to be shared by two dissidents who had spent years in jail.
This perception has led to speculation that the regime has taken advantage of the fissures and jealousies within the democracy movement and recruited dissidents to discredit Wei and derail his nomination. 
Last year, a prominent dissident in China, Ren Wanding, sent an open letter to the Nobel committee, pleading with its members not to give the prize to Wei. 
The 52-year-old Wanding, who himself spent 11 years in prison, then called a news conference in Beijing and told foreign reporters that Wei was "not a symbol of Chinese democracy," and that his Western supporters were making a god of him. 
In November, a week after Wei's release, another veteran dissident, Xu Wenli, publicly rapped Wei for being conceited, for failing to recognize other dissidents' achievements and for being too soft on Deng Xiaoping.
Were Ren's and Xu's comments another example of disarray in the movement, or was something more sinister going on?
Xiao leans toward the darker view.
"For the last two years, no dissident in China can call a press conference to say anything," he tells me amid the boxes and file folders of his cramped office. 
"They're not even allowed to have a birthday party.. 
. .Wanding, Xu, all dissidents are under 24-hour surveillance. 
The Government knows where they're at, what they're doing. 
Ren Wanding then calls a press conference for foreign reporters in Bejing to speak against Wei?
It never would have happened without Government sanction or tolerance. 
Draw your own conclusions."
Wei has already drawn his. 
After telling me that he initially did not take the attacks too seriously, regarding Ren and Xu as "old friends," he says in a tone of regret that the two men have gone over to the other side. 
"We have no direct evidence or proofs of any sort," he quickly adds. 
"However, this is definitely not coincidental that after many years of silence, they should voice these criticisms. 
They are coordinating with the Chinese Communists to sabotage the work of the democracy movement."
There are nevertheless China scholars -- as well as Chinese dissidents definitely not in collusion with Beijing -- who also question Wei's nomination. 
They say he doesn't deserve it any more than several others who have suffered for their commitment to democracy.
Zhang Weiguo, a 42-year-old exile who posts a dissident Website, "New Century Net," out of his office in Berkeley, Calif., explains that some of these critics are merely envious, while others have legitimate concerns. 
"Why are there different opinions about Wei?"
Zhang asks. 
"If Wei becomes the authority for democracy, then some fear their voices will be overwhelmed. 
If Wei is conferred with the mantle of democracy, then, these people fear, he will become a kind of cult figure, defeating the whole purpose of pluralism."
Those who view Wei in this light say he is wasting his energies and valuable moral capital, charging off in different directions, criticizing Western policies before he's had time to study the issues thoroughly. 
What he should do now, they advise, is learn English, work on his autobiography, establish his credentials as a political thinker and build support in the dissident community.
In the end, it is impossible to form a single opinion or impression of so complex a man. 
The skepticism voiced about his ideas and approach to the West's China policies appeals to the mind; but Wei's unflagging spirit, commitment and courage appeal to the heart. 
A lot of his critics are intellectuals, and intellectuals tend to distrust clarity, simplicity and directness even when what's clear and simple is the truth. 
And I think that Wei does speak the truth when he says that the interests of the Chinese Communist Party will never be the same as, but ever in opposition to, the real interests of the Chinese people.
As for Wei's spirit, those scholars and friends advising him to retire to the study and write and develop his intellectual resources may not be misleading him, but they are probably misreading him. 
Besides, there is something tepid about such counsel. 
To borrow an old, old phrase, it does not have the power to stir men's souls. 
Many other dissidents have followed that route, and it doesn't appear to have helped the cause of democracy in China or to have unified Chinese political exiles.
That said, Wei does need to brief himself on current conditions, in this country and his own. 
In the words of Cunningham, Wei's editor, Wei may not be a "first-class intellectual, but of all the prominent dissidents, he has "the appeal and spirit, the personality and the charisma, all the credentials to unify that fractious movement."
But he will lose credibility if he doesn't catch up on all that happened in the world while he was in prison. 
It does neither himself nor his cause any good to paint Jiang's China in the chiaroscuro pigments of Mao's China, where people, literally, were forced to devour their children.
