
THE UNITED STATES took on China over a pirating of America's intellectual property for the first time in 1903, when trademarked foreign products first started flowing out of Chinese factories. 
The Chinese figured that if they signed an agreement and ignored it, Washington would soon forget about the whole thing. 
They were right.
Ninety-two years later China's leaders signed another accord, this time promising to keep their hands off Winnie-the-Pooh videotapes and Windows 95 CD-ROM's. 
Then, figuring that some strategies work as well at the end of the century as they did in the beginning, they permitted all but a few of their illicit factories to keep generating hundreds of millions of dollars in profits for provincial officials, the military and the entrepreneurial elite. 
This time, they miscalculated.
In a nutshell, that's how the United States and China descended into another tape-for-tat trade war last week, with Washington threatening billions of dollars in sanctions against China's state-owned industries -- mostly clothing, silk and electronics -- and China shooting back that it will meet tariff with tariff.
It sounds like a lot of bravado, and by the time the two countries hit a June 17 deadline to strike a deal or invoke the sanctions, that's all it may prove to be. 
But behind the make-my-day threats are two very different calculations of national economic power.
America figures that it is still too big to mess with and that China -- faced with the choice of closing plants or finding their products locked out of Walmart -- will fold. 
In Beijing, the guess is that American industry is far more divided than President Clinton would like to admit -- and that Hollywood can be pitted against Boeing (which sends one in seven planes to China) and that Microsoft will be arm-wrestling Ford and G.M., which are in delicate talks over joint-venture factories.
Those divisions in American industry are very real and help explain why China's back seems to stiffen a bit more with each annual cycle of American threats and counter-threats. 
Every year, China gets a little richer, a little more nationalistic, and a little better equipped to resist America's seemingly endless demands. 
And it's getting better at the divide-and-conquer techniques that its longtime Asian rival, Japan, has used so effectively to stiff-arm the whining barbarians across the Pacific.
 
 
 
Learning From Japan
"China learned a lot watching the Japanese handle American trade negotiators," said William P. Alford, a Harvard law professor and author of "To Steal a Book Is an Elegant Offense," (Stanford University Press, 1995), a study of Chinese views of intellectual property. 
And Washington's standard technique -- draft a highly specific agreement, then demand enforcement -- "doesn't translate so well in a country like China that doesn't have much of a legal infrastructure and views this all as deal-making," he added.
Clinton Administration officials say their case is straightforward: Last year, under the threat of $1 billion in sanctions, Beijing agreed to a tight schedule for closing its pirate factories or turning them into legitimate operations. 
But illegal production has surged.
"We're not asking to negotiate new agreements," Charlene Barshefsky, the acting United States Trade Representative, said. 
"We have the agreements. 
They are clear. 
The question is one of enforcement. 
And that is a question of political will, not ability."
Ms. Barshefsky is, at first glance, in an admirable negotiating position. 
United States-China trade accounts for more than 8 percent of China's gross national product, but less than 1 percent of America's. 
So China has a lot more to lose in a trade war.
Beijing's strategy centers not only on its economic power, but on the political advantage that comes from playing competing American and other Western interests off against each other. 
So when America steamed the Seventh Fleet off Taiwan this year, Li Peng, China's Premier, ostentatiously used a trip to Paris to sign a few contracts with Airbus Industries that Boeing had desperately wanted. 
And when China published its "counter-retaliation list" 20 minutes after Ms. Barshefsky left the podium on Wednesday, Beijing said it would not hesitate to suspend American investment in its market.
 
 
 
Rattling Ford's Cage
That's probably a bluff. 
But it rattled a few cages in Detroit: Ford Motor Company turned out a statement declaring that while "the protection of intellectual property rights is a key to open and successful trade and trust between trading partners, we do not believe that unilateral sanctions by either country are constructive or likely to lead to a solution of the problem."
Many other companies, from electronics makers to oil companies, turned out equally fence-straddling statements.
America's allies, especially Japan, the Philippines and others who live in China's shadow, were a lot clearer: Conduct exercises with the Seventh Fleet wherever you want, but don't start messing with trade weapons; someone could get hurt.
Much as the Chinese enjoy hearing such a chorus, they know -- or Ms. Barshefsky thinks they know -- that there are risks in overplaying their hand. 
Congress is about to begin the annual ritual of debating whether to withdraw China's overall trade benefits, a step so drastic Congress has always shrunk from it before. 
So far, President Clinton and Bob Dole have both favored renewal, giving China a good chance to squeak through again. 
If a real trade war starts in mid-June, though, all bets are off.
