
Faced with their first major crisis since resuming sovereignty over Hong Kong, where the stock market went into free fall and lost 10.4 percent of its value today, Chinese officials responded calmly with promises not to intervene or overrule Hong Kong authorities.
Displaying a sophisticated understanding of market pressure, and pointing to the "one-country, two-systems" formula that Beijing has pledged to keep in Hong Kong, China's top banker employed caution and expressed confidence that Hong Kong's financial authorities would handle the situation.
"The Hong Kong Monetary Authority has the competence and capability to maintain the stabilityI of the Hong Kong dollar," Dai Xianglong, governor of the People's Bank of China, told a Hong Kong newspaper in an interview to be printed Friday.
At the same time, Mr. Dai sent a signal to speculators by declaring that China was prepared to support the Hong Kong currency, if asked.
One of the main concerns in Hong Kong about Beijing's new rule has been that Chinese officials unfamiliar with modern financial markets might panic or interfere in a crisis.
Technically, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has sole say in the territory's fiscal matters. 
But if a serious disagreement arose between Hong Kong and Beijing during a financial crisis, it is anyone's guess who would prevail.
In a sense, today was the first test.
Acting calmly, Mr. Dai and other bank officials indicated that even before they took control of Hong Kong on July 1, they had anticipated just such a market meltdown. 
"We are fully prepared for this kind of situation," Mr. Dai said. 
"I have full confidence in the Hong Kong dollar."
Economists have been watching with growing bemusement over the last year as China's foreign exchange reserves grew ever higher, reaching $134 billion by the end of September. 
Mr. Dai acknowledged today that one of the reasons was to protect the Hong Kong and Chinese currencies in a crisis.
In view of the market turbulence spreading across the globe, Mr. Dai said, "The reserves are currently sufficient, not excessive."
Hong Kong's own reserves total $80 billion, and officials at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority have pledged to use what is necessary to defend the Hong Kong dollar's peg to the United States dollar of 7.75 to 1.
Just prior to the handover of power to Beijing, there was wide speculation in Hong Kong about whether Chinese authorities would try to support the Hong Kong stock market if it came under heavy pressure. 
Now that that has happened, however, a senior economist at the Bank of China insisted that it was inconceivable Beijing would authorize such a defensive operation.
"A lot of analysts thought the market became overvalued in the last few months, especially red chips," the economist said, referring to China-based companies listed in Hong Kong. 
"It makes no sense to support the stock market. 
It will rise and fall. 
The currency is what needs to remain stable."
Shen Guofang, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, echoed that sentiment. 
"No administrative agencies will interfere or intervene in the operations of the stock market," Mr. Shen told reporters. 
"We believe the 'one country, two systems' is being applied well in Hong Kong."
Eden Woon, director of Hong Kong's General Chamber of Commerce, said most business leaders supported the Government's policy. 
"This is a very political issue," Mr. Woon said. 
"Everyone sees it as an extremely important sign of stabilityI and confidence in the territory. 
People know that a loosening of the peg would cost a great deal."
