
A federal grand jury in New Mexico indicted a nuclear weapons engineer today on 59 counts of illegally removing highly classified design, construction and testing data from the Los Alamos weapons laboratory where he was employed.
The indictment charged that the engineer, Wen Ho Lee, had violated the Atomic Energy Act and Foreign Espionage Act, assembling collections of 19 computer files that contained some of the country's most closely held nuclear weapons secrets.
Dr. Lee, who has been under scrutiny for more than five years, was arrested this afternoon at his home outside of Los Alamos by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
He made an initial appearance at the federal courthouse in Albuquerque and, after prosecutors described him as a flight risk, a federal magistrate ordered him held without bail pending a detention hearing on Monday.
The indictment accused Dr. Lee of transferring classified information into unclassified computer files at the Los Alamos laboratory and downloading other material onto portable tapes. 
The indictment said that seven of the tapes that Dr. Lee had made, containing critical nuclear secrets, could not be found.
The most serious offenses in the indictment, removing classified nuclear weapons data, are punishable by a maximum of a life sentence in prison.
The indictment accused Dr. Lee of mishandling nuclear data but did not accuse him of spying or of any espionage offenses related to a foreign government. 
Nevertheless the case has been one of the most notably sensitive issues in recent United States relations with China, as well as internal American debates over policy.
Separately, officials said they were aware that the government would be criticized for singling Dr. Lee out for prosecution and would be prepared to show at his trial that unlike any other scientist or laboratory employee who mishandled secrets, Dr. Lee had selectively stripped the Los Alamos files of every conceivable secret related to nuclear weapons development over the last 50 years, an incalculable loss of research that in the wrong hands could alter the global balance of nuclear arms. 
Page A17.
Today, Dr. Lee's lawyer, Mark Holscher of Los Angeles, issued a statement saying that the charges against Dr. Lee were groundless and that federal prosecutors were "wholly unjustified in suggesting that Dr. Lee is a flight risk."
Mr. Holscher said that Dr. Lee had been unfairly singled out because of he is a Chinese-American and that "prosecutive decisions in this case have been influenced by other branches of government."
His complaint was an apparent reference to accusations by Dr. Lee's supporters that the scientist had been turned into a scapegoat by law enforcement and energy officials who had been criticized by Republicans in Congress for security lapses at the country's nuclear weapons laboratories.
Mr. Holscher specifically denied any accusations of wrongdoing in connection with the tapes in a letter dated today to the federal prosecutor in New Mexico, John J. Kelly. He offered to make Dr. Lee available for a polygraph test "to verify our repeated written representations that at no time did he mishandle those tapes in question and to confirm that he did not provide the tapes to any third party."
It is unlikely that prosecutors will accept Dr. Lee's offer. 
In the past Dr. Lee has voluntarily taken government polygraph examinations, law enforcement officials said, and has given some answers about his activities that appeared to be deceptive. 
The results of polygraph examinations are not admissible as evidence.
The indictment did not allege that Dr. Lee gave the material to any unauthorized person or government, but it did charge that he removed classified nuclear weapons data "with the intent to injure the United States and with the intent to secure an advantage for a foreign power."
The indictment did not explain how the government would prove Dr. Lee's intent, and at a news conference in Albuquerque, Mr. Kelly declined to discuss what evidence the government had obtained that would demonstrate Dr. Lee's motives.
At the federal courthouse in Albuquerque, the intense drama involving Dr. Lee, which has seemed at times to threaten the nation's relationship with China, was reduced to a brief and routine procedural hearing.
Dr. Lee sat calmly in the sparsely filled courtroom wearing a brown leather jacket over a pink, open-collared shirt. 
He sat at the defense table across from Mr. Kelly, the United States attorney, and three assistants.
The magistrate, Donald Svet, asked Dr. Lee whether he had read the charges against him.
"Yes," he answered quietly, "I read them in the last couple of hours."
The magistrate asked, "Are you aware of the penalties," and Dr. Lee shook his head, no.
After the counts were summarized, the magistrate asked again, "Do you understand?"
Dr. Lee answered, "What is the total number of years, I don't understand."
Neither the judge nor the prosecutors fully answered Dr. Lee's query before the hearing ended and he was placed in the custody of a United State marshal and escorted to jail until the detention hearing on Monday.
For months, Dr. Lee's case has been the focal point of a furious debate within the cloistered worlds of counterintelligence, law enforcement and nuclear science. 
And today's charges are unlikely to quell that controversy, particularly within scientific circles.
Since Dr. Lee was fired from his job in March, some scientists have said he was selectively punished because other researchers had sometimes removed classified information without being severely punished.
But Dr. Lee was charged with 29 counts of removing and tampering with restricted data, 10 counts of retaining restricted data, 10 counts of gathering national defense information and 10 counts of unlawful retention of national defense information under the Federal Espionage Act.
With its lengthy list of serious felony charges the government left little doubt that prosecutors had concluded that Mr. Lee was responsible for what some counterintelligence officials regarded as the most serious breach in security at the weapons laboratories in recent decades.
But in the politically charged debate over American-Chinese relations, the indictment seemed certain to further stir emotions about Dr. Lee's case and whether he could be blamed for what government officials said was the loss of a vast store of secret data sufficient to alter the world's strategic balance of power.
But after a security investigation dating back to late 1994, investigators have been unable to uncover concrete evidence that Dr. Lee passed any nuclear secrets to China or any other government.
Mr. Lee, 59, is a naturalized American citizen born in Taiwan who has worked in United States weapons labs for 20 years. 
He had been under suspicion in an inquiry into Beijing's suspected theft of technology known as W-88, the design for the United States' most advanced miniaturized nuclear warhead.
Investigators were unable to determine who was responsible for the W-88 loss or even whether Chinese scientist might have acquired the technology on their own. 
But counterintelligence authorities continued to investigate Dr. Lee on circumstantial grounds that he had access to some of the information and had traveled to China on scientific exchange visits.
Dr. Lee's lawyers have portrayed these trips as innocent and said that they were approved by the government in advance.
Investigators eager to step up their inquiry into Dr. Lee had long sought permission from Attorney General Janet Reno to begin covert electronic surveillance of him. 
While that effort was blocked by Ms. Reno's intelligence aides, the point became moot earlier this year when Dr. Lee agreed to a voluntary search of his office and home.
Agents said that in the search they uncovered evidence that he transferred weapons data to nonsecure computers -- the first indication of the extensive removal of information that came to be the central point of today's indictment.
