
A day after President Jiang Zemin of China said the people of Tibet were "living and working in happiness and contentment," Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright appointed a new special coordinator today to focus attention on China's suppression of Tibet's cultural and religious traditions.
The creation of the position became a diplomatic problem for the Clinton Administration this week. 
Ms. Albright had promised Congress that she would make an appointment by Nov. 
1, a deadline that left Administration officials worried about offending Mr. Jiang during his three days in Washington.
Ms. Albright waited until the last moment -- after Mr. Jiang had left Washington on Thursday to continue his weeklong tour of the United States in Philadelphia and in New York and New Jersey today.
Ms. Albright appointed Gregory B. Craig, who is now director of the State Department's office of policy planning, which is devoted to strategic planning and long-range issues. 
Mr. Craig is one of Ms. Albright's close aides, and as Special Coordinator for Tibetan Affairs, he will report directly to the Secretary. 
He will continue in his current post.
China has long bristled at international criticism of its treatment of Tibet, the remote, mountainous region that has sought greater autonomy since Chinese troops violently established Communist rule starting in 1950. 
In the weeks leading up to this week's sessions between President Clinton and Mr. Jiang, Chinese officials repeatedly objected to the creation of a post devoted to Tibetan affairs.
In a speech in Washington on Thursday, Mr. Jiang brushed aside criticism of China's rule over Tibet. 
He even compared the Communist Government's crushing of a Tibetan rebellion in 1959 to the emancipation of slaves in the United States. 
"With the support of the central Government and the rest of the country, today's Tibet is developing prosperity," he said.
Reflecting the sensitivity of the appointment, Ms. Albright informed Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of her decision in a meeting on Thursday before making the announcement today.
Mr. Craig, 52, has been director of policy planning since June. 
A lawyer, he was an adviser to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, from 1984 to 1988. 
He also served as chairman of the International Human Rights Law Group.
The United States considers Tibet a part of China and does not support its independence, as do many Tibetans in exile. 
The State Department's spokesman, James P. Rubin, said one central aspect of the new post would be to promote talks between China and representatives of Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama.
Since the new position does not carry the rank of ambassador, Mr. Craig's appointment does not require Senate confirmation. 
But the appointment drew praise in Congress, where Democrats and Republicans had pressed the Administration to create the post and to raise the profile of Tibet in American foreign policy toward China.
Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the Republican chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said through a spokesman that he was pleased with the appointment of an official with so high a rank in the department's bureaucracy.
Representative Benjamin A. Gilman of New York, chairman of the House International Relations Committee, said he would hold a hearing next week on Tibet and ask Mr. Craig to testify.
"The destruction of Tibet's religion and culture must end," Mr. Gilman said, "and hopefully the Special Coordinator will play a leading role in the effort to seek greater recognition of Tibet."
