
I came to Shanghai in the summer of 1996 with a 20-year plan. 
People thought I was crazy, as no one moves to a city on the other side of the world -- especially to one in a developing country -- with a 20-year plan. 
But I did, and I have 16 1/2 years left.
I have always wanted to create a business running schools. 
I wrote my thesis at Wharton on how to manage for-profit schools. 
And so, after much research, I decided to develop a chain of universities for Chinese students and started raising money.
It was very difficult at the beginning. 
Doing business in China is complicated and completely different from in the U.S. 
I couldn't just walk into some government office and register a company and then begin. 
I had to find a local partner and navigate the government bureaucracy. 
It took a year to get approval.
We planned the opening of the first school in Nanjing, booked a hotel, informed the parents of 100 students and arranged for reporters to attend, on a Sunday. 
On the Thursday night before, about 9 p.m., I'm having a quiet evening doing a little bit of work in Shanghai when the phone rings. 
The vice governor, one of the top five officials in a province of 71 million people, wants to attend the school's opening ceremony. 
But he's available only on Saturday.
Now he can't just come; he has to get approval from his higher-ups. 
So we spent Friday running around helping track people down, and by 3 p.m. we were told he could attend. 
Then we needed to confirm the hotel. 
But as Saturday fell on a very auspicious day in the Chinese calendar, every hotel in Nanjing was booked for weddings. 
We had no place to hold the event, and we still hadn't informed the parents or reporters about the change.
Finally, after many hours of phone calls, we were given permission to use a government guesthouse on the grounds of the former U.S. 
Embassy in Nanjing, from the days when the Kuomintang government was there. 
It wasn't until 7 p.m. that we managed to start calling all the parents to tell them about the change. 
But because schedule changes to suit high-ranking officials are common in China, no one was upset. 
And everyone looked good because the children were going to a school that had a vice governor as host at its opening.
In China, you must be ready to create and take opportunities the Chinese way. 
The other day the train I was taking to Nanjing stopped suddenly. 
After waiting two hours, we heard rumors that protesters in a town farther down the line, who were upset about losing money in an investment fraud, had blocked the tracks.
When I realized we weren't moving anytime soon, I started telling people around me we should just abandon the train. 
Before I knew it I had 20 people following me. 
Many people in China are willing to do very adventurous things, but they won't take the initiative.
We set out on foot, with no paved road in sight, nothing but farmland as far as the eye could see. 
We walked for a long time along a muddy track, all of us city folks from Shanghai, through tiny villages, past goats, pigs, ducks, chickens and farmers still wearing Mao suits.
Finally we got to a paved road and waved down an old Russian car. 
The driver agreed to take four of us. 
He drove very slowly, never more than 30 miles an hour, but got us to Nanjing. 
We were only three hours late, and I made my 2:30 meeting on schedule.
