
A week after the Clinton Administration signed off on a multibillion-dollar intervention in the currency markets to support the Japanese yen, American authorities stepped up pressure on the Japanese Government today to make good on its promises of economic reform and avoid another decline in the yen's value.
"The steps we can take -- currency intervention -- can have an effect, but they can have an effect primarily through what they signal," Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today, hours after returning from a trip to Japan and Indonesia. 
"What is crucial is the pace of action," he said.
So far, investors seem to have been unimpressed with the speed of Japan's efforts to clean up $600 billion in bad bank debts, spur the economy and accelerate the deregulation of its financial markets. 
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto told President Clinton last week that he would accelerate those efforts, a promise that led to the joint intervention in the currency markets last Wednesday. 
That sent the yen's value up sharply, though briefly -- it lingered at a rate around 136 to the dollar for a day or so.
But the yen has slipped ever since, as Japanese leaders reverted to talking about the difficulties inherent in moving quickly. 
Late today, the yen settled in New York trading at 141.25 to the dollar, compared with 139.15 on Tuesday, and not far below the level when the United States agreed to step in.
Investors appeared to interpret Mr. Summers's comments as suggesting that Washington would not intervene again any time soon. 
But they have been burned once before: When Mr. Summers's boss, Secretary of the Treasury Robert E. Rubin, told Congress earlier this month that interventions only worked temporarily, traders saw that as a green light to bet against the Japanese currency. 
Their rush to sell yen at that time gave Mr. Rubin an opportunity to take the markets by surprise.
Today, Mr. Summers also told the Senate committee he had received additional assurances from Chinese officials that they were "committed to maintain exchange-rate stabilityI," despite growing pressure to devalue their currency, the yuan.
United States officials fear that a devaluation, while intended to keep Chinese exports competitively priced with the goods of other Asian nations, would greatly worsen the Asian financial crisis -- setting off another round of currency devaluations.
President Clinton is expected to raise these matters directly when he meets with Chinese leaders in Beijing this weekend. 
But already the Administration is praising China for its restraint, and the Chinese are hoping to parlay their resolve not to devalue into some kind of diplomatic advantage.
Mr. Summers said further today that the International Monetary Fund was on the verge of another economic agreement with Indonesia -- its fourth, but the first since President Suharto's resignation. 
While details of the accord are skimpy, it will enable the I.M.F. to resume aid to Jakarta at a time when economic projections for the country are growing considerably more dire.
The country is suffering what United States officials call a food crisis, with increasing reports of malnutrition in outlying islands, after years in which Indonesia boasted of self-sufficiency in food production. 
The number of Indonesians living below the poverty line may increase by almost 80 million this year, or nearly 40 percent of the population, the World Bank warned several days ago.
American officials fear that such distress would worsen attacks on ethnic Chinese in Indonesia.
Mr. Summers made an oblique reference to such attacks today. 
He said that when he met with Indonesia's new President, B. J. Habibie, in Jakarta on Monday, he told him "it is essential that all of Indonesia's people, rich and poor alike, enjoy a sense of security that their homes, their businesses and their futures in the country are secure."
The focus of Mr. Summers's testimony today, though, was on Japan, and he repeated the theme that the Japanese had only a brief "window of opportunity" to act.
But in private, many at the Treasury and the White House are skeptical about how much Japanese leaders will be able to deliver before Prime Minister Hashimoto visits Washington on July 22 -- a visit that is intended in part to keep pressure on Japan and in part to appease it after Mr. Clinton's extended visit to China, which begins in Xian on Thursday.
"The situation in Japan is a source of very considerable concern," Mr. Summers said today. 
"Growth has turned negative; the banking system is increasingly stressed. 
While the passage last week of a significant stimulus package is a welcome step, we remain very concerned about Japan's economic and financial situation."
"This is a pivotal moment for Asia and the global economy," he added. 
The weakness in Japan is now having a clear impact on the other troubled economies in Asia."
