
AFTER holding China together for four decades, Communism is like a yellowing, cracking layer of glue, slowly losing its grip. 
The ideology and -- when that wasn't enough -- the fear that Mao used to keep distant provinces in the orbit of Beijing are no longer sufficient, and Chinese leaders are searching for a new unifying force, a new adhesive, to keep the empire together.
"In Russia, there's no state, but there is a society," said a prominent Chinese journalist. 
"Here it's more like the reverse. 
In Russia, people still line up even if there's no bread on the shelves, while here it'd be chaos in that kind of situation. 
There's nothing to hold us together. 
It's only a question of time before everything falls apart."
Not everyone is that pessimistic, but even the authorities are aware of the risks. 
They have in mind two possible replacements for ideology as a national glue. 
One is a sustained economic boom to raise living standards and thus give the Government a new legitimacy and the people a sense of common purpose. 
The second is nationalism.
There are problems with both. 
China's economic boom has tended to worsen regional disparities and tensions rather than alleviate them. 
Tibetans feel left out, while prosperous Guangdong Province is growing so fast it feels dragged down by the rest of the country.
And Chinese nationalism could threaten Asian stabilityII. 
China has boundary disputes with at least seven of its neighbors, including Japan, Vietnam, Russia and India. 
The neighbors are naturally anxious that rising nationalism could encourage China to become more aggressive, particularly as it is engaged in a far-reaching military buildup. 
China insists that its intentions are wholly friendly, but it seems to be doing what it can to encourage more nationalism.
"The new unifying force in China is patriotism," said He Xin, a social commentator with close ties to the hard-liners, using a more benign term for nationalism. 
"It's already emerged."
Empires have had a way of falling apart in this century, as the British, the French and lately the Russians have discovered. 
Today the Chinese empire -- stretching from Buddhist Tibet to Korean enclaves in Manchuria, from Muslim Xinjiang near Pakistan to Cantonese-speaking Guangdong next to Hong Kong -- is arguably the last great multi-ethnic trans-continental empire left in the world. 
And while its grasp is enormous, its reach is even greater: Chinese claims stretch across seas to encompass Taiwan and the Spratly Islands near the Philippines and Malaysia.
For decades and sometimes centuries at a time, China has been more like Europe -- sometimes Europe at war -- than like a country. 
As recently as the first half of this century, China was a hodgepodge of fiefs run by competing warlords. 
As Lucian W. Pye, an American specialist on Asia, writes in the most recent issue of the Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs: "Put bluntly, the fundamental problem in China's modernization is that China is really a civilization pretending to be a nation-state."
Today many Chinese are particularly fearful about what will happen after the death of Deng Xiaoping, the country's 88-year-old senior leader. 
Few questions may be so important to Asia in coming decades as whether China develops some new cohesive force to keep it together.
 
At the Edges
Already, decentralization is gaining momentum, and local leaders are increasingly bold about defying national policies. 
Separatist movements appear to be gaining in Tibet, Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia; Taiwan, as well, is debating whether to declare its formal independence from Chinese sovereignty.
It seems less likely that China's other provinces would want to leave, but in places like Guangdong the possibility of eventual secession cannot be ruled out. 
Indeed, in China, almost nothing should be ruled out.
Leaders from Mr. Deng on down have warned that the West should not look forward with glee to the prospect of Communism collapsing in China. 
Given past experience, including the flight of millions of Chinese abroad when past dynasties crumbled, the authorities may have a point.
"Should there be a disintegration of China or a continued chaos with the 1.16 billion people divided and fighting and starving, the disastrous consequences would spill over the border and endanger the stabilityI of our neighbors, and Hong Kong may witness a flow of millions of people across the border," Ma Yuzhen, the Chinese Ambassador to Britain, warned in a recent speech.
While China's neighbors are worried not just about the possibility of China collapsing but also about the emergence of nationalism as a new unifier, there is little sign now that militant nationalism could be a threat. 
Nationalism is clearly on the rise only among ethnic minorities, and in their case is directed against China.
The only nationalist issue that seems to fire up the general public is the conduct of Japan. 
Many Chinese blame Japan for failing to provide more compensation for wartime injuries, for laying claim to islands that China regards as its own, and for supposedly waging economic imperialism by flooding China with Japanese products.
Paradoxically, this manifestation of nationalism seems to do more harm than good to the central Government's legitimacy.
Many ordinary Chinese protest that the Communist authorities are being too friendly to Japan, and are trying to prevent anti-Japan organizations in China from speaking out. 
The party rose to power partly because it gained nationalistic credentials by fighting Japan; today it is losing some of its dwindling legitimacy because it is widely seen as too chummy with those still known in Chinese as the wokou, the "Japanese bandits" -- a term often pronounced with a real hatred.
While wary of the way nationalism could turn against them, the authorities seem to believe that they have little alternative but to press ahead and cultivate national pride.
"The amount of patriotism will depend in part on how we play our propaganda," said a mid-level Government official. 
"So we're trying to step up our propaganda now in schools and in the news media to encourage more patriotism."
