
THIS YEAR SEEMS typical when it comes to the Oscar race for best foreign-language film. 
That is to say, complaints and conspiracy theories are rampant. 
And, as usual, they center on why certain films were not nominated by their respective counpries and how difficult it is to change the eligibility rules. 
The five selected films will be announced on Tuesday, along with other Oscar nominations.
Some of the most talked-about foreign-language films released here last year will not be among the nominees because they were not offered up by their home countries. 
These include several that were critically praised: "Shanghai Triad," from China; "The Postman" ("Il Postino") and "Lamerica," from Italy, and "Wild Reeds" and "Les Miserables," from France. 
"Les Miserables" won the Golden Globe award three weeks ago.
Even eligible films have encountered significant problems. 
The Iranian film "The White Balloon," the story of a young girl's quest to buy a goldfish, narrowly escaped being withdrawn. 
Teheran tried to pull it back, saying Washington planned a covert operation against the Iranian Government. 
The Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences refused on the grounds that the foreign-language film committee members had already begun screening "The White Balloon."
Another political squabble has swirled around "Underground," a film from Yugoslavia about two small-time gangsters who join the Communist Party at the beginning of World War II. 
Since "Underground" won the prize for best film at the Cannes International Film Festival last year, it has been the subject of a heated debate in France centering on the politics and loyalties of its director, Emir Kusturica.
"Underground" has also become the subject of a legal debate. 
Days before it was scheduled to be shown to the Academy's committee, the film's distributor, Ciby 2000, asked that the screening be postponed on the grounds that the film contained potentially libelous material about an individual who believed he was being parodied. 
The problem was resolved when a shorter, 25-minute version of the film, also released in Yugoslavia, was submitted.
Despite its problems, "The White Balloon" is still considered a contender for a nomination, according to some members of the Academy's committee. 
Other films that have been mentioned are "Antonia's Line," from the Netherlands; Bo Widerberg's "All Things Fair," from Sweden; Pedro Almodovar's "Flower of My Secret," from Spain; Giuseppe Tornatore's "Star Maker," from Italy, and two dark-horse candidates, an Algerian film called "Dust of Life" and "Wild Horses" from Argentina.
This year, only about 400 of the Academy's more than 5,000 voting members volunteered to judge the 41 eligible foreign-language films. 
(Only countries belonging to the United Nations may submit a film, and only one film per country may be entered.) The films were divided into two groups, which were each shown to half of the members. 
To vote, members must see roughly 16 of the films in their assigned group. 
According to Bruce Davis, executive director of the Academy, about 325 members were qualified to vote this year.
Because of the investment of time required to see 16 films, the committee is composed mostly of retired Academy members. 
The director Paul Bartel, the producer Mark Johnson and the cinematographer John Bailey are among the few working film makers who participate.
As in past years, there has been considerable carping about the films being offered by selection committees in foreign countries. 
Chinese politics may have played a role in the exclusion of "Shanghai Triad," Zhang Yimou's drama set in the 1930's. 
It was passed over by the Chinese selection committee in favor of "Red Cherry," directed by Ye Ying.
"Red Cherry" is about two children who are sent to the Soviet Union to be educated. 
Though "Red Cherry" was the most popular film last year in China, many observers believe that politics was involved in the Chinese Government's nomination of Mr. Ye's film instead of Mr. Zhang's.
Mr. Ye's father was sent to the Soviet Union to be educated; there, he was a classmate of Li Peng, the Chinese Prime Minister. 
Mr. Ye's grandfather was General Ye Ting, a member of Mao's army; the general is regarded as a Communist martyr.
It should also be remembered that last year the Chinese Government forbade Mr. Zhang to attend the New York Film Festival for the opening night of "Shanghai Triad."
In 1994, he was not allowed to go to the Cannes film festival when his film "To Live" was shown there. 
And in 1990, the Chinese Government tried but failed to withdraw his film "Ju Dou" from being considered for an Oscar nomination.
"It's really obvious that the Chinese Government wants to keep Zhang Yimou down," said Michael Barker, co-president of Sony Pictures Classics, the company that is distributing "Shanghai Triad."
Critics of the current system have suggested that all foreign films released theatrically in the United States during the past year be eligible for a nomination. 
If this were the case, "Shanghai Triad" and "The Postman" would have been eligible this year. 
The films "Wild Reeds" and "Les Miserables," which were passed over by France in favor of "French Twist," also would have qualified.
But the current rule of one film per country is apparently not going to change. 
"We would rather keep the category eccentric and manageable," said Mr. Davis. "We can make this category go away if it becomes too difficult to administer or if we are making more people angry than happy."
Bruce Feldman, a committee member who used to be a marketing executive at Universal, adds, "If any Academy members have a problem with the selection committee, they should serve on it."
As an added inducement, this year's screenings, which ended last Sunday, were accompanied by fudge, crudites and the occasional steamed dumpling instead of the packaged cookies of years past.
