
AS brothers in arms, China and North Korea have a long history of standing shoulder to shoulder against Western "hegemony" in Asia. 
Perhaps half a million Chinese soldiers died defending the right of Kim Il Sung, North Korea's longtime dictator, to commit one of the century's great military blunders in attacking South Korea on June 25, 1950.
Today, the world is anxiously waiting to see how a much different China, one desperately seeking an era of stabilityII in which to lift its 1.2 billion citizens to prosperity, is going to help North Korea escape its most serious confrontation with the West since Harry Truman was forced to send a general named MacArthur onto the beach at Inchon.
There are many signs that China's leaders are torn over which course to take, whether to back the doddering, 81-year-old general in Pyongyang, thereby supporting his quest to become Asia's second nuclear power, or join a United Nations pressure campaign to stop him.
Either way, China could lose, and that is why few analysts here expect China's untested new President and Communist Party boss, Jiang Zemin, a fence-sitter all his career, to take a leading role in Korean diplomacy.
This month in Seattle, Mr. Jiang, in his first performance on the world stage as China's leader, clearly demurred when Pacific leaders looked to him to exert some influence on his North Korean comrades.
Instead, Mr. Jiang told Prime Minister Mirohiro Hosokawa of Japan in private that China has little influence these days over Kim Il Sung and, therefore, could not be counted on to change North Korea's ways.
This must have added to the disappointment of President Clinton, who has little to show for upgrading relations with China at some political risk this fall -- including meeting with Mr. Jiang in Seattle. 
Afterward, he returned to Washington to strike a shoulder-to-shoulder stand last week with South Korea's President, Kim Young Sam, but avoided the more bellicose vocabulary that his Administration has recently directed at North Korea. 
And Mr. Clinton held out an unexpected carrot.
If North Korea allows inspections of its nuclear installations and resumes its dialogue with the South, the United States would consider standing down from the annual "Team Spirit" war maneuvers it conducts with South Korea -- war maneuvers that North Korea, through its paranoic lens, views as a prelude to invasion.
Asian diplomats say Mr. Clinton's offer, including other incentives like aid and the possibility of normal relations, was not self-inspired. 
Japan, South Korea and China have all warned that painting the prickly North Korean dictator into a corner is counterproductive. 
Mr. Clinton last week said he got the message.
Asian leaders also felt that the American oratory was too far out in front of the politics. 
They say no Asian power, especially those most threatened by the prospect of a nuclear North Korea, is now ready to support United Nations sanctions for the simple reason that they won't yield any result except perhaps a war devastating to the region's vibrant economies.
Japan and South Korea have made it clear they eventually may go along with a United Nations campaign of pressure and sanctions, but neither feels the threat has "ripened," as one Japanese diplomat said. 
After a briefing from Defense Secretary Les Aspin in Tokyo last month, a Japanese official said, "We still are not persuaded that North Korea has a full nuclear capability or an effective means to carry a nuclear weapon."
Such statements raise the question of whether the Administration and its Asian allies agree on what constitutes a North Korean nuclear capability. 
If North Korea has extracted enough plutonium from its five-megawatt research reactor to assemble one or several crude, untested nuclear bombs -- but is still far from actually assembling a device -- is this a threat so severe as to warrant an immediate United States-led military assault aimed at leveling North Korea's well-dispersed nuclear complex?
Presented with such a scenario, an Asian diplomat will warn of the enormous flow of Korean refugees to the Chinese border in a military conflict, or about how the peninsula's economy could be set back decades, or of heavy casualties.
Now, as diplomacy approaches the brink over North Korea, the key players seem focused on different schedules.
The United States remains riveted on the International Atomic Energy Agency's inability to inspect North Korea's nuclear labs or assure the Security Council that North Korean scientists have not yet tightened the last screw on their first nuclear bomb.
 
The Long View
At a meeting next month, the atomic-energy agency may well conclude that, having been thwarted since the spring, it can no longer guarantee North Korea is in compliance as a signer of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
That could trigger an unwelcome escalation of the crisis.
China's leaders seem to take greater comfort in focusing on the long term in North Korea -- the prospect that the death of Kim Il Sung will bring an era of change for a country caught in what Secretary of State Warren Christopher calls a "time warp."
Implicit in China's strategy is that it might tolerate the development of a nuclear bomb until it could persuade a successor regime to return to non-nuclear status, as South Africa did under President F. W. de Klerk. 
A Western diplomat here said that beneath China's noncommital statements on the need to avoid pressure is the hope "that they can somehow manage the collapse of the Kim dynasty and bring about a transition to a Communist regime that is more like China or Vietnam, one that is open and interested in economic development, but which is still Communist and retains stabilityI."
If Mr. Clinton succeeds in his new policy of broader diplomatic engagement with what seems a hopelessly isolated regime, he will have scored a major Asian policy success, as well as a blow for nuclear non-proliferation. 
But the North Korean problem may also demonstrate a new imperative about the new world order -- that commercial interests and stability outweigh all but the most advanced, the most "ripened," of security risks.
