
General Motors said today that it would begin producing a small car in China in December, the first of several such offerings planned by some of the world's largest automakers, each hoping to dominate this country's potentially huge market.
Based on the Opel Corsa that G.M. makes in Brazil, the car will be sold under the Buick brand and will be called the Sail in English, a transliteration of its Chinese name, Sai Ou, which means roughly "compete with Europe."
General Motors' China operations expect to face competition from European as well as American and Japanese manufacturers after China joins the World Trade Organization and car import duties fall.
The first Sail is scheduled to roll off the production line on Dec. 
12 at the company's Shanghai joint venture with the state-owned Shanghai Automotive Industrial Corporation. 
Full production is to begin next April.
Many automakers have exhibited prototypes of family cars for the China market, and several have announced their intention to offer models in the $12,000 price range -- the market segment at which the government wants to aim. 
Volkswagen is expected to introduce a version of the Polo at its joint venture with Shanghai Automotive. 
Toyota is expected to announce a version of its Yaris at a joint venture in Tianjin, a huge industrial city in the northeast. 
And Ford is in negotiations with a Chinese carmaker in Sichuan province to produce a small, inexpensive car.
Despite its obvious promise, China's car market has been slow to develop because the government has preferred that tax revenue and people's savings flow elsewhere -- into the country's fledgling private housing market, for example.
China's network of roads had been considered too undeveloped to support the explosion of traffic that private car ownership will bring. 
And the government has been reluctant to allow foreigners to dominate such a major industry as automaking.
But all this is changing, in large part because of the pressures that global trade membership will bring. 
China will have to open its market to car imports after it joins the W.T.O. 
-- a move expected within the next few months -- and it is relaxing restrictions on the industry now to give domestic manufacturers a chance to prepare. 
In the country's coming five-year plan, the blueprint that will guide government economic policy from 2001 through 2005, the automobile industry's ranking is expected to edge ahead of that of housing.
Thanks to heavy government spending to keep the economy chugging in recent years, a national network of highways now links most of the country's cities.
And while many cities can ill afford more cars on their already jammed roads, officials hope that car sales will help stimulate consumer spending and "turn auto consumption into a major driver of China's economic growth," said the president of Shanghai General Motors, Chen Hong.
Demand is greatest for inexpensive cars of high quality.
"If your intent is to be No. 1 in China, you'd better be No. 1 in this segment," said Michael J. Dunne, president of Automotive Resources Asia, a marketing services company with offices in Beijing. 
He estimates that by 2005, half of all cars sold in China will be in this market segment, sold to members of the urban middle class.
Private car ownership was almost unheard of a decade ago; five years ago, it accounted for only 10 percent of new car sales. 
But that share has risen since the Asian economic crisis rattled regional economies, and China, trying to increase consumer spending to keep its economy stable, began encouraging people to use their cash. 
Private buyers now account for 40 percent of new car sales, and Mr. Dunne estimates that that will rise to 60 percent or higher by 2005, even as competition will keep prices low and profit margins thin. 
"Market share is the name of the game," he said.
This is not the fabled billion-buyer market; much of the purchasing has been in the countryside, where small-time entrepreneurs buy tiny, tinny vehicles that sell for $3,000 to $5,000 each.
In the cities, though, there are plenty of high-salary office workers and young entrepreneurs who would like to own a higher-quality car but cannot afford the sedans now available.
"I've encouraged my staff to buy cars, but right now there are really no affordable cars to choose from," said Wei Wei, who owns a garment-exporting business in Shanghai and who herself has yet to buy a car, though she has had a driver's license for years.
Ms. Wei said she was planning to buy a Buick sedan, currently G.M.'s main product at its Shanghai plant. 
Such cars generally start around $35,000.
The Sail, however, is the company's best chance at making full use of its sprawling $1.52 billion joint-venture factory in Shanghai. 
While the venture announced a profit of $72 million last year, sales have failed to meet expectations. 
The plant, with the capacity to make 100,000 cars a year, began producing a minivan in April that has not sold well. 
And the factory will turn out only 30,000 to 35,000 vehicles this year, far short of the 50,000 the company forecast.
"We're pretty excited about the opportunity in the small-car market," said Philip Murtaugh, chairman and chief executive of G.M. 
China.
The country's anticipated entry into the World Trade Organization has hurt Shanghai G.M.'s sales because many Chinese have put off car purchases, expecting prices to fall after the drop in import duties pushes prices down. 
The slump in sales set off an industry price war that hurt G.M. further.
Competition has also chewed away at some of the Buick's market, which appeared wide open when the joint venture was originally formed in the mid-90's. 
Honda has begun offering an Accord model built at a plant in Guangzhou, in the south. 
And Shanghai Automotive's joint venture with Volkswagen, also in Shanghai, began offering a slightly smaller Passat model this year. 
Shanghai VW is expected to begin producing a 3-liter Passat intended to compete directly with Shanghai G.M.'s Buick sometime in 2001.
At a trade fair here on Tuesday, Shanghai G.M. will display two of its new Opel-derivative Sail cars assembled from kits imported from Brazil. 
The 1.6-liter Sail will come with safety features currently unheard of in China's bare-bones small-car market. 
Those include driver- and passenger-side air bags, four-wheel antilock brakes, a safety cage built into the body, and shock-absorbing front and rear crush zones.
