
FOR nearly 50 years, American troops billeted along the most heavily fortified border in the world have helped stave off a surprise attack by North Korea and have kept the line separating it from the south frozen in place.
Now, after a short few months of stunning diplomacy that started with a presidential summit in June and was recognized with the award of the Nobel Peace Prize last week to President Kim Dae-Jung of South Korea, many Koreans have finally been able to imagine an end to their nation's division.
But as the prospect for national reconciliation and eventual reunification grows, anxiety is spreading throughout Northeast Asia, suddenly bringing into sharp focus a feature of the American military presence whose effects are far more sweeping than its assigned role of defending a medium-sized ally.
The region is home to many of the most explosive loose ends of the 20th century. 
And by policing the Korean DMZ for five decades, the United States did far more than keep the truce here. 
It served as a cork in the bottle, preventing historic rivalries and animosities among China, Japan, Korea and even Russia from spilling forth.
Under the American shield, Western Europe came together during this same period, both economically and politically, and ultimately witnessed the collapse of the threat from the rival bloc to the east.
But this region, home to the world's most populous nation, its second largest economy and several of the world's biggest and best equipped armies, has seen no such coalescence. 
What remains in place instead are many of the same antagonisms of old, together with incomparably greater means to act upon them.
American policy makers are plainly aware of this. 
President Clinton himself recently warned against any premature American withdrawal from Korea. 
But thoughts are already turning to the substantial downsizing that would inevitably follow any peace treaty between the Koreas. 
"Mission defines force structure," said the United States ambassador to South Korea, Stephen W. Bosworth, who said that American ground troops could be cut back in the future. 
"If we are no longer here to deter, we may need different things. 
Our military planners would work closely with our Korean hosts to decide what is necessary."
But Korea's Asian neighbors are clearly not waiting for an uncertain peace treaty between the divided halves of the peninsula to begin thinking and worrying about what comes after the Pax Americana.
Indeed, they may not have to. 
If the two Koreas are able to sustain any momentum in their current engagement, public opinion in South Korea since the summit meeting, together with generational changes, will steadily increase pressure on present and future governments to shrink America's presence. 
Last month, one newspaper poll said that 67.3 percent of Koreans already favored a gradual withdrawal of United States troops, while 10.7 percent wished them to leave immediately.
"Simply maintaining good atmospherics could be a real destabilizer," said Han S. Park, director of the Center for the Study of Global Issues at the University of Georgia. 
"South Korea cannot maintain the necessary level of military preparedness under these circumstances. 
National security advocates in the society will find themselves on the defensive."
While South Koreans who are old enough to remember the devastation of the Korean War, or to have grown up in its shadow, worry that the prospect of peace on their peninsula paradoxically carries with it a heightened risk of renewed disaster, Korea's neighbors are haunted by patterns set in a distant past.
Western Europe's rivals came together around common cultural foundations, capitalist economies and democracy. 
But China and Japan, despite having much in common, are as divided as ever. 
One is Communist, the other capitalist. 
One is wealthy and increasingly gray, the other's system young and relatively poor, but fast-rising. 
Each craves stabilityII. 
But neither can countenance being eclipsed by the other.
And for China, which sees itself as the region's Greece and Rome, the humiliation under Japan's brutal colonial rule drives its bid for renewed -- the Chinese would say rightful -- pre-eminence.
When these two powers have locked horns in the past, it has often been over control of the Korean Peninsula. 
And many of the worst nightmares of their leaders today involve the peninsula once again.
For Japan, the bad dream is an expansion of Chinese power and influence in the peninsula, including the military use of ports like Pusan to intimidate it.
"The closer the Koreas grow together, the more the rationale for the American forces will change, and if there is rapid movement, it will have a major impact on Japan's security," said Terumasa Nakanishi, a professor of international politics at Kyoto University in Japan. 
"Koreans tend to be very complacent and overly optimistic about China, and that worries the Japanese.
"The nightmare that Japanese have is that the peninsula one day will fall under the strategic sway of China. 
We have a fear of seeing the Chinese naval colors being flown in Pusan one day. 
To American eyes this may seem rather far-fetched, but this comes from a deep-rooted historic and cultural experience of the three nations in northeast Asia."
China, meanwhile, harbors a real fear of Japanese rearmament and a resurgence of Japanese militarism. 
Such a turn of events could flow from further North Korean nuclear or missile weapons testing, or from a feeling in Japan of being left exposed once there are fewer American troops.
HAVING had hundreds of years of experience of foreign interventions, Korea, the quintessential medium power surrounded by far more powerful neighbors, knows the frightening regional scenarios by heart. 
"Historically when Japan gets stronger they simply cannot remain on their own island; they try to expand their power on the continent," said Chun In Young, a political scientist at Seoul National University. 
"But China will then say, 'But this has been our traditional zone of influence.'
Their worsening relations will inevitably have grave consequences here, and could prove to be the most persuasive reason for retaining an American presence."
But things are not quite that straightforward. 
Whether one considers allies, rivals or outright foes, the presence of American troops both grates and gratifies, often simultaneously. 
China, for example, has never officially favored the American deployment in South Korea, even though it has plainly profited from the resulting peace, to the point of establishing lucrative economic ties with South Korea. 
"If North Korea is no longer the threat, the Chinese will ask, why are the Americans still on the peninsula," said Mr. Park, of the University of Georgia. 
"Redefining the role under these circumstances is going to be a formidable task."
With few of these issues worked out, it is little wonder that none of the regional players appears to be in a hurry to address the question of the American troop presence as they watch events unfold between the Koreas. 
According to President Kim Dae Jung, even his North Korean counterpart, Kim Jong Il, told him that he wishes to see American troops remain.
"Frankly no one knows what the picture will look like in 10 or 15 years," said Mr. Nakanishi, the Japanese specialist in international affairs. 
"But the mainstay of order in this region is the American presence. 
And as Margaret Thatcher once said, you should not break down your old house until you have built a new one."
