
IN the helium-filled world of Internet investing, a lot can ride on a new company's name. 
When that name is China.com, you might reasonably assume its stock would float on gossamer wings.
After all, the China.com Corporation combines two of the decade's hottest investment concepts -- China and the Internet -- in a single stock offering. 
While both have lost a bit of their luster among investors in recent weeks, China.com seems convinced that putting them together will prove irresistible.
The company, based in Hong Kong, plans to raise $56.3 million through an initial public offering on the Nasdaq stock market in two weeks. 
It began its road show for investors, at a lavish lunch here yesterday, with a familiar mixture of intoxicating predictions and fuzzy details.
"We believe we have presented one of the most exciting investment opportunities in Asia," said Peter Yip, the vice chairman and chief executive of China.com. 
"No other company has our integrated approach."
He noted that the number of Internet users in China was projected to rise from 2.4 million in 1998 to 16.1 million in 2003, a compound annual growth rate of 46 percent. 
As the first public company to tap that vast market, Mr. Yip believes, China.com will be one of the cyberheavyweights of Asia.
It is a tantalizing prospect -- one that lured America Online to buy 10 percent of China.com for $25 million earlier this month.
Executives at China.com's investment bank, Lehman Brothers, said the offering was already oversubscribed. 
And analysts predicted that China.com would take off like a rocket after the shares begin trading.
"The company has a great name," said Kaushik Shridharani, a media analyst at Salomon Smith Barney here. 
"That will drive investor enthusiasm for the stock, because most investors don't delve into the details."
The details in China.com's case are eye-opening. 
Despite its all-encompassing name, China.com does most of its business in Hong Kong, where it operates an Internet portal service called hongkong.com, an Internet advertising service and a Web design and consulting business.
China.com's Hong Kong portal -- and a similar one on Taiwan -- offer a menu of services, from English- and Chinese-language news and information to E-mail, search engines and message boards. 
The company does operate a portal called china.com, which is aimed at users in mainland China, but technology executives said it generated little traffic. 
In a recent ranking of Web sites conducted by the Chinese Government, it placed 17th, behind destinations like Sinanet and Sohu.
"Given all the P.R. they've created, they really should be generating more traffic," said Hanson Cheah, the executive director of Asia Tech Ventures, a venture capital firm here that specializes in Internet companies.
Kenneth Farrall, an expert on the Internet in China who runs a consulting firm in New York, said: "China.com has never been a factor in the Internet business in China. 
It doesn't register on the radar screen."
China.com said yesterday that it had 400,000 registered users of its three main portals. 
The company said it recorded one million "page views" a day, and would double that by year's end.
Peter Hamilton, the chief operating officer of China.com, acknowledged in an interview that the number of users "doesn't satisfy our internal objectives."
But he added, "We're satisfied with the growth rate."
Mr. Hamilton said the company's critics were placing too much emphasis on its relatively low traffic. 
He said the company could expand its reach through its regional advertising service, 24/ 7, which places ads on Web sites in 11 Asian and Pacific Rim countries, from Japan to Australia.
"If you build a business based solely on China, you're going to have a long and hungry wait for ad revenue," he said.
Like most fledgling Internet companies, China.com has never made money. 
In 1998, it reported losses of $11 million on revenue of $3.4 million. 
More than three-quarters of its sales come from its Web consulting business. 
And China.com said it would not turn a profit until 2001.
Despite its meager revenues, China.com has been able to attract an impressive array of United States technology companies as partners. 
They include Netscape Communications, Bay Networks, Sun Microsystems, Pointcast, and most recently, America Online. 
But the critics note that most of these partnerships have fizzled.
"Have any of China.com's ventures become real businesses?"
Mr. Cheah asked. 
"As far as I can tell, none."
Perhaps China.com's most sensitive relationship is with Xinhua, China's official news agency. 
Xinhua is one of the original investors and still owns a 13.6 percent stake. 
In addition to supplying China.com with mainland news, Xinhua edits news from Reuters and Agence France-Presse that is distributed on the company's Chinese site -- deleting references to Taiwan and Tibet.
Mr. Yip said it was an honor to work with Xinhua, adding, "As we all know, the Internet business in China is highly regulated."
For all the questions about its business, China.com has a couple of likely advantages. 
It is the first China-focused Internet company to go public, and it is doing so at a time when analysts say investors in the United States are becoming jaded by the constant stream of Silicon Valley start-ups. 
Moreover, it is entering the market at a time when other high-profile Chinese companies are stepping out. 
The China National Petroleum Corporation, the country's biggest oil company, and China Unicom, a rival to the dominant China Telecom, are both planning major share offerings.
With potential investors overflowing a hotel ballroom in Hong Kong yesterday, the buzz surrounding China.com was unmistakable. 
Mr. Shridharani said such interest was bound to result in disappointment.
"To the extent that expectations are shaped by what's going on in the States, investors are going to be disappointed," he said. 
"This company is going to grow fast, but not on a scale that will excite investors."      
