
IT is impossible to pinpoint the moment when America's successes in the 1990's moved from a topic of grudging admiration around the world to a constant source of annoyance at Washington's triumphalism to a rationale for mistrust and resistance.
Perhaps the clincher was envy over the Dow's dramatic ascent from a little over 2,000 at the start of the decade to a little over 11,000 this year. 
Maybe it was the dawning realization that people around the globe are all flicking on the same Windows operating system in the morning, on their way to navigating an Internet dominated by American innovations and businesses and driven by Intel inside everything. 
Maybe it was when the United States, in the wake of the Asian economic crisis, began offering tutorials on American-style capitalism, and insisting that the world's financial architecture be rebuilt to American building codes.
But surely the capstone was Kosovo. 
Whether Washington intended this outcome or not, the war demonstrated to allies and potential adversaries alike how much more formidable American military technology has become since the Persian Gulf war. 
Europeans got a rude awakening when they learned that the gap between the United States' capability and their own had so widened that they now have to rethink their we'll-build-it-on-the-Continent mentality.
And nothing sent a greater chill through the Kremlin and the Chinese leaders' compound next to the Forbidden City than the image of those B-2 bombers lazily lifting into the air over Missouri at midday, flying an 11,000-mile, 32-hour mission to drop laser-guided weapons over Belgrade -- and getting back in time for dinner the next evening. 
Feeling the need to stake out some ground, Moscow hastily flew a ragtag force into Kosovo, and Beijing boasted last week that it had the neutron bomb -- don't-mess-with-us messages that undercut the Clinton Administration's talk of strategic partnerships with old cold war adversaries.
Of course, the world looks very different to Americans, who have already moved beyond the Kosovo war. 
In the national self-image, America's pillars of global power -- unparalleled financial clout, unmatched technological prowess and unchallenged military reach -- are separate entities, bits of a far more fragile mosaic. 
Sure, times are good, but Americans don't feel particularly powerful now, even with the Russians broke, the Chinese consumed with unemployment and slowing growth, and the Japanese unable to get their breath back.
But talk to Thai politicians stewingover what they view as an American conspiracy to keep their candidate from running the World Trade Organization, or scan the People's Daily, or listen to talk radio in Toronto, and it becomes clear that America's triple threat -- the dollar, the Pentium III chip and the B-2 -- is now also its biggest diplomatic challenge. 
It may be a case of being too powerful for one's own good.
OR as Michael Mandelbaum, a professor at Johns Hopkins University, puts it, "If you are the 800-pound gorilla, you're concentrating on your bananas and everyone else is concentrating on you."
Of course, the reactions differ dramatically when America talks to friends like the Western Europeans and to potentially hostile powers. 
Nonetheless, officials at the State Department, the Treasury and the Pentagon, who agree on precious little, all say fear of America's widening lead has become the subtext of nearly every major conversation they hold around the world.
It underlies Europe's near-panic over the precipitous fall of the euro, the new currency meant to represent a more economically powerful Europe. 
And it underlies Russia's perpetual negotiations to avoid national default, in which Moscow fights every step of the way as the International Monetary Fund -- synonymous with Washington in the Russian view -- demands economic reforms in return for aid.
"What we need is a policy of strategic reassurance," a Clinton Administration official lamented, "a way of demonstrating that not only is this power benign, but that it isn't a zero-sum game."
BUT turning that desire into policy isn't easy. 
The new Treasury Secretary, Lawrence H. Summers, warns against trying to fix the world, noting that "we cannot want prosperity and reform in any country more than its people do."
"It's our challenge," he says, "to succeed as the first outward-looking, non-imperialist, continental superpower."
The unspoken comparison is with the old Soviet Union, which was continental but expansionist and the continental but inward-looking China.
From other capitals, though, Washington doesn't look so benign. 
Its push for more open markets around the world is often viewed as nice ideological justification for speeding the pace at which more efficient American companies can drive their foreign competition into the ground. 
Meanwhile, the White House jumps when American companies complain that low-cost imports are hurting American workers: In the past two weeks alone, Washington has announced restrictions on cheap steel from Russia and Brazil and cheap lamb from Australia and New Zealand. 
No matter how it defends such moves as legal responses to "dumping," from overseas it looks more like protectionism.
On top of that is puzzlement over the deliberately vague "Clinton Doctrine."
It doesn't get much press in the United States, but everywhere else there is speculation over how far the Americans might extend the principles of Kosovo, intervening inside other nations' borders to enforce "international values" of humanitarian treatment or human rights. 
Russia looks at Kosovo and worries about Chechnya; China looks at it and worries about Tibet and Taiwan.
An intense decade of global competition and technological innovation has only heightened the contrast between America's view of its power and the very different view held by the rest of the world.
Europeans struggling with 12 percent unemployment and Japanese trying to emerge from a lost decade look at America's surging markets and employment rolls and see a train speeding by so fast that it looks uncatchable. 
When Americans look at the same facts, many get as queasy as Alan Greenspan, wondering how long the boom can last. 
(That insecurity, some economists think, has actually helped spur America's growth, sustaining the pressure for cost-cutting and productivity gains.)
When foreign companies look at the pace of American technological development, they see a gap far greater than a decade ago. 
But American corporate executives look over their shoulders and worry. 
"You sense quite the opposite of triumphalism from c.e.o.'s," said Jeffrey Garten, the dean of the Yale School of Management. 
"They feel they are in a brutally competitive world, and they think they are in a race for their lives."
The developing world holds a similar fear. 
The United Nations Development Program issued a report last week arguing that the digital divide is widening faster than ever. 
Twenty-six percent of Americans use the World Wide Web, it said, compared to 3 percent of Russians and a tiny fraction of a percent of the population of South Asia. 
The United States has more computers than the rest of the world combined. 
In other words, the faster rich nations log on, the further they pull ahead of countries that aren't even plugged in. 
But the closest the report came to advocating a solution was a 1-cent tax on long E-mails, with the revenue earmarked for connecting up the rest of the world.
The perception gap grows whenever the subject turns to the lessons of Kosovo and American military power. 
Washington looks back at the events of the spring and wipes its brow, relieved that it got through with negligible casualties and no ground troops. 
It sees a truly multinational mission: After all, there was Prime Minister Tony Blair, feeling his oats, arguing for ground troops.
The European allies emerged with a different view: The war was won with American air power that homegrown military technology cannot match. 
Meeting last week in Washington to review the war, European defense contractors and officials concluded that trans-Atlantic mergers of defense contractors -- something both Europe and America have long resisted -- are now inevitable.
The Chinese saw Kosovo through another lens. 
When Thomas R. Pickering, the Under Secretary of State, went to Beijing last month to explain the series of mistakes that led to the accidental bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, a senior Chinese official said China believed that the United States was involved in Kosovo simply to test its latest armaments, according to American officials who have reviewed transcripts of the conversation.
"I don't think that we appreciate how this integration of financial, military and technological power looks from the outside," said Gerrit Gong, the director of Asian studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. 
"It makes random, unconnected events seem like part of a plan for America to hog the road."
THIS may be a problem without a solution. 
Perhaps it could be eased with a little less talk of America as the "indispensable nation" -- Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright's phrase -- and a little more attention to sharing technology and the wealth it creates.
That, however, is not exactly the mood that Congress is in. 
Nor is the Administration so inclined; it is trying to get through its last 18 months with no more ethnic wars, no more economic collapses around the globe and no abrupt end to the age of prosperity.
"Economic progress is a Faustian bargain," concludes Mr. Mandelbaum. "You gain a lot, you pay a price. 
That's what international politics is all about."
