
The Clinton administration's agreement to support China's membership in the World Trade Organization today laid bare the deep divisions among Republican candidates for president on the nature of relations between the United States and China.
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Senator John McCain of Arizona gave qualified endorsements of the trade deal, saying that bringing China into the global trading scheme would help moderate its economic and political behavior.
But the more conservative candidates for the Republican presidential nomination condemned it, accusing the administration of ignoring gross human rights violations in its eagerness to expand commerce with China.
The two Democratic candidates, Vice President Al Gore and former Senator Bill Bradley, applauded the trade agreement, although aides said that Mr. Bradley would reserve final judgment until he had a chance to study its terms. 
Both candidates are seeking a way to embrace free trade with China while not alienating important Democratic constituencies -- including organized labor and some human rights advocates -- who oppose it.
The initial reaction signals that the coming political battles on China and trade will take place largely within the major political parties, rather than between them.
"The more heated debate will be within the Republican Party," said Gary Bauer, a Republican presidential candidate and vehement opponent of the trade deal. 
"There will be a Reagan wing making my argument, and the trade wing -- the Bush wing -- unfortunately siding with Clinton and Gore on this."
Mr. Bush said in a statement that he has consistently supported membership of China in the World Trading Organization, a position also advocated by his father, former President Bush.
"I welcome news of an agreement that will open China's markets to American products and help introduce American values into China," Governor Bush said. 
"The agreement should give American farmers, ranchers and businesses access to China's growing market, and help introduce American values along with American products. 
An agreement with China should also open the door for Taiwan's admission to the W.T.O., which is long overdue."
Mr. Bauer's view, which is largely shared by his fellow conservative candidates, Steve Forbes and Alan Keyes, is that China's record on trade, human rights, weapons proliferation and threats to Taiwan has worsened in recent years. 
He said the administration should have sought significant changes in the way Beijing does business before agreeing to sponsor its membership in the trade organization.
Mr. Forbes, a millionaire magazine publisher who is largely financing his own campaign, said last week in a speech on China policy that he strongly opposes allowing China to join the global trade group.
"Let me be clear," Mr. Forbes said in an address at the Nixon Library in Yorba Linda, Calif.: "Yes to Taiwan in the W.T.O. 
No to China. 
Beijing hasn't earned it, and we shouldn't give it. 
Period. It is time for our government to reward freedom and democracy -- not force and demagoguery -- and let us never forget it."
Mr. Bradley did not directly address the China trade agreement today. 
But an aide said that Mr. Bradley supports China's membership in the trade group as long as it has to meet the same legal and economic requirements as any other nation.
"Senator Bradley believes it is better to have China inside W.T.O. subject to universal rules rather than outside cutting unilateral deals," said Kristin Ludecke, a spokeswoman for him.
Mr. Gore supports the administration's position on trade with China, but he is also trying to finesse the issue because of the fervent opposition of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has endorsed his presidential bid.
John Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, criticized the agreement as a "grave mistake" and accused the administration of being "disgustingly hypocritical" in claiming that trade deals help to moderate Chinese behavior.
A spokesman for Mr. Gore, Christopher Lehane, said in response to Mr. Sweeney's criticism, "Al Gore has made absolutely clear -- as he did at the A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention last month -- that all future trade agreements he would negotiate as president would include labor, environmental and human rights agreements as part, and they would be enforceable."
Patrick J. Buchanan, who is seeking the Reform Party's presidential nomination, has long opposed what he considers one-sided trade deals that hurt American workers.
"This is the latest administration capitulation to Beijing at the expense of working American families and for the benefit of transnational corporations," Mr. Buchanan said in a statement. 
"It is a cave-in, pure and simple, to a regime that even today persecutes religious minorities and aims nuclear rockets at the United States of America. 
I will fight it with everything I have right through to November 2000."      
