
Many Chinese were pinching themselves this afternoon, filled with disbelief that after more than a decade of false starts, China had actually taken the plunge into the international economy, signing a landmark trade agreement with the United States.
On a chilly gray afternoon in Beijing, many people were ebullient when they first heard the news. 
For most people, it raised the prospect of new opportunities to make money as well as new chances to consume. 
The agreement drops many current restrictions on trade and investment and reduces import taxes.
"It's signed?" said Li Dayong, 29, who works for an American pharmaceutical firm. 
"That's great!
I'm thrilled!
We've been wanting this for so many years."
Some took a macro view, welcoming the treaty as a sign of bigger things: China's new economic muscle, an immutable commitment to further economic reform and a renewal of relations with the United States that had been ravaged by the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in May.
But Beijingers also seemed keenly aware that there will be individual winners and losers along China's new path. 
Most are paying careful attention to the micro view, calculating what the trade agreement -- which is widely expected to lead to World Trade Organization membership -- means for them.
"This is great news: I had planned to change my Daewoo for a better car soon and now I'll buy an imported American one," said Xu Yiang, a stock investor, referring to the car he now owns.
Mr. Xu said he also plans to change his investment strategy, buying telecommunications stocks that he deems likely to attract foreign investment.
But Luan Wenqiang, a worker at the Beijing Light Truck Company, predicted that the agreement would drive him out of his already tenuous job. 
"Our factory is already in bad shape," he said. 
"Most workers are on leave and are called back only when there is work to do. 
This will open China to better and cheaper U.S. trucks. 
I don't believe we will survive."
Under the agreement, duties on imported vehicles will drop dramatically, from the current rate of 80 to 100 percent.
For the hundreds of millions of Chinese who farm the land or work as low-wage laborers in small cities and towns, today's triumphant treaty was a big bang in another universe -- although many will probably feel its effects.
Half a dozen migrant workers interviewed in Beijing said they had never heard of the trade organization, which has had only fleeting recent mention in the press despite the frantic negotiations here.
"It has nothing to do with my life," said a middle-aged man, a worker in a small machine factory, strapping a huge box of cabbage to the back of an ancient bicycle.
The new treaty will certainly bring both new investment and intense competition to China and the outcome will vary from industry to industry. 
But many corporate leaders seemed to relish the challenge of being able to compete in the world arena.
"I'm extremely happy to hear about this," said Duan Yongji, the Chairman of China's giant Stone Group, a technology company. 
"Everyone knows that entry will make the country more open and that will bring more competitive pressure.
"But we shouldn't need a greenhouse to protect us. 
And we also hope that entry will open more opportunities for collaboration and cooperation between Chinese and foreign companies."
Mr. Duan added that, at a personal level, he was relieved to hear the government renew its vows, so to speak, to principles like economic overhaul and engagement with the West. 
The Chinese government has often appeared lukewarm on such concepts.
In Beijing's business districts, many owners of small businesses likewise focused more on the opportunities of today's deal than its risks.
Many foreign companies have opened offices here in the last five years -- though their activities were extremely circumscribed by Chinese law -- gambling that this huge economy would one day open. 
Today people dared to imagine the payoff.
Li Dayong, an American drug company employee, said that until today his company has not been able to import many of its medicines to China. 
"Now I think it should become easier to bring foreign medical products in," he said.
Dai Liming, 35, well dressed in a sweater vest and suit, saw only possibilities when he heard the news. 
Mr. Dai, who works as a representative for a domestic trading company, predicted that "the deal will bring my company new opportunities for foreign trade."
But others offered more sober assessments, noting that many of China's service industries -- from insurance to the Internet to personal banking -- are young and ill prepared to compete on the world stage.
"We are already facing fierce competition from foreign companies in some areas and if further concessions are made in the insurance sector we'll be facing a grimmer future," said Lu Youquan, manager of Antai Life Insurance Company in Shanghai.
