
News that the House voted to grant China permanent normal trade status with the United States was generally greeted with joy here today, tempered by worries about the wrenching economic changes that are expected as China frees up its markets to outsiders.
"That's fantastic," said Zhang Linan, 24, an accountant, as he heard the news on the way to work. 
"I think it will be a boost for our economic development and personally it means more choices for us."
But the government, in its first official reaction, expressed "severe concern and dissatisfaction" about conditions that the House attached to the bill, including a new annual review of human rights, calling it an unacceptable effort to "interfere in China's internal affairs and damage China's interests."
Many Chinese have placed enormous hopes on membership in the World Trade Organization, with its rules for market opening, as a force for dismantling inefficient state industries and modernizing the country. 
The trade bill's passage was expected to help China's entry to the WTO.
And since most people yearn especially for cooperation with the United States, which they see as the world's economic and cultural leader, defeat of the trade bill would have been seen as a stinging betrayal.
"It's so good that it passed," said Luo Hui, 36, a computer programmer. 
"If Congress hadn't passed this law, it would have been a shock, a setback, a big international incident. 
Now we can get on with business."
While the government felt obliged to object to intrusive conditions the House attached to the trade bill, the top leaders were undoubtedly pleased with its passage. 
President Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Zhu Rongji have staked their prestige on China's entry into the global trading regime and on closer economic ties with the United States.
The official statement, issued by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, said "it was wise of the House of Representatives to pass" the bill to normalize trade relations. 
"The resolution of this issue will benefit the healthy and stable development of Sino-American bilateral trade on a basis of equality and reciprocity."
At the same time, the government put a strong protest on the record. 
The conditions included in the bill, the official statement said, are "unacceptable to the Chinese government."
The news from Washington should speed along what is already a remarkable revival in Chinese-American relations since the bombing of China's embassy in Belgrade last year, during the NATO campaign against Yugoslavia. 
Still, foreign policy experts warn of pitfalls ahead.
"Before the trade vote in Congress, two big problems threatened Chinese-American relations, trade relations and Taiwan," said Xiong Zhiyong, dean of the Foreign Affairs College here. 
"Now there's only one."
