
When Saatchi & Saatchi set out to create a Chinese television commercial for Daktarin, an athlete's foot medication made by a unit of Johnson & Johnson, the advertising firm faced a predicament. 
Chinese government regulations prohibit advertisements from showing patients or symptoms -- critical elements for a pharmaceutical commercial.
Saatchi & Saatchi eventually resolved the problem by using weeds as a visual analogy for a foot fungus. 
That satisfied the regulators, but frustrated the ad agency.
"Creatively, we could be 10 times better than now if it wasn't for the regulations," lamented Philip Li, executive creative director for Saatchi & Saatchi's Beijing office.
Rigid government control, however, is the price to enter one of the world's fastest-growing advertising markets. 
Mr. Li said he had often had to rework commercials to address the objections of Chinese censors -- or to avoid running afoul of them in the first place. 
"The regulations are always in the back of your mind," he said.
Advertising is just as problematic for the government. 
In China's march from a centrally planned economy to a market economy, officials have promoted advertising as an accelerator of economic development and welcomed it as a way to supplant government subsidies for many television stations and periodicals. 
On the other hand, the government has also criticized advertising as a conduit for both fraud and unwelcome foreign ideas.
"They will try to be as lenient as possible, but whenever anything touches cultural values or political stabilityI, it is something they have to crush right away," said Louisa Ha, president of Dr. Ad Marketing International, a consulting firm based in the United States that focuses on China.
Coca-Cola, for example, recently withdrew a multimillion-dollar campaign for its Sprite soda because the ads featured a popular Taiwanese singer, A-Mei, who had sung Taiwan's national anthem at the inauguration of President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan. 
China regards Taiwan as a renegade province.
"If they allowed her to be on the commercial, they would be allowing dissidence," Dr. Ha said. 
"Politics is above everything else in this country's agenda, whatever economic interests are sacrificed."
Those interests are not insignificant. 
In the 21 years since a Shanghai station showed China's first television commercial, for a Chinese tonic wine, advertising spending in China has soared from zero to more than $7 billion, and by some estimates is as high as $12 billion. 
The range results from discrepancies between published rates and discounted rates that advertisers are actually charged, coupled with the weakness of China's accounting system.
While that is a fraction of the $165 billion spent on advertising in the United States last year, China is one of the world's fastest-growing markets. 
It has surpassed South Korea to become Asia's second-largest market behind Japan.
As advertising has mushroomed, so has the government's determination to keep it under control. 
In a country where the media are monitored carefully for their political and social influence, advertising is considered a privilege bestowed by the government and not a commercial extension of the right of free speech.
In adjusting this privilege, the government has updated its advertising rules more than 30 times in the last six years.
The guidelines range from vague principles, like insisting that advertisements not "jeopardize the social order," to specific prohibitions, like those that forbid the use of state symbols like the flag or national anthem. 
Companies are also not allowed to use superlative terms like "best" or compare their products with those of competitors.
The prohibitions have scuttled ads for such products as the Bristol-Myers Squibb painkiller Bufferin, which claimed to be "the best," and Colgate's diamond-headed toothbrush, which the company asserted was superior to traditional rectangular toothbrushes. 
However, Budweiser's slogan that it is "America's favorite beer" was allowed after its brewer, St. Louis-based Anheuser-Busch, provided statistical evidence to support the claim.
While the regulations may seem severe, the government considers them a necessary consumer-protection measure in a country where soaps have claimed to help people lose weight and tonics have promised to make people smarter. 
In the United States, consumer sophistication backed by government regulations has convinced most advertisers that it is in their own best interest to shun exaggerated claims and outright falsehoods in advertising.
"Self-regulation is the hallmark of maturity in an advertising industry," said Hong Cheng, a professor of communications at Bradley University in Peoria, Ill. 
"This kind of system is still in the making in China. 
That is why the government has to act as a Big Brother."
Since the regulations went into effect, the government said it had found 160,000 examples of false or misleading advertisements and had imposed penalties of more than $54 million. 
The number of "advertising malpractice" cases handled by the authorities rose 36 percent last year, led by ads for drugs, medical services and food.
These included products called Jiannan Capsules (which translates as Healthy Male Capsules) and Alaska Shengmin Lixiong Platinum (Alaska Life Strength Chest Platinum). 
Several of the cited products trade on the Chinese translation of Viagra, the impotence treatment, which is not trademarked in China. 
The government did not identify the manufacturers.
"The shadow of the regulations hangs over the advertising creative process from beginning to end," said Louis Wong, president of Beijing-based Megacom Advertising, who estimates that half of his commercials have to be modified during the approval process. 
"It is annoying, but this is reality."
Television commercials, which receive the greatest scrutiny because of their wide viewership, must be submitted to each regional office of the State Administration for Industry and Commerce before being shown. 
Many companies submit their storyboards and script before filming just as a precaution.
The approval process is subjective and fragmented, with some regional offices approving commercials that other offices reject. 
A shampoo commercial that showed a glimpse of a bather's shoulder was accepted in cosmopolitan Shanghai, for example, but banned in a conservative neighboring province. 
Other commercials that received storyboard approval were rejected after the final edit. 
Some commercials are censored after they go on the air.
Commercials that violate standards can sometimes be salvaged by rewriting the script or making other adjustments, but some are banned.
"Most of our problems are pharmaceuticals and things related to underwear," Mr. Wong said. 
"The problem is often over-exaggeration of a product, or that it goes against the general moral standards of the Chinese population."
Pharmaceuticals face the strictest regulations. 
That industry, the largest spender in advertising, faces reviews by public health officials as well as advertising regulators. 
And, because of a history of exaggerated claims for medicines, advertisers in China are not allowed to show patients, children or symptoms. 
Nor can they associate products with the names of doctors or hospitals.
Sexual modesty is also emphasized by the government. 
Models must be covered at least 15 centimeters (5.9 inches) down from their necks and 15 centimeters up from their knees, which can be inconvenient for companies trying to sell shampoo or underwear.
"If you are the marketer for the underwear, you want to demonstrate that a piece of underwear fits well," said Mr. Wong, whose firm is working on an account for Embroform, a Hong Kong underwear company. 
"But if you just featured a face of a woman up to the shoulders, then what is the point of an underwear commercial?"
His firm is looking into using computer animation for the commercial, hoping in that way to avoid the fate of a previous ad that was censored because authorities thought a model's miniskirt was too short.
Foreign manufacturers are not the only advertisers who have run into trouble. 
The government itself has on occasion run afoul of the censors. 
A commercial advocating condom use to avoid AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases was pulled late last year, two days after it first appeared, when the State Administration for Industry and Commerce decided it was too risque
Regulations not only restrict the content of advertisements, but the structure of the industry. 
China has 50,000 advertising firms employing almost half a million people, an average of just under 10 people a company. 
To protect domestic agencies from foreign competition and to limit foreign cultural influence, multinational advertising agencies are required to set up joint ventures and are limited in their equity. 
Foreign advertising executives said they expect China to relax or eliminate that requirement if the country is admitted to the World Trade Organization.
While China's advertising market is experiencing surging revenue growth, creative growth is unremarkable as a consequence of all the restrictions.
"If you look at all the award-winning commercials in the Cannes festivals, I can bet 80 percent could not be in China because of the content," Mr. Wong said. 
It's frustrating, he said, but he and others knew to expect it when they walked into China.
"If you want fun and creative," Mr. Li concurred, "that's not China."
