
WHEN investigators were trying to find out who might have given sensitive weapons secrets to China, they paid special attention to Wen Ho Lee in part because of his Chinese ancestry. 
But last week, when the Taiwanese-born American scientist pleaded guilty only to downloading sensitive information onto an insecure computer and prosecutors conceded they had no further case to make against him in open court, the quick association of Mr. Lee's ethnic origins with suspicions about his loyalty seemed mostly an embarrassment for the government.
Accusations of "racial profiling" in Mr. Lee's case didn't just offer a new example of the historic tension in America between concerns about national security and civil liberties principles. 
There were also practical arguments, offered by experts on counterintelligence, against zeroing in early on an espionage suspect primarily on the basis of ethnicity.
To be sure, some Justice Department investigators felt last week that they were the ones who had been treated unfairly. 
To them, it was thoroughly legitimate to consider Mr. Lee's ethnic background, among several other factors, in forming suspicions that he might have helped Beijing. 
It was especially logical, they said, because the Chinese government has a well-documented history of using ethnic Chinese in other countries to help gather intelligence.
Those investigators said they are obliged to make their best effort to narrow the list of suspects when trying to determine the source of a leak of information and should not be hampered by notions that to do so might offend some group.
But many experts are now saying that such an approach is not only inherently offensive but also potentially counterproductive.
Experts on espionage have long accepted that using factors like ethnicity carries a risk of reprising historically corrosive assertions that some Americans have a dual loyalty based on their heritage.
For many years, it was fear of that very accusation that lay behind an Israeli government policy of not using American Jews to gather intelligence in the United States. 
When Jonathan Pollard, an American Jew and civilian analyst for the Navy, was arrested in 1987 on charges of spying for Israel, the shock was all the greater for that reason, and the Israeli government made a point of insisting that the intelligence unit that recruited Mr. Pollard had been a renegade outfit.
Phillip B. Heymann, a Harvard law professor who served as the deputy attorney general in the early Clinton years, said that using a suspect's heritage is not only offensive to concepts of civil rights but is also often a lazy form of stereotyping that can do more to hamper a counterintelligence investigation than help it. 
"At the early stage of an investigation, you have to identify a relatively limited number of suspects and do so in a relatively inexpensive way," he said in an interview. 
"And then you can work harder on that smaller group."
Mr. Heymann, who oversaw the Justice Department's counterintelligence operations, said that the most important factor in narrowing a list of suspects is determining who had access to the information and motive to provide it to a foreign power.
"Motivation and opportunity are the two things you look for," he said. 
"You might look at who had unusual debts, who is bitter and angry, who has the opportunity to make contact with the country that received the material."
Ethnicity, he said, can serve as a misleading surrogate for those factors. 
"What you're getting out of knowing that Wen Ho Lee is Chinese is an extremely crude estimate of the larger list of factors about motive and opportunity. 
It comes very cheap but it isn't nearly as probative as the others.
"Ethnicity turns out to be a very difficult factor to use properly," he said. 
"There are so many steps between the initial observation of someone's ethnicity and making an intelligent use of it that it's really not worth using. 
And if you use it to focus too quickly on a narrow category of people, you're giving a pass to other people in other categories."
John L. Martin, who supervised the Justice Department's investigation and prosecution of espionage cases for 26 years until 1997, said in an interview that "what should lead a good investigator are the facts and not necessarily the ethnicity of anybody in the pool of suspects."
Mr. Martin now heads the Washington office of the OSO Group Ltd., an international investigative company. 
He said that most spies of recent vintage were mercenaries, people who chose to help foreign governments for money. 
"You would be wasting your resources if you pursued a potential suspect largely on the basis of ethnicity and not all the underlying facts," he said.
In the case of Mr. Lee, he said, it seemed that his Chinese heritage had increased suspicion of him because he had traveled to China and had met with Chinese government scientists in the United States. 
"But it appears a flaw in the Wen Ho Lee case was that there were non-Chinese scientists who made some of the same trips and had some of the same contacts" but were not investigated as closely, he said.
Another feature of the Lee case that strongly suggests that investigators were too quick to rely on Mr. Lee's ethnic heritage was that in the end they weren't sure which foreign country he might have been motivated to help. 
Some investigators suspected China, but because Mr. Lee had been born in Taiwan, others thought it might have been that country, which is the People's Republic of China's most resolute foe.
It may never be fully clear to the public just how much Mr. Lee's ethnicity was a factor in singling him out because the plea agreement that ended the case also halted an inquiry on that matter by the federal judge hearing the case. 
But the issue has already had other consequences. 
Last week, lawyers for several Muslims charged in connection with the plot to bomb two United States embassies in Africa in 1998 said they would use the Lee case to argue that the prosecutors had unfairly singled out their clients on the basis of their religion.
And just as the "racial profiling" of minorities for special suspicion of involvement in crime can backfire on law enforcement by arousing a whole community's resentment, there was evidence that the Wen Ho Lee case may have actually cost American security research some valuable talent. 
Chinese-American civil rights groups said that Chinese-Americans are now greatly reluctant to take government positions at the national laboratories.
