
On Monday, President Jiang Zemin warmly played host to American officials at the Chinese leadership compound to celebrate the major trade agreement committing China to far-reaching economic reforms and broad international ties.
Today, on the other side of Chang An Avenue, Mr. Jiang's security police forcibly detained more than a dozen members of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement who had dared to unfurl a yellow banner and meditate in Tiananmen Square.
The two events, only 24 hours apart, illustrated the contradictory impulses driving China, a country that one moment seems to be hurtling toward a more open future and the next seems mired in Communist orthodoxy and intolerance.
Today, one day after the announcement of a trade deal that is likely to lead to membership in the World Trade Organization soon, China's state-controlled news media uniformly gushed over the deal's benefits for business as well as for foreign relations. 
The pact will "improve relations with other major powers, particularly the U.S.," said the Beijing Youth Daily, a newspaper that just four months ago was castigating the United States as an imperialist invader for the bombing in Kosovo.
"There are a lot of paradoxes in China now that are difficult to resolve," said Minxin Pei, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington.
Many experts in and outside China, as well as President Clinton, have predicted that the opening of the economy required for entry into the World Trade Organization would ultimately push China to liberalize in noneconomic spheres as well -- promoting, for example, more freedom of the press and a more even-handed legal system.
But for now, the contradictory facets of China remain mostly uncoupled, creating the odd juxtapositions.
"The economic dimension of China has been transformed to allow for market forces and private property," said He Qinglian, a Shenzhen author and economist. 
"But the other dimensions -- politics and ideology -- have changed very little. 
The political system has changed only as much as demanded by economic change. 
And in ideology, there's been very little change at all."
This is partly because China's leaders are much more unified on the need for economic reform than for political reform, said Mr. Pei. And Chinese citizens are, for the moment, far more concerned with improving living standards than with voting, he added.
But other experts point out that there is a unifying impulse behind the leaders' seemingly contradictory actions: to maintain the power of the Communist Party.
"The furthering of reform and opening characterized by the W.T.O. deal and the intensified crackdown on the sect and dissidents are both fully in line with Deng Xiaoping theory, which calls for 'both hands being aggressive,' " said a researcher at the Institute of Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong Theory of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing.
He said the leaders hoped that the trade deal would bring foreign investment to maintain high economic growth, which would in turn promote stabilityI. 
"If they can achieve these goals, it can help consolidate the rule of the Communist Party, which -- remember -- is the most important of Deng's Four Cardinal Principles."
In the past year, the Chinese government has grown increasingly at home living in this divided world, making little effort to link liberalizing economic and social policies with politics at home.
In 1997 and 98, in the months preceding the exchange of state visits by Mr. Jiang and Mr. Clinton, the Chinese routinely released dissidents as a good-will gesture, held only a few political trials and even tolerated the development of an embryonic democratic party.
But this fall, even as Mr. Jiang toured Europe and chatted on the phone with Mr. Clinton in pursuit of a trade agreement, Chinese courts were sentencing pro-democracy activists to long prison terms after brief trials without lawyers. 
And the Chinese police were detaining thousands of Falun Gong members for practicing a banned form of exercise and meditation.
Falun Gong is an idiosyncratic blend of traditional Chinese exercises and Buddhist and Taoist religious beliefs that was widely popular -- before it was banned in July -- among middle-aged Chinese for its supposed health benefits.
Ever since, the government has been conducting an old-style Maoist propaganda campaign to wipe out what it has labeled an "evil sect," complete with re-education for members, and detention or labor camps for those who have publicly continued its practices.
But in a China now filled with Internet cafes and Hong Kong cable television, campaigns do not work as they used to, and this one has fallen flat both among more devoted practitioners and among the many Chinese who see the group as mostly harmless.
Today, on a crisp fall morning, in Tiananmen Square, a dozen or so practitioners unfurled a banner reading "The Great Law of Falun" and held out their hands to begin their exercises, a small protest to attract the attention of the United Nations Secretary General, Kofi Annan, who is visiting Beijing.
Police in uniforms and plainclothes -- on bicycles, in vans and on foot -- were out in large numbers. 
The protesters, some of whom were kicked, were then shoved into vans, which sped out of the square, witnesses said.
There was another small demonstration Wednesday morning by four women, a man and a young child who performed slow meditation exercises, The Associated Press reported. 
The police bundled the group into a van and drove them away.
Experts say it is unclear how long China's leaders can aggressively open their economy to the outside world while pursuing a totally closed political system at home.
"I think the whole process of economic pluralism inevitably leads to pluralism in ideology and other spheres, because it leads to diversity of economic interests which in turn produces distinctive needs and values," said Ms. He, the economist.
She said that at a time when China is changing so rapidly, the country's sustaining value systems, Confucianism and Communism, are both collapsing -- leading to the rise of groups like Falun Gong.
"China still adheres to a monolithic ideology," she said. 
"But a specialized professional society like China is becoming requires a more innovative, pluralistic ideology."
Also, after an initial surge in response to the trade agreement, China's stock prices tapered off today, and investors and economists in China seemed uncertain that opening the economy would, by itself, lead to the economic growth that the Communist Party wants and needs.
"The kind of paradoxes we see today can last for some time," said Mr. Pei of the Carnegie Endowment. 
"But no society can tolerate that kind of dissonance forever."
