
JIANG ZEMIN, 71, President and General Secretary of the Communist Party
A mechanical engineer from Yangzhou, near Shanghai. 
Trained in the Soviet Union. 
Minister of Electronics Industry, then Mayor of Shanghai. 
Surprise candidate, chosen by Deng Xiaoping, in 1989 to head the Communist Party after the crackdown on demonstrators in Beijing. 
Initially judged an interim leader and lightweight, he has successfully edged aside all rivals and established himself after Deng's death as primary leader. 
In 1997, by far his best year, he appears on track for successfully handling Deng's death, the repatriation of Hong Kong, the 15th Party Congress and a summit meeting with President Clinton, planned for next month
LI PENG, 69, Prime Minister
A stiff, sour-faced bureaucrat, ranking second in power after Jiang. 
Widely associated with the 1989 crackdown, though he was too junior in the hierarchy at the time to play a serious role in key decision-making. 
Easily the most hated man in Government, ridiculed for lacking intelligence, though officials say he is actually a smart, tough taskmaster and skilled manager. 
Adopted son of former Prime Minister Zhou Enlai. 
Constitutionally required to step down when his second five-year terms expires in March 1998.
 
QIAO SHI, 73, Chairman of the National People's Congress
Called the mystery man of Chinese politics for his long years heading the secret police and party discipline inspection commission. 
Consistently low profile. 
An obvious candidate for Communist Party general secretary in 1989, but passed over for Jiang, perhaps after vacillating on how to handle student demonstrators. 
Seen as a principal rival to Jiang since then. 
As head of China's weak, almost powerless legislature, he has become a minor symbol of legal and legislative reform. 
Unclear what job, if any, awaits him.
 
ZHU RONGJI, 69, Deputy Prime Minister
Sometimes called "China's Gorbachev" by West 2/3erners who admire his no-nonsense practicality and vision. 
Hates that name, because it makes him vulnerable to accusations that he would preside over the dissolving of the Communist Government. 
As Mayor of Shanghai, 1988-91, he worked closely with Jiang and feuded with him. 
Handled student demonstrations there with sensitivity and skill, avoiding any violence. 
Promoted to Beijing, he became economic czar in 1993 when the job looked impossible. 
To virtually everyone's surprise, he succeeded in bringing down inflation -- from 24 to 2 percent -- while keep economic growth rate high. 
Widely expected to succeed Li as Prime Minister.   SETH FAISON
