
WHEN the world's athletes converge on Atlanta for the Olympics this summer, there will be one person who Chinese fans fervently hope will lose, will humiliate herself, maybe even have a heart attack during play. 
She is Chire Koyama, Japan's table tennis champion, a strong contender for the gold medal. 
Her sin is that she was born Chinese but then moved to Japan, married a Japanese and joined the Japanese national team.
"Chinese all hate her," explained a Chinese woman living in Japan. 
"After, all, she married a Japanese."
The Chinese fury with Mrs. Koyama is not diminished by the fact that she has an excuse for going to Japan. 
She claims that when she served on the Chinese national team, her coach ordered her to lose a game in the 1987 world championships so that a teammate could advance to the finals. 
Instead, she beat the teammate, and her Chinese coaches reportedly punished her by refusing to allow her to compete in the 1988 Olympics. 
Still, when she began playing for Japan and defeating Chinese players, China's official newspapers denounced her as having been selfish in refusing to throw the match, and as having betrayed her motherland.
The venom underscores the antagonisms that bedevil the delicate relationship between China and Japan, neighbors with histories that have been intertwined for 2,000 years. 
These are the giants of East Asia, two points of a strategic triangle with America, and their relationship is central to continued stabilityII in what is economically the most dynamic part of the world. 
Yet their shared past is more a source of division than of unity, and today distrust is growing rather than receding.
The distrust grew a bit more this month, after China ignored repeated Japanese warnings and conducted a nuclear test underneath its Western desert. 
Because of its memories of the atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan is bitterly hostile to nuclear weapons, and so, perhaps too self-consciously, it interpreted the Chinese nuclear test as a direct insult.
"We are very disappointed," declared Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto as Japan lodged an official protest. 
In Japan's Parliament, there are growing voices for more than just words. 
More and more legislators complain that the Foreign Ministry officials are yowagoshi, roughly meaning spineless, and that politicians must intervene to teach China some respect. 
In particular, some politicians would like to curb Japan's huge loan program to China, while others urge a more aggressive Japanese assertion of ownership over disputed waters and territories. 
The Japanese Government has discouraged Japanese oil companies from exploring for potentially rich deposits of petroleum in waters between the two countries, but some politicians argue that there is no need to be so circumspect.
 
 
 
Hardening Toward Beijing
"There's a growing attitude in Parliament that we need to take a tougher line toward China," said Kazuo Aichi, a former Cabinet member and prominent member of Parliament. 
"Whenever anything happens, the Japanese Government takes too gentle a position, and that's why this impatience is spreading in Parliament."
Yet Mr. Aichi, like almost every senior Japanese official, adds that "the relationship with China will be the major issue for Japan."
It is difficult to have a conversation with a senior Japanese policy maker for more than about 30 minutes before the conversation turns to China, for there is a growing sense that Japan's long-term future is almost as dependent on decisions made in Beijing as in Tokyo. 
"For the last 100 years, our focus in foreign affairs has been on America," said one top official. 
"From now on, it will have to be China."
The concerns in Japan run the gamut: A civil war in China could send tens of millions of boat people fleeing to Japan; a continuing industrial revolution in China could raise global oil prices significantly and send acid rain and other pollutants across the sea to Japan; Chinese adventures against Taiwan or in the South China Sea could interfere with Japan's oil lifeline and cripple economies throughout Asia; an increasingly nationalistic China could seize Japanese islands and confront Japan militarily. 
In America, half a world away, China's rise seems awesome and exciting; in Japan, next door, it also seems awesome but a bit ominous as well.
 
 
 
Suspicion Is Mutual
China, on the other hand, is equally suspicious of Japan. 
Chinese note that whatever its recent problems near its borders, historically China has not been particularly aggressive to its neighbors, while in this century Japan tried to colonize everyone in sight. 
Chinese officials often argue that America is being naive about Japanese militarism, and that Beijing and Washington should team up to contain Japan before it is too late. 
Chinese suspicions are reinforced because Japan always seems half-hearted about apologizing for the deaths of up to 20 million Chinese during World War II.
To be sure, for all the mistrust, Japanese companies have been thrilled by, and shrewd in exploiting, the Chinese market -- somewhat to the chagrin of the Americans, who would prefer allied solidarity in forcing China to respect trade accords. 
Japanese salesmen tend to serve longer tours in China than American counterparts, tend to speak better Chinese, tend to devote more efforts in smaller provincial cities, and, Americans sometimes complain, tend to sweeten deals by making generous "gifts" to Chinese officials. 
But even this interaction stirs Chinese resentment. 
Many Chinese say they would prefer to buy American products, and in 1986 Chinese university students demonstrated against what they called Japan's "economic imperialism."
Such tension belies the ways each side has enriched the other historically. 
Japan was the biggest beneficiary; it learned rice farming from China and much of its language consists of Chinese words. 
It is impossible for a Japanese to converse without using Chinese words, and Japanese culture benefited hugely from Chinese poetry and philosophy. 
"It is because of the Chinese that we are human beings," acknowledged a Japanese official. 
"From them we got writing and even civilization."
The Chinese are also indebted to Japan, for Chinese intellectuals traveled to Japan late in the 19th century and early in this century to study the ideas of the modern world. 
Indeed, most of the Chinese political vocabulary was imported from Japan, including the Chinese words for democracy, politics, economics, government.
These days, some Japanese can be patronizing, even contemptuous, of modern Chinese society. 
But they do not hate Chinese. 
In China, however, local people sometimes tell foreigners that the Chinese character "hen," or hatred, can be defined by "the feeling we Chinese have for the Japanese."
Many Chinese are willing to let their children marry Americans, but a marriage with a Japanese can be a neighborhood scandal.
 
 
 
Looking to Washington
The alarm about China's long-run intentions may be leading Japan to put a greater premium on its security relationship with the United States, since cooperation with America is politically and economically more feasible for Japan than building a first-class army of its own. 
Former Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa says bluntly that without the security partnership with Washington, Japan might fully rearm and acquire nuclear weapons. 
Yet like some other senior Japanese officials, Mr. Miyazawa is anxious that alarm about China could become self-fulfilling, by alienating and angering China into becoming just the disruptive force that some fear. 
"Let's not treat China as an enemy," Mr. Miyazawa said. 
"Let's try to engage China in dialogue."
