
CHINA'S newest city is crowded, expensive, polluted and mired in its worst recession since World War II. 
And yet to listen to Hong Kong's leaders, every person in mainland China with the slightest claim to live here would scramble across the border if the gates were opened.
Since January, Hong Kong has been in a lather over the prospect that it is about to be inundated by Chinese immigrants. 
The fears, which began after a court here granted residency to mainland Chinese who have at least one parent in Hong Kong, escalated into near-hysteria when the Government estimated that more than 1.6 million people would be eligible for residency.
"It is clear that Hong Kong cannot bear the burden of these 1.67 million people," said Tung Chee-hwa, the territory's chief executive, in a typically charged response. 
"The consequences are unimaginable."
Last week Mr. Tung asked Beijing, in effect, to overrule the court by reinterpreting a part of Hong Kong's constitution that deals with residency rights. 
Pro-democracy leaders accuse Mr. Tung of flouting the rule of law, which has been the cornerstone of Hong Kong's economic success and was supposed to survive the transition from British to Chinese rule.
That Hong Kong would put its legal system at risk to keep out an influx from the mainland shows how vulnerable this enclave still feels. 
Nearly two years after Hong Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty -- in a grand experiment known as "one country, two systems" -- people here regard Hong Kong as a Xanadu that could be spoiled by the masses from the vast Chinese hinterland.
"It's a typical immigrant mentality that says 'I got in, now close the door behind me,' " said Martin Lee, the leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party. 
"This whole debate has brought out the worst in people."
Despite Hong Kong's woes, there is no disputing its allure. 
It generates a gross domestic product of $25,200 per person, 33 times that of the rest of China. 
It has more Rolls-Royces per square mile than any city in the world. 
In a country of 1.2 billion people, half of whom have not made their first phone call, Hong Kong has so many cellular phones that movie theaters ask patrons not to talk on them during love scenes.
It may be one country, but measured by almost any economic yardstick, it remains resolutely two systems.
David Tang, founder of the Shanghai Tang boutiques in Hong Kong and New York, speaks for many here when he asks: "Do we want millions of immigrants coming into a stable and bourgeois society?
Our starting point is different than 150 years ago, when this place was a barren rock."
The debate has put Hong Kong's residents in an awkward spot. 
Most are the children or grandchildren of Chinese refugees who came in waves after the Communist takeover in 1949 or during the Cultural Revolution. 
While many still distrust the regime, the motherland evokes genuine patriotism. 
Protesters mobbed the United States Consulate here to denounce the errant bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, pelting it with tomatoes rather than rocks, as protesters did in Beijing.
But when it comes to sharing their schools or neighborhoods with mainland Chinese, Hong Kong's citizens wrinkle their noses. 
In a survey of residents conducted shortly after the handover in July 1997, the words they most frequently used to describe mainlanders were ignorant, impolite, dirty and greedy.
PART of this has to do with changing demographics. 
Many of the mainland Chinese who poured into Hong Kong after 1949 were members of the commercial elite. 
Those who came during the Cultural Revolution tended to be scholars and intellectuals. 
The latest batch, from neighboring Guangdong Province, are mostly young, male and uneducated.
"It's a form of class discrimination," said a 40-year-old woman from Guangdong Province whose husband lives in Hong Kong. 
"Many people in China have not had the chance to receive an education."
The woman, who identified herself as Mrs. Siu, is trying to gain residency for her 16-year-old daughter. 
Mrs. Siu's husband migrated to Hong Kong in the 1970's, returning to China in 1981 to find a wife. 
After the couple had their daughter, they discovered that Hong Kong's immigration laws barred her from moving here. 
So Mrs. Siu stayed with the daughter in China, while her husband moved back.
Attitudes toward mainland Chinese have also hardened in the wake of the Asian economic crisis. 
With Hong Kong limping through its second year of recession, blue-collar workers here worry that more newcomers could crowd them out of the job market. 
Policy makers fear that an influx of unskilled people would make Hong Kong less competitive than Taiwan and Singapore, both of which have immigration policies that favor highly skilled applicants.
Critics say Hong Kong has exaggerated the projected number of immigrants to scare the public and win support for reversing the court ruling. 
"It's probably the grossest misuse of numbers I've ever seen by a government," said Michael DeGolyer, the director of an academic project that conducts surveys on public attitudes about Hong Kong's return to China.
Mr. DeGolyer said some realities of Hong Kong life -- like its stratospheric real estate prices -- would keep mainlanders away. 
In fact, he said, some locals stay only because of its hospitals and schools. 
"If Hong Kong opened its border 24 hours a day," he said, "and if it built schools and medical facilities near the border, at least 200,000 people would move out immediately."
