
LAST year, Japan seemed to bite its lip as it watched China's economy continue to boom. 
Japan was suffering its worst slowdown in more than half a century, and its rival was the only Asian country to survive the Asian economic crisis with its reputation enhanced. 
Commentators made invidious comparisons between Chinese decisiveness and Japan's inability to confront its economic problems.
All this was hard to take in Japan, Asia's largest economy, and it hurt even more when President Jiang Zemin made a state visit in November -- the first ever by a Chinese leader -- and told Japan how terrible it had been in World War II. 
Nobody wanted China's economy to collapse, but there was a bit of a yearning for China to stumble and learn its vulnerability.
Now that has happened. 
China's economy is showing signs of frailty, even though officials still hope for economic growth this year of 7 percent. 
And Japanese business executives and economists are finding that they are looking at China's economy these days not so much with resentment or envy as with apprehension.
"I'm very nervous about them following the same path as the Japanese economy in the next five years," said Takashi Hoshino, a China specialist and director for research at the Institute for Socio-Economic Infrastructure and Services here. 
"There are very big problems in China. 
In particular, the situation of the financial sector -- the banking problems -- their situation is quite similar to Japan's recent experience."
There are also huge differences. 
Japan's economy is more than four times the size of China's. 
China can still enjoy catch-up gains that are unavailable to Japan.
But some Japanese see in China a bit of their own experience. 
China has enjoyed the go-go growth that Japan went through in the 1980's. 
But since Japan's speculative economic bubble burst in the early 1990's, it has taken eight years for the nation to come to grips with fundamental problems that still need to be solved.
As a Communist country trying to make the transition from command economy to the market, China obviously has problems Japan never faced; its dying state sector claims about 40 percent of total economic output. 
Japan, with 120 million people, can tap into a savings pool of $9 trillion. 
China, with about 1.2 billion people, does not have nearly as big a savings pool.
But China also has the creeping burdens that have plagued Japan: Government spending on public works to boost growth, a practice of lifetime employment, growing public debt and a broken financial system.
China's economy is expected to grow this year, while Japan's is going to have to fight to reach zero growth. 
But like Japan, China is facing the threat of deflation, as prices begin to sink, as factories become idle and as inventories rise with products no one wants.
With ailing state businesses trimming wages and workers, Chinese consumers are increasingly worried about the future, hoarding their money, rather than spending it, which would help boost nationwide consumption. 
As in Japan, the only big spender in China is the Government, which is pouring money into concrete, bricks and mortar for bridges, dams and other projects, even if they crumble thanks to hasty construction or corruption.
AND as in Japan, China's spending is swelling the budget deficit to record levels. 
And the banking system, buckling under bad loans amounting to 30 percent to 40 percent of the nation's total economic pie, is reluctant to lend. 
China, like Japan, is caught in a credit squeeze.
"People are very jittery," said Fred Hu, a China economist at Goldman Sachs in Hong Kong. 
"They are moving from a world of cradle-to-grave welfare system to a very uncertain brave new world."
Economic relations between China and Japan are complicated by more than a century of profound political and military antagonisms. 
Many Chinese are irritated that Japan has not apologized more forthrightly for World War II atrocities. 
Even today, many young Chinese say with remarkable bluntness that they hate Japanese people.
Some Japanese worry that China could become a militarist bully in the next century the way Japan was in the middle of this one. 
"China can become as militaristic, as expansionist and as arrogant as we were," said a Japanese legislator who travels to China regularly.
The possibility that the two largest economies in Asia could both be ailing troubles many economists. 
Many Japanese recognize that growth in China would help maintain stabilityI in the region by maintaining the flow of trade and a firm exchange rate.
"We are not in the habit of rejoicing in the misfortunes of others," said Sakaaki Numata, a spokesman for the Japanese Foreign Ministry. 
"And I'm not quite sure what is happening in China can be described as misfortune just yet."
