
WHAT does Harry Wu have in common with Milton Meier?
Both are American citizens and both are behind bars in foreign countries because, among other things, they are accused of being spies.
But there the similarity ends. 
The differences between them underscore the arbitrariness with which the United States Government, the Congress, human rights groups and news organizations focus attention on Americans who get in trouble overseas.
Mr. Wu is a world-famous human rights advocate who is under arrest in China on charges that he entered the country under aliases, traveled to places not open to foreigners, spied, bought secrets, stole secret documents, carried them abroad and provided them to outside organizations.
But Mr. Wu has the full weight of the Clinton Administration and the Congress behind him. 
His wife, Ching Lee Wu, was welcomed at the White House and on Capitol Hill last week in her campaign to win her husband's freedom; both houses of Congress have passed resolutions condemning the Chinese in the case, and the Administration has warned that continued detention will keep the United States and China from having good relations.
The seriousness of the matter was captured at a recent State Department briefing when the spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said: "We're not playing games. 
We are not politicizing the relationship. 
On the issue of Harry Wu, we're seeking justice for an American citizen."
Milton Meier does not enjoy the same high-level attention.
A little-known travel agent and businessman, he lived quietly in Iran throughout the revolution and seizure of the American Embassy, citing his love of Iran. 
But he was arrested in September 1992, and in April 1994 he was sentenced secretly to 24 months in prison and a $285,000 fine after confessing, the Iranians say, to corruption and charges of espionage.
His wife is an Iranian citizen who still lives in Iran and was a sister-in-law of the head of the Shah's secret police, who was executed in the early days of the revolution. 
So it is not surprising that she hasn't spoken out publicly about her husband's plight. 
The State Department says it knows little about why Mr. Meier is in prison, except to insist that he is not guilty of spying and to speculate that he got in trouble for business deals gone bad. 
News organizations have only fleetingly paid attention to him.
Officials and residents of Milpitas, Calif., where Mr. Wu lives, have tied yellow ribbons throughout the town; no one at the State Department seems to know where Mr. Meier comes from.
It is not that the United States Government is convinced that Mr. Wu is innocent and that Mr. Meier is guilty of something.
Mr. Wu, who spent 19 years in Chinese labor camps and is now determined to uncover and publicize their evils, has long said that during previous trips he penetrated more than two dozen Chinese labor camps under false pretenses. 
In most any country, that might be grounds for arrest, at least for trespassing.
"A question is what criteria should Americans use in evaluating a foreign legal system," said Stanley B. Lubman, a San Francisco lawyer and specialist in Chinese law. 
"On the one hand, we shouldn't judge another country's practice by our ideals. 
On the other hand, total relativism is unsatisfying and leaves us without the capacity to form judgments. 
The Chinese criminal code is badly drafted, because its definitions of crimes are vague and ambiguous. 
But some of the conduct that he is alleged to have engaged in could be defined as punishable under the laws of many Western countries."
As for Mr. Meier, the official Iranian media has said he was charged with links to "foreign intelligence officials" and had confessed to operating illegal trading firms, collecting economic information and receiving bribes from foreign companies for information.
The Swiss, who represent American interests in Iran in the absence of diplomatic relations, have tried unsuccessfully to obtain a written verdict or a status report on Mr. Meier's appeal.
Mr. Meier's plight is not unique.
Through bad judgment or circumstances beyond their control or a combination of both, William Barloon and David Daliberti find themselves in a small cell in Baghdad. 
The two Americans were arrested after wandering over the border from Kuwait into Iraq last March, and have been sentenced to eight years in prison.
The Iraqis accused them of illegally entering the country; the two men, employees of American military contractors in Kuwait, insist that they strayed into Iraqi territory by mistake.
A pilgrimage to Baghdad by their wives was reported only briefly by news organizations. 
The Poles, who represent American interests in Baghdad, have been rebuffed since early April in efforts to visit the two men.
Unlike Mrs. Wu, Mr. Barloon's wife, Linda, expresses frustration with the United States Government, which she says has left her out in the cold. 
"I feel like this black curtain is drawn all the time," she said in May during a trip to Baghdad to visit her husband. 
"I get no information."
