
China said today that accusations that its spies had stolen nuclear weapons designs from the United States were "unfounded."
The Foreign Minister, Tang Jiaxuan, gave the first official response to accusations of nuclear espionage today at a previously scheduled news conference. 
The assertions, circulating within the American Government, were reported in The New York Times on Saturday.
American security officials, the report said, believe that in the 1980's Chinese spies learned the American design of an advanced, small nuclear warhead, used for hitting multiple targets with a single rocket. 
American officials believe that the spying effort, centered on national weapons laboratories, has continued, it said.
Today Mr. Tang said, "I think the report by The New York Times was irresponsible and unfounded."
The espionage assertions, Mr. Tang noted, followed other recent accusations that China has gained military technologies through commercial satellite transactions.
"There are always some people trying to obstruct normal trade relations between the United States and China, including the export of high-technology items," he said. 
"This will not be beneficial to the interests of the United States."
Mr. Tang also said any effort to condemn China's human rights record at a United Nations meeting this month would fail, and he repeated China's vehement opposition to research by the United States and Japan on anti-missile defenses.
Despite those problems, Mr. Tang said, he is hopeful that a visit to Washington in April by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji will aid progress toward a Chinese-American "constructive strategic partnership."
The Clinton Administration is under strong pressure from Congress to sponsor a resolution censuring China at an annual United Nations human rights meeting in Geneva this month.
Administration officials have described past efforts to condemn China in the Geneva meetings as futile and counterproductive, and last year the United States did not offer a resolution. 
But recently, after China gave harsh sentences to several democracy advocates, the Senate voted 99 to 0 to urge the White House to again sponsor a condemnation.
Should that occur, Mr. Tang said today, "I think the outcome will not be different than in the previous seven times."
He said he told Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright during her visit earlier this week that "On the question of human rights there will be no way out if you replace dialogue with confrontation."
 
--------------------
Anger in Congress
By The New York Times
WASHINGTON, March 7 -- Republican leaders said today that the report that the Chinese had obtained American nuclear secrets could make it difficult for the United States to support Beijing's efforts to gain entry into the World Trade Organization.
Asked on "Fox News Sunday" about whether China should be allowed to enter after the latest assertions, Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, said, "I think it should be out of the question."
Senator Richard C. Shelby, the Alabama Republican who is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said that the report, if true, would be the worst security breach the country has suffered in many years.
