
Several midnights a month, Hong Kong expatriates -- waiters from Chinatown, bartenders from Kennedy Airport, factory workers from Brooklyn and Queens -- head for the horses. 
After their shifts they escape to the Meadowlands Racetrack in New Jersey, where they bet, cheer and swear as the thoroughbreds run, 13 time zones ahead. 
The live simulcasts can last until sunup.
The late-night trips are a cure for homesickness for these transplants from a city obsessed with horse racing, where the Hong Kong Jockey Club is the center of social life. 
The club takes in $11 billion a year, drawing crowds of up to 70,000 people a day, including wealthy businessmen in private boxes and working-class families dressed in their finest. 
It is a bastion of Old World luxury. 
It is everything that the early-morning Meadowlands, with its stark lighting, smoky cashier lines and shuttered doughnut shops, is not.
"These guys are used to basically all the amenities, but we're on the wrong side of planet Earth at this time," said Paul J. Q. Lee, a consultant for the Meadowlands who arranges for a van to pick up many of the gamblers at Chatham Square in Manhattan.
As the 15-seat van headed down the New Jersey Turnpike one recent frigid night, nobody on board was wearing formal attire -- and there were no women, children or tycoons.
In a seat near the front, Yui Chuen Ho, 60, a retired Hong Kong taxi driver, enthusiastically explained his approach to the Sport of Kings. 
"Betting on horses is like the stock market, not like the casino," he said through a translator. 
"It doesn't depend on luck."
Stabbing the air with his index finger, he said one must study the horse's face, body and legs as the horse is presented to the public before the race, and make sure the rear hoof lands in the print of the front hoof. 
"It's got to slip in exactly the same spot, and if not there's something wrong with it," said Mr. Ho, who bought a house in Hong Kong with a window facing the downtown track. 
"How smooth is the tail?
Is the hair smooth and shiny?
It must have tight muscles. 
It must not stumble."
Several rows in the back, another passenger -- a 35-year-old who has been in the country 10 years and gave only his first name, Fred -- scoffed at such handicapping. 
"Why don't you just ask a fortune teller?" he said. 
"I don't believe it."
The men arrived at the track about 12:15 a.m., and soon rushed off to take their places in the Meadowlands clubhouse, in chairs with one television screen each, or in the public viewing areas, to catch the early-afternoon post time in Hong Kong.
Some bettors had books showing each horse's family tree, back to great-grandsires and great-grand dams. 
Others held printouts of racing Web pages, in Chinese or English. 
They watched attendants escort horses around the Asian track before the afternoon races. 
On this side of the video screen, people wore jeans, flipped their pens nervously and sipped sodas.
The Meadowlands started broadcasting races from Hong Kong four years ago. 
At the height of the simulcasts' popularity, a couple of busloads of workers from Chinatown would make the late-night ride, drawn by Hong Kong entertainers and special events like karaoke.
But the late hours proved to be too much for most gamblers, organizers said. 
The food is limited, and the Meadowlands track's bars close around post time in Hong Kong. 
The number of customers has dwindled to one vanload and another couple of dozen die-hards who make the trip in their own cars.
Still, Meadowlands management considers it worthwhile to stay open for the races, which are broadcast live by satellite from the Hong Kong club's Happy Valley and Sha Tin racecourses 8,000 miles away. 
The Meadowlands pays 3 percent of the total bet on the Hong Kong races to an intermediary for the Jockey Club.
"From the betting standpoint, even though it's early in the morning, it does comparatively well with races during normal business hours," said Chris McErlean, vice president and general manager of the Meadowlands Racetrack, who had seen other tracks in California, Vancouver and Toronto attract early-morning crowds with simulcast races from Hong Kong.
"I'm always amazed at the amount of money that's bet on it, given the time frame," he said. 
Last year, 500 to 700 people would come in between 11 p.m. and 3 a.m., he said, and bet about $60,000 over five or six races. 
The Meadowlands also broadcasts races from England, Australia and the West Coast, for a total of 20 hours of simulcasts a day.
One die-hard fan, Sammy Chan, 52, aimed binoculars at a large-screen television for a close-up view.
"If the ear is straight up, that means he's fresh," Mr. Chan said. 
"That detail tells you something."
He had driven from Kennedy Airport after finishing work as a bartender and would be driving home to the Bronx after the races.
The fans are also adamant about the superiority of Hong Kong's thoroughbreds. 
"American horses look like they are fake," said Kinpint Mui, 35, a gambler who works in a Chinatown factory. 
"They are so slow. 
There's no excitement."
Actually, the horses in Hong Kong are all imports from England, the United States, Australia and Japan. 
They are more likely to be offspring of the best sires, but do not have as fancy a pedigree as the big winners themselves, said Alan Shuback, the foreign editor of The Daily Racing Form. 
If a horse arrives in Hong Kong with an inauspicious name, he said, it will most likely be changed to something like Dragon Win, Horse of Healthy or Clement Fortune. 
Not to mention Chinese Tea, Tea for Gentlemen and Tea for You.
The track at Happy Valley, in downtown Hong Kong, is triangular, and made of turf instead of dirt, the common surface in America. 
Races usually have 12 or 16 horses, while in the United States horses often race in heats of 6 or 7, he said. 
They run clockwise, the British way.
Mr. Lee, the consultant for the Meadowlands, who has also arranged trips from Chinatown to Atlantic City and the Foxwood Resorts Casino in Connecticut, has noticed other differences in the racing cultures. 
"We don't have negative stigma about gambling, like in church, where they say it is a bad thing," Mr. Lee said. 
"In Hong Kong, it's a family experience."
People there wager far more on horse races, he said. 
For the 1998 season, for example, the Jockey Club reported $11.9 billion in revenue. 
The 150 tracks in the United States had gross revenues totaling $3.25 billion, according to a 1999 report by the National Gambling Impact Study Commission. 
Until China took control, the Jockey Club was the city's second largest business -- after Jardine Matheson, the trading house -- and contributed about 10 percent of the government's tax revenue.
To explain the importance of racing in Hong Kong, one gambler recalled how Deng Xiaoping, China's leader, had soothed fears by pledging that the Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club would endure, though in deference to the new political climate the century-old club dropped the "royal" from its name.
The accommodations remain more majestic than Maoist. 
"You have everything from galleries for the masses to the most exquisite boxes for the elite of Hong Kong," Mr. Lee said. 
He described a lofty scene: boxes with two large buffet tables, serving Cantonese and Western food, Yung Chow fried rice next to roast beef. 
Waiters and waitresses deliver meals to spectators.
"It is an exquisite experience," he said. 
"You're eating the finest, in very strict, old British style."
The same cannot be said for the early-morning Meadowlands, where some rooms resemble a bus terminal more than a gracious buffet. 
Most of the men from Chinatown stayed in the Race World Teletheater on the grandstand's paddock level. 
It has two connected rooms with a black ceiling, 156 seats, most of them empty, each with television monitors that broadcast several channels, including the Hong Kong races in both English and Cantonese.
Mostly, the men kept to themselves or talked in pairs as they hung out by the video monitors or drifted near the cashier windows. 
Few took advantage of the hot dogs and french fries still for sale.
During each race, the British announcers' excited voices rose up a steady chromatic scale. 
The six races, about half an hour apart, did not evoke much noise from the crowd at the Meadowlands, aside from the occasional cussing out of a horse. 
"Come on, Fly Me Outside," an agitated man yelled at the screens. 
"I need the 3, not the 5. 
I need the damn 3!
I can't win a thing on this track!"
There is an occasional language barrier. 
Paul Campanelli, a teller at a betting window, said he once asked a bettor who had trouble making himself understood to write down the numbers of the horses he wanted to bet on. 
The man returned a while later -- with the numbers written in Chinese characters.
The men like to talk about how much can be won by picking the win, place and show horses in three races; it is theoretically possible to win $5,000 with a $2 bet. 
But at 3:30 a.m., when the van was ready to return to Manhattan, no winners were boarding. 
Yui Chuen Ho, who said he was always prepared to lose $1,000 at the track, had lost $200. 
Fred said he had lost $80. 
Nobody was particularly upset by the losses.
Charlie Gang, who had driven to New Jersey after his shift at a Brooklyn factory, put it this way: "It's special to come here. 
I just want to have all the trouble to forget about, and feel happy. 
I don't mind if I win money or lose money."
