
Two supporters of China's entry into the World Trade Organization warned the White House today that the administration is in imminent danger of seeing its huge trade initiative die, partly because of Beijing's threats to Taiwan and because Vice President Al Gore appears to have cold feet about the deal.
In a heated exchange before the Senate Finance Committee, the chairman of the panel, Senator William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, said today that recent comments by Mr. Gore "raise serious questions about the administration's commitment to getting this deal done and the legislation passed."
Speaking at a meeting of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last week, Mr. Gore promised to negotiate stronger protections for workers' rights and the environment if elected president.
The ranking minority member of the committee, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, was even harsher in his assessment of how the administration has handled an agreement on which much of the United States-China relationship now hinges.
The administration, he said, has not yet sent a bill to Congress to grant China permanent "normal" trade status -- the one American concession in an accord that opens China's markets.
"The administration has to know that they have to get this thing done in two to four weeks," Senator Moynihan said in an interview this afternoon, describing a timetable for a vote far speedier than what the White House is considering. 
"After that this whole thing is in jeopardy."
White House officials say they disagree and want a vote before the summer. 
But the timetable is partly up to the Republicans, and administration officials met today with Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader.
President Clinton has begun a lobbying campaign on the China deal, meeting members of Congress in small groups in the yellow Oval Room in the White House residence, and will speak on the issue on Thursday morning in front of the Business Council, a group of 75 business leaders.
The White House insists that it can win passage of the deal by relying on the support of Republicans, and by winning over 70 to 90 Democrats. 
But it is far from clear they will get that support.
Democrats, pressured by labor's opposition to the trade deal, are far more leery. 
Mr. Gore promised last week to get labor and environmental protections into a subsequent agreement with China, but Senator Moynihan said today "the Chinese won't sign that deal, so we won't have any future trade agreements."
Mr. Gore's comments put the White House in what one administration official said this week was "an intellectually indefensible position."
By suggesting that he would press for a better deal later, Mr. Gore gave political cover to those Democrats who want to skip the vote this year. 
And plenty want to do exactly that, after the unions have made clear that they will work to defeat, district by district, members of Congress who vote for the China agreement.
This week China also made passage more complex. 
Its 11,000 word report on Taiwan, released on Monday, suggested that Beijing would feel free to use military force to reunify the mainland with the Republic of China if negotiations with Taiwan drag on for too long. 
That drew a sharp response from the Pentagon and from conservative Republicans who see China as an emerging security threat to the United States.
The result is a bizarre political alliance between conservatives in Congress and labor and environmental groups opposed to the China deal.
In testimony before the Finance Committee today, Charlene Barshefsky, the American trade representative, made no direct references to either Mr. Gore or the threats against Taiwan. 
She told Mr. Roth and Mr. Moynihan that she was testifying "with the full support of the administration."
But she also argued that while Congress could debate the issue endlessly, it really had no choice other than to sign on to the deal -- or risk putting American firms at a huge competitive disadvantage in the world's largest and fastest-growing market.
Clearly, though, the administration is going to have to give ground to its critics. 
Some supporters of the trade organization deal say that may mean approving more arms for Taiwan -- which enrages Beijing -- or may mean finding a way to enforce Chinese compliance with the deal that would appease the critics.      
