
ONE of the great paradoxes of Africa is that its people are for the most part desperately poor while its land is extraordinarily rich. 
East Asia is the opposite: a region mostly poor in resources that over the last few decades has enjoyed the greatest economic boom in human history.
The area around this river port city in eastern Congo, the former Zaire, is a case in point: it is dilapidated and impoverished yet studded with diamonds, like a billionaire on Skid Row. 
Back in the 1950's, when this country and several others in Africa were at the same income level as South Korea while blessed with far more natural resources, it might have seemed reasonable that Africa would soon leave Asia in the dust.
Now South Korea has a per capita income of about $10,000 a year, and Congo stands at $150 per person. 
Narrowing the gap is a fundamental challenge for Congo's new leaders as they try to rebuild their country after the overthrow this month of the longtime Zairian dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko. 
And a vital first step, not only for this country but for others across Africa -- and for big aid donors like the United States -- is understanding why such yawning disparities have occurred.
A wave of new research into the contrast between Africa and East Asia is producing some surprising findings. 
The most striking and reassuring conclusion is that although East Asia enjoyed some significant cultural and historical advantages, its economic boom relied on factors that probably can be replicated elsewhere.
In a nutshell, the formula was an outward-oriented, market-based economic policy coupled with an emphasis on education and health care. 
Countries in other regions like Chile have followed the strategy with great success. 
Several African countries, led by Congo's neighbor Uganda, are trying to learn from the Asian experience and are enjoying their own Asian-style boom.
 
Encouraging Signs
Uganda, a beautiful, vividly green nation on the banks of Lake Victoria in East Africa, with vast herds of antelope that graze beside modern highways, now has one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. 
Yet it is simply at the crest of a wave of African countries experimenting with privatization and stock markets -- there are 16 so far in Africa -- and trying to prove that rapid economic growth is not a prerogative of East Asia alone.
"This is still in the early days, and we're not euphoric and jumping up and down, but we think that parts of Africa are moving in the right direction," said Alan H. Gelb, chief economist for Africa at the World Bank. 
"I think there are grounds for optimism."
At last count, four countries -- Uganda, Angola, Lesotho and Malawi -- were enjoying growth rates of 10 percent. 
That is about as fast as the peak growth rates for the Asian "tigers," Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea.
"There's an emerging consensus that Africa is not hopeless, and that in fact there is an emerging renaissance going on in Africa," said Salih Booker, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.
But to travel the back roads here and in Asia is to be reminded how many opportunities Africa missed over the last few decades, and how much it continues to mortgage its future by giving short shrift to education and health care. 
The new research suggests that a central feature of the successful East Asian model was a high level of education and public health -- a level partly inherited from past centuries and partly nurtured in recent decades. 
Despite its own ancient educational traditions, Africa lags far behind in building this "human capital."
In the little village of Lalia, in eastern Congo, the principal of the mud-brick elementary school throws up his hands at the challenges he faces educating the barefoot children who swarm around him.
"We have no notebooks and no teaching materials, and some teachers don't come because we cannot pay salaries," said the principal, Bibi Masakama, an energetic 32-year-old, as he showed a visitor around the school. 
The mud walls leaned ominously, and light came from holes in the walls that functioned as windows. 
Lizards ran about on the walls and on the rough wooden planks that served as desks and benches.
"None of these kids has ever been vaccinated against any disease," Mr. Masakama added. 
"None has ever had a medical examination."
Many reasons have been cited over the years for the different economic trajectories of Africa and East Asia. 
Some said that the colonial burden on Africa was much heavier, or that Africa was troubled more by artificial boundaries and disparate tribes and languages. 
Others, including some Africans, pointed to climate or culture.
"In Africa the climate is such that there's always fruit around, in back of the house, and you just reach up and pick it when you're hungry," said Alauwa Lobela, the mayor of Kisangani. 
"But in Europe and Asia, the climate forced people to get food, to protect themselves from the cold in the winter, to develop a spirit of battle."
Such climate-based explanations are common, and analysts have found that the economies of tropical countries do indeed grow a bit more slowly than those of temperate countries, all other things being equal. 
But the statistical relationship is slight, and one study suggested that climate explains only one-twentieth of the difference in economic performance between Africa and East Asia since 1965.
Of course, East Asia includes North Korea, healthy and well-educated but an economic disaster area facing famine, while Africa includes countries like Botswana that have prospered over the years. 
But regionally per capita incomes grew about 11 times faster in East Asia than in sub-Saharan Africa in the years since 1965.
 
Educated and Healthy
Why?
Economists point to a conjunction of factors associated with rapid growth: places like Japan, China, Taiwan and South Korea underwent land redistribution after World War II and became relatively egalitarian societies; they were relatively well-educated and healthy, and they experienced a sharp drop in birth rates. 
On top of that, economic policies were ideal: the East Asian countries sooner or later adopted relatively open, market-oriented policies emphasizing exports.
East Asian countries pursued various economic models, but there was also a common economic strategy, which countries like Uganda are now emulating. 
The strategy emphasizes fiscal prudence and avoiding inflation while vigorously promoting exports and keeping the currency undervalued. 
In the past, African countries often tolerated soaring inflation and overvalued their currencies, keeping exports uncompetitive on world markets.
 
The Socialist Path
A central issue was politics: many African countries flirted with socialism and an anti-capitalist brand of nationalism that was in fashion during the cold war. 
In East Asia, the most successful countries avoided socialism and, in the case of South Korea and Taiwan, flirted with fascism. 
Even China since 1980 has arguably been closer to fascism than Communism, not so much Marxist-Leninist as market-Leninist.
Another critical factor has been savings, which are needed to finance new factories and other investments that stimulate economic growth. 
Partly because of market incentives and government dictates, national savings rates have been much higher in Asia (more than 30 percent of gross domestic product) than in Africa (about 12 percent).
"Our problem is that we don't save," lamented Samuel Ndomba, a British-educated professor at the University of Kisangani in Congo. 
"When people get a bit of money, they just spend it to buy a beer."
That might change, though, were there more incentives for investment. 
There is nothing intrinsically Asian about high savings, for Japan had very low savings rates in the 19th century. 
They soared in part because of Government campaigns and the spread of deposit-taking institutions, and eventually financed Japan's industrial revolution.
One major reason not to save and invest in Africa has been inflation and instability: when people save money, it often ends up being confiscated. 
Victoria Baenongandi, for example, lasted just two weeks as an entrepreneur in eastern Congo. 
She bought a pile of merchandise to resell, but everything was seized by soldiers. 
So she returned home and gave up on business -- and put her savings into beer.
Economic policy aside, East Asia enjoyed another crucial advantage over Africa, one that may be harder to replicate. 
Countries like South Korea or even China started the development process with citizens who were more literate and more healthy than those in other nations at their income levels, and they continued to improve. 
For all of China's persistent poverty, a child born in Shanghai in the early 1990's was more likely to learn to read and more likely to survive childhood than a baby born in New York City.
Some experts argue that East Asia's success in education derives not from Government programs -- Asian governments actually spend a smaller share of G.N.P. on education than do African governments. 
Rather, literacy and other education achievements in Asia may have been helped greatly by a culture of parental concern that supports enormous private spending on education, arising from a Confucian reverence for scholarship.
Because of Confucianism, China has had national exams and the rough equivalent of university graduates for 2,000 years. 
In contrast, Tanzania is said to have had only 13 university graduates at independence in 1961.
Their histories also meant that most Asian countries slipped fairly easily into the form of the modern nation-state, for they had a sense of nationhood that in some cases went back for millenniums. 
On the other hand, some African countries -- a hodgepodge of ethnic groups within borders drawn arbitrarily by colonial rulers -- are still struggling to adjust to modern nationhood. 
Such instability has always been fatal to economic development, whether in Cambodia or in Mozambique.
Health problems have also been a greater economic burden on Africa than is often realized. 
Most Africans, for example, have stomach worms, and as a result millions of people cannot study or work energetically, and some children have their intelligence permanently impaired because of anemia caused by the parasites.
"From the age of two, most people here have worms," shrugged Bakondagama Barandala, a 24-year-old nurse at a shabby clinic in Mambasa, in northeastern Congo. 
The clinic is a metaphor for public health in Congo: it is the only clinic in the region, yet it has no doctor, no electricity, no drinking water, no instruments and no medicines.
 
The Graft Factor
For all the importance of education and health care, the cultivation of human capital seems to be effective only in tandem with the right economic policies. 
China was healthy and literate for its income level in the early 1960's when under Mao it underwent one of the worst economic contractions and famines in world history, one in which 30 million people died. 
Likewise, Tanzania for many years vigorously promoted education and health, but it stagnated because of catastrophic economic policies inspired by a quasi-socialist ideology.
One reason for some optimism about Africa now is its parallels with Asian countries earlier this century. 
Much like Asia was before its boom, Africa is relatively egalitarian in wealth, partly because land is not concentrated in the hands of a small elite (as in parts of Latin America). 
Similarly, in many African countries birth rates are dropping and literacy is rising.
Moreover, it's instructive to recall that Western pessimism over global basket cases was once directed at Asia too: it used to be fashionable to say that Chinese had no capacity for hard work and no feel for business, and that China was destined, as Samuel Taylor Coleridge put it, to "permanency without progression."
Among the most important studies of the lessons of East Asia are a 337-page report edited by two Harvard economists and just released by the Asian Development Bank, and another major report published by the World Bank in 1993. 
Those studies and related research point to other factors that go along with the nurturing of financial and human capital -- especially the effectiveness of Asian governments.
Asian governments have often been more effective than Africa's in part because they have been less corrupt. 
Asia has huge amounts of corruption by American standards, but for the most part graft there is just another cost of doing business; in Africa it often prevents business from being done at all. 
A joke heard in business circles makes the point:
An African visited an Asian friend, a Government official, and admired the official's spectacular home and opulent life style. 
The Asian explained his wealth with a wink toward his "cut": "You see that highway out there?
Fifteen percent!"
Then the Asian visited the African, also a Government official, and found that he was living just as lavishly. 
Asked how he had prospered, the African pointed outside, saying: "You see that highway out there?"
"No," the Asian said, peering helplessly out the window. 
"What highway?"
"That's just it. 
One hundred percent."
