
The Chinese authorities appear to have stopped following foreign reporters, as part of an effort to spruce up their image and help their bid to become host of the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
The State Security Ministry and Foreign Ministry jointly issued an internal Government circular this month announcing an end to the following of foreign journalists, Chinese familiar with the document say. 
The circular said the step was necessary to improve Beijing's human rights image and therefore its chances of being awarded the Olympic Games.
Beijing is one of half a dozen cities competing to become host of the 2000 Summer Olympics. 
It is vigorously rebuilding roads and renovating its airport in the hopes of winning the Olympics, while also encouraging the use of English and taking other steps to improve its bid.
Considering how security-conscious the Chinese authorities are, the change suggests that they are extremely concerned with the Olympic bid, which is to be decided this fall. 
Diplomats say that China has generally managed its application well and that Beijing will be one of the stronger contenders to get the Olympics.
 
An Unusual Vigor
For several years, Government agents have followed certain foreign journalists with a diligence that rarely surfaces in other endeavors. 
While Government ministries often empty by late afternoon, and take days to answer the simplest questions, three carloads of security agents can miraculously appear at 10 on a rainy Saturday night to pursue a foreign reporter.
Reporters for The New York Times, who have apparently been followed more than reporters from any other news organization, were followed almost every time they left their residence in recent months. 
But that kind of surveillance stopped abruptly about 10 days ago, and other journalists said they too had not been followed recently.
Diplomats from the United States and other countries are followed much less frequently than reporters, perhaps because the authorities are less concerned with their secrets getting out than with the embarrassment of having them splashed across foreign newspapers.
The Foreign Ministry and State Council News Office declined today to confirm or deny that the following of reporters had been suspended.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, asked for a comment, inquired who had told the reporter about the document. 
When the reporter declined to say, the spokesman added that it was difficult to make a comment without this information.
 
Harsh Punishment for Chinese
The Government is still extremely concerned with the flow of information to foreign journalists and diplomats, and it has severely punished Chinese accused of giving documents to foreigners. 
The Chinese in such cases are always punished far more harshly than the foreigner.
Wu Shichen, a mid-ranking editor at the official New China News Agency, was detained in October on charges of giving a Hong Kong reporter an advance copy of an important speech. 
Mr. Wu, who is accused of accepting money in exchange for the speech, was recently sentenced to 15 years in prison for revealing state secrets, a Beijing journalist said.
But that sentence seems unusually long and it cannot be confirmed. 
Officials have declined to comment.
The Hong Kong reporter who allegedly paid Mr. Wu for the document was detained for several days and then expelled from the country.
Bai Weiji, a former Foreign Ministry employee who was arrested in May for allegedly giving documents to The Washington Post, remains in custody but has not yet been tried. 
By some accounts, another Chinese who allegedly gave the documents to Mr. Bai may also be awaiting trial.
Chinese security agents searched the office of The Washington Post in May and confiscated what they said were secret documents -- apparently the ones that Mr. Bai is accused of supplying -- but did not expel or take other action against the newspaper's correspondent, Lena H. Sun.
 
Electronic Surveillance Goes On
While the following of foreign journalists may be suspended for now, surveillance will presumably continue in more subtle ways. 
Telephones are tapped, offices and homes are bugged, and Chinese are still asked to spy on their foreign acquaintances.
The problem for the security forces is that China has opened up so much in the last few years that surveillance has become more difficult: some Chinese cheerfully cooperate with State Security and then with equal cheerfulness discuss their cooperation with the foreign reporter. 
Others explain the workings of the telephone bugs to those who are being bugged.
Another problem is that State Security docks the salaries of its agents who allow a reporter to get away. 
For fear of losing wages, the agents therefore sometimes disobey orders and stay so close to the reporter that the following is very obvious.
