
For years when Judith Leeper drove a back road near here, she was mystified by glimpses, first, of copper domes and pagoda-like structures shining through the trees, then of a towering golden monument that glimmered in the California sun.
The mystery was cleared up on a recent Saturday when she joined 1,500 other visitors at an open house at Odiyan, a newly opened Tibetan Buddhist temple and study center in the mountains overlooking the Pacific about 100 miles north of San Francisco.
As more than 800 orange, yellow and red prayer flags, silk-screened with passages from sacred texts, snapped gloriously in the breezes, the visitors filed between walls of hundreds of prayer wheels, their copper cylinders, covered with mantras, encasing miles of tightly rolled prayer scrolls.
Odiyan's profusion of colors and images can astonish: a 108-foot-tall temple contains a central monument with 108,000 small gilded statues of Padmasambhava, a founding figure of Tibetan Buddhism revered as a second Buddha and believed to have been born miraculously, in an earlier incarnation, from a lotus blossom.
But no less striking is the fact that this repository of Tibetan sacred symbol, art and form was created almost entirely by several dozen American volunteers who, for two decades, learned both the spiritual discipline of Tibetan Buddhism and the practical skills of construction.
What is happening at Odiyan -- and at a growing number of other Buddhist centers around the country -- is part of a new chapter in the 2,500-year-old history of Buddhism, which spread from the tree in northern India where a young prince, Siddhartha Gautama, is believed by his followers to have attained perfect enlightenment.
Not only has the Buddhism that arrived on these shores with Chinese and Japanese immigrants been augmented by new waves of immigrants from Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand and Korea, but the interest in Buddhism among non-Asian Americans, once largely focused on the meditation and riddles of Japanese Zen Buddhism, has been reinforced by a diaspora of Tibetan Buddhist leaders, including the Dalai Lama, revered by his people as the incarnation of a compassionate heavenly being.
Buddhists now number at least 800,000 in the United States, according to a 1991 survey by the City University of New York, and some Buddhist organizations say that figure should be doubled or tripled. 
The number of Buddhist centers and publications is increasing rapidly.
Bruce Smith is part of this new chapter. 
Two decades ago, he was a geophysicist doing research on earthquakes. 
His pursuit of Japanese martial arts led him to take a course in meditation from Tarthang Tulku, one of the first prominent Tibetan lamas, or holy men, in the United States and the spiritual leader and organizer of Odiyan.
Now 51 years old, he has spent the last 17 years living and working at Odiyan alongside other volunteers -- an experience that he says has transformed his life even more than the regular practice of meditation.
Tarthang Tulku said Odiyan was part of an effort to preserve a form of Buddhism ravaged in its homeland by Chinese Communist rule and to implant its wisdom in a new land.
For the Buddha -- or Enlightened One, as Prince Siddhartha came to be known -- wisdom involved the realization that life is an endless cycle of birth, death and suffering, from which one can escape by compassionate living and disciplined insight into the impermanence of reality.
Spreading, over a thousand years, from India to Southeast Asia and then to China, Korea and Japan, Buddhism developed a wide variety of spiritual practices, subtle philosophical schools and forms of monastic living. 
And once Tibet became thoroughly Buddhist, between the 7th and 11th centuries, the country's isolation in the Himalayas made it a treasure chest of ancient teachings and elaborate beliefs and practices.
That body of teaching and way of life was threatened with extinction after the Chinese Communists occupied Tibet in 1950 and suppressed a rebellion in 1959, destroying monasteries, books and religious objects and detaining, executing or driving into hiding numerous monks and scholars.
Tarthang Tulku went into exile in India, to which the Dalai Lama, revered as a living god by Tibetans, later escaped. 
Then, in 1968, he came to the United States. 
He organized projects to preserve, print and distribute in both the West and Tibet 755 volumes of sacred texts. 
He also helped rebuild his original monastery in Tibet. 
Carrying out these tasks were individuals drawn to the meditation centers and classes he established in Berkeley, Brazil, Germany and the Netherlands.
The lama, who is now 60, praises Americans and the nation's religious liberty. 
"Americans in some way are very religious, generous and ethical," he said sitting and sipping tea in Odiyan's central temple, "but at the same time they are more neurotic and chaotic in their heads," something that he believes the disciplines of Buddhism could repair.
Odiyan -- the name comes from Oddiyana, a mythical land of Padmasambhava's birth -- is not designed to become a traditional monastery for celibate monks who take vows but rather a center where 15 to 50 serious lay students of Buddhism can live and work for short retreats or even years.
The buildings preserve a kind of nonwritten sacred text: images and objects vital to Tibetan Buddhism.
Tarthang Tulku designed the area as a replica of Samye, Tibet's first Buddhist monastery, and as a "mandala," a symbolic representation of cosmic forces.
At Odiyan, a simple one-story structure of rooms and living areas runs around the edge of a square approximately 100 yards on each side, which is surrounded in turn by a moat-like lagoon with swans and edged with formal gardens.
At the center is an 80-foot-tall temple with a bright copper dome. 
Smaller temples stand over the east, west, north and south gates. 
At some distance is a shimmering gold-leafed stupa, a 113-foot-high multitiered monument.
Built in accordance with sacred specifications and arrayed with texts, symbols and works of art, the structures are meant to convey multiple levels of Buddhist teaching in thousands of details. 
All of the physical patterns, as well as the natural beauty of the flowers, darting swallows and jasmine-scented air, are meant to gradually transform a person's consciousness. 
The fluttering prayer flags and prayer wheels powered by electricity, an American innovation, are believed to radiate multitudes of blessings and healing energy to counter harmful natural forces and human designs.
This luxuriance of image, color and celestial beings put Tibetan Buddhism into sharp contrast with the austerity and simplicity of Zen Buddhism, the form of Buddhism familiar to Americans.
Tibetan Buddhists believe that enlightenment can be achieved in one lifetime rather than through the series of reincarnations in which adherents of some other forms of Buddhism believe. 
Tibetan Buddhists say this can be done by rigorous chanting, and praying, by participating in ceremonies and by visualizing sacred beings. 
These complicated techniques demand, more strongly than in many other strands of Buddhism, submission to the guidance of a guru or teacher.
The question of the teacher or master's authority is one area of tension with American culture, according to American Buddhist leaders.
Tarthang Tulku agreed. 
Americans believe that "if you follow someone, you are brainwashed," he said. 
"That's the negative side, but the positive side is that if there is a good teacher, someone who has compassion, there will be genuine respect."
Not all the visitors to Odiyan last weekend were equally impressed. 
Ms. Leeper, the visitor from Sea Ranch, a few miles to the north, praised the effort to preserve Tibetan Buddhism but felt that the center had a slightly inauthentic aura and "didn't quite fit the land."
But a friend, Rosemary McGinnis, quoted her son-in-law as saying, "I don't believe in God, but I felt I had walked into a prayer."
