
For decades, Chinese intellectuals have brooded over the lack of a Chinese Nobel laureate in literature, half blaming the outside world for its ignorance, half wondering if their artists are up to standards and always bemoaning the severe language barrier. 
Only this week, a popular newspaper here ran articles on what it called the "Nobel blues."
So for many in the literary elite, the news that the coveted prize had gone to a writer in exile, the experimental playwright and novelist Gao Xingjiang, had a bittersweet quality. 
Reactions ranged from elation to bewilderment to suspicion of the Nobel Committee's motives.
The Communist Party, which denounced Mr. Gao when he wrote a play about the 1989 killings of demonstrators at Tiananmen Square, had a simple response. 
This morning the official news media did not report on the award at all, though word had already spread fast among the literati via the Internet and telephone.
Then, this afternoon, the Foreign Ministry said in a statement that while "China has had an outpouring of outstanding literary works and literary giants," this Nobel Prize had been used for "ulterior political motives."
The evening news briefly noted that a politically motivated Nobel had been given to a "French-nationality Chinese writer."
In an interview this afternoon, Jin Jianfan, secretary of the official China Writers Association, repeated the political charge, adding for good measure that when Mr. Gao worked in the association back in the 1980's, "we all had the view that his work was very, very average."
Mr. Gao made a mark in the Beijing theater scene in the early 1980's with his absurdist plays, in the style of Becket and Ionesco, and courted controversy with an essay attacking socialist realism in art. 
But he tired of the official constrictions and in 1987 moved to France, where he has lived ever since, producing plays, novels and paintings.
His works have not been performed in China for many years, and he is better known in Europe.
But he does have admirers among intellectuals who are struggling to make the avant-garde more respectable in China, and this award seems bound to play into a simmering cultural battle.
Though Mr. Gao is in the official doghouse, a recent issue of the Beijing magazine Avant-Garde Today published an essay extolling his work as trying to "rewrite China's mythical-poetic history through folklore."
An editor of the magazine, Shi Jian, said today by telephone from Nanjing, where he was attending a book fair, that thousands had shown up at the fair this afternoon for a hastily organized celebration of the award.
"There was a good buzz around here," Mr. Shi said. 
"Everyone is happy with the news."
Mr. Shi said it was understandable that a writer like Mr. Gao would be better received overseas than in China. 
One reason is that his work, while often drawing on Chinese themes, employs complex, unfamiliar Western experimental forms.
A second reason, Mr. Shi said, "is the fact that the creative space for work like this is so confined in China."
"For drama like his, which has elements of experimental theater, traditional opera and drama, Noh and other influences," Mr. Shi added, "there is very little space to develop and stage it here."
Han Shaogang, editor of the literary magazine Horizon, shared the general surprise at the selection of Mr. Gao. Writers like Mo Yan, the author of "Red Sorghum" and a succession of other inventive novels, and the dissident poet Bei Dao, who lives abroad, had been higher on nearly everyone's list.
But Mr. Han, who has kept up a friendship with Mr. Gao, also called the award "great news" and said he hoped it would be "a boost for literary creativity" in China.
Experimental painters, writers, performance artists and filmmakers from China have often found it easier to live abroad, where they can escape official pressures and incomprehension, and also find a greater commercial market for their work.
In turn, Chinese-born artists who achieve high honors abroad are often viewed with suspicion or jealousy here, sometimes by artists who are trying to work in China's still-daunting artistic environment, sometimes by party culture officials.
The surprising news of Mr. Gao's award prompted lively debate on China's Internet bulletin boards, the country's freest forums these days.
"What's the point of getting excited?" one writer asked. 
"This is just a Frenchman with a Chinese name who won the prize."
But others pointedly asked why the official press had been muzzled.
"A Chinese won the prize," another writer said. 
"His country did not congratulate him. 
And countless people who know nothing about him have attacked him. 
What is wrong with our people?"
