
Steering clear of another legal confrontation with the Chinese government, the top court in Hong Kong ruled today that defacing the Chinese flag is a crime. 
The decision was a victory for the local government and reversed a ruling by a lower court that said defacing the flag was a form of expression guaranteed by the constitution of this former British colony.
Striking down a Hong Kong law that protects the flag, legal experts said, could have led to a showdown with China. 
The new legislature adopted the law hours after the colony reverted to Chinese rule in 1997.
The flag decision was released a week after the court had said that Beijing had the right to overturn its landmark decision that granted residency to more than a million people from mainland China.
Taken together, the rulings prompted some critics here to contend that the Hong Kong judiciary had lost its independence.
"I'm afraid people will see this as a trend," the leader of the Hong Kong Democratic Party, Martin Lee, said. 
"It won't be long before Hong Kong goes down the same route as Singapore or mainland China, where the courts never rule against the government on sensitive cases."
Mr. Lee, a lawyer, refused to comment on the case itself.
Other legal experts noted that unlike the immigration case, where the court made a well-reasoned decision that Beijing overturned, the decision today involved a thorny issue that has bedeviled courts in the United States and Europe.
"I'm sure people will say the court is collapsing," the former solicitor general of Hong Kong, Daniel R. Fung, said. 
"But this ruling is not a knee-jerk response to executive pressure. 
On the contrary, the judges are looking at how other mature jurisdictions have approached this issue."
The case stemmed from a pro-democracy rally in January 1998 in which two men, Ng Kung-siu and Lee Kin-yun, carried heavily defaced Chinese and Hong Kong flags. 
Both flags were torn, smeared with black ink and had the Chinese word for "shame" scrawled on them.
Lawyers for the two argued that they had the right to express themselves, even by destroying the flags, under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which is enshrined in the Hong Kong Constitution. 
The government countered that the men had violated laws that protect national and regional flags. 
The defendants won their case on appeal.
In the 51-page ruling, Chief Justice Andrew Li acknowledged that the flag ordinance restricted civil liberties.
But Chief Justice Li said it did not stifle other forms of political expression, and he said it was justified because the Chinese flag symbolized Hong Kong's effort to integrate itself into the Chinese motherland.
"Protection of the national flag and the regional flag from desecration, having regard to their unique symbolism, will play an important part in the attainment of these goals," the judge declared.
In a concurring opinion, another justice, Kemal Bokhary, seemed eager to show that Hong Kong was squarely in the mainstream of international legal opinion. 
He noted that defacing the flag was a crime in Germany and Italy. 
The Portuguese colony of Macao, which returns to Chinese rule on Sunday, also recently banned the practice.
Judge Bokhary acknowledged that the ban was "just within the outer limits of constitutionality."
      
