
It was 1987, and Cai Weiyan was performing acrobatics at a Chinese sports school.
"A coach who was doing well with men in the pole vault asked me if I liked track and field and did I like pole-vaulting," she recalled yesterday. 
"I was 14. 
I didn't know anything about it. 
He said: 'Are you afraid?
Try it.'
I did. 
The first day, I couldn't clear the bar. 
By the end of the year, I did 3.15 meters" -- 10 feet 4 inches -- "and it was exciting."
In 1989, at another Chinese sports school, Sun Caiyun was playing many sports, including basketball.
"Before that," she said through the same translator, Zhou Xinmin, the manager of the Chinese track team now in New York, "I had no idea about the pole vault. 
A pole-vault coach saw I had a tall body. 
He asked me to try the pole vault. 
I tried it and liked it, but I lacked strength. 
The first time I cleared the bar, I did 2.80 meters," or 9-2 1/4.
Tomorrow night, in the 92d annual Chase Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden, Cai and Sun will compete in the women's pole vault. 
Last year, when America's leading indoor track meet introduced the event, it became one of the competitive highlights of the night. 
This year, with Cai, Sun and Daniela Bartova of the Czech Republic, there is great potential again.
In the 1998 world ranking by Track and Field News, Cai is third and Sun is eighth. 
They are the pioneers of a relatively new sport, which met wide resistance when it was introduced in the United States. 
Too unladylike, critics said.
"It was the same in China," Cai said. 
"When I start to vault, some teammates said this is a dangerous sport. 
I wasn't afraid."
Sun found the same reaction.
"Some friends said it wasn't an Olympic event," she said. 
"Some friends said this is a men's sport not fit for women. 
Now they think I made the right choice."
Good thinking. 
Sun became the first official world record-holder at 13-3 3/4, and five weeks later Cai raised the record to 13-4 1/4. 
In all, Sun has set world records 11 times indoors and 6 times outdoors. 
Their career bests are 14-3 1/4 for Cai and 14- 1/2 for Sun.
The world records are now held by Emma George of Australia -- 15- 3/4 outdoors and 14-11 indoors. 
The progress is amazing in an event for which world records were first recognized only five years ago and which has not yet been contested in a world outdoor championships or Olympics.
Women's pole-vaulting is still an esoteric sport. 
Cai said that perhaps 100 women in all of China are pole-vaulters. 
But last year alone, 17 women from 9 nations cleared 14 feet outdoors, led by George (15- 3/4), Bartova (14-9 1/2) and Stacy Dragila (14-8 1/4), the American record-holder and last year's Millrose winner. 
Dragila is injured now. 
Sun said that if men can clear 6 meters (19-8 1/4), which eight men have done in the last decade, then women can clear 5 meters (16-4 3/4).
But as the bar gets higher, the expectations do, too.
"It used to be a little easier," Cai said, "because China started the event. 
But now it's everywhere and it's high pressure, but it's also an encouragement for the sport."
Cai and Sun are the first Millrose athletes to come from mainland China. 
Li Tong ran in the men's hurdles at Millrose in the 1980's, but at the time he was a student at Washington State, where his name was Americanized to Tony Lee.
The Chinese pole-vaulters are a little Americanized, too. 
When Sun was asked if she knew she would be competing on the same floor where Michael Jordan had performed wonders, her eyes lighted, then saddened. 
"It's a pity,' she said, "that he is retiring from basketball."
