
For the seventh time since he took office, President Clinton will ask Congress, on Thursday, to renew China's trading privileges with the United States. 
That has always been a dicey proposition, though one that Mr. Clinton -- with aggressive lobbying help from companies with interests in China -- has always won.
But this year the battle over what are now called "normal trade relations" promises to be more confused, more emotional and far trickier than any time since the military crackdown in Tiananmen Square, 10 years ago. 
Just a few months ago, Mr. Clinton and the Chinese had hoped to be asking Congress for far more, for permanent trade privileges, as part of a deal that would usher China into the World Trade Organization.
Mr. Clinton's aides say that on Thursday the President will hold open the possibility that the bigger and more permanent deal will soon be struck, presumably after the furor dies down here over accusations of Chinese spying and in Beijing over bombing the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade. 
But some of Mr. Clinton's advisers said privately they feared that the chances of having a trade deal signed with the Chinese and through an angry Congress were increasingly remote.
"What we are watching," an adviser said last week, "is a seven-year initiative with China crumble in our hands."
Once the White House called that initiative the development of a "strategic partnership" with China, a phrase stricken from all official references to that country. 
So has the term "commercial diplomacy," once used to describe how increased economic engagement with China would strengthen ties in other arenas.
Now the White House, and business leaders, are arguing the opposite, why national security issues should be divorced from trade.
The White House's seeming ambivalence about how to tackle the vote, which usually becomes a Congressional referendum on the state of Chinese-American relations, is mirrored by the Republicans' ambivalence. 
Roughly half the Republican Presidential hopefuls, including Gary Bauer, Patrick Buchanan and Steve Forbes, argue that the spy case underscores why the United States should suspend negotiations with China over entering the W.T.O.
The other half, including George W. Bush and John McCain, have carefully separated the issues, with Mr. McCain, chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, arguing: "We should make judgments on the basis of our trade interests. 
The scandal is not that they spied on us, but that we let them."
For many executives the debate on responding to the spying accusations echoes the debate that played out in the first two years of the Administration, over tying China's human rights record to its trade privileges. 
Mr. Clinton himself started out that way and reversed course, separating human rights issues from arguments over the annual renewal.
The chairman of Intel Corporation, Andrew Grove, said he saw the relationship in terms of parallel universes. 
"There is the political and geopolitical universe, where nations have problems and collaborations," Mr. Grove said. 
"There is the trade universe, and then there is a universe of technology issues. 
And what we have to deal with -- whether we want to tie those three together, so that if hits a brick wall they all stop making progress."
Mr. Grove's concern, one that he and other technology executives plan to voice here next week, is that Congress will link the trade vote to new restrictions on technology transfers.
"It's entirely possible that higher-end Pentium III's will not be salable in China," Mr. Grove said, referring to top-of-the-line Intel microprocessors. 
"Imagine that, a personal computer you will be able to buy for $1,200 at CompUSA by the end of the year could not be shipped to China."
Mr. Grove and other technology executives argue that such restrictions would not deny technology to China, but that they would rather force China to develop its own processes. 
"And then you have to ask are we better off in any of those universes -- the political one or the trade one or the technological one -- if we force them to build up their technological base on their own?"
In Congress, though, such subtleties have not been debated. 
After Tiananmen, Congress imposed trade and technology restrictions, many of which have since been lifted. 
There may be the same reaction this time.
But some experts on Capitol Hill say they believe that when passions cool, there will once again be momentum for a trade deal that opens China's markets.
"In the end," said Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who is pushing for permanent trade privileges, "people will come to realize that all the concessions in this trade agreement are on China's side."
      
