
America's global trade deficit soared to $12.7 billion in January, the largest gap between imports and exports since the Commerce Department adopted a new method of measuring international trade in 1992. 
The figures included a 36 percent increase in the deficit with China that will further complicate the politics of Vice President Al Gore's trip to Beijing next week.
Mr. Gore's aides have made clear that they want to steer away from economic issues during his visit, in large part because questions of trade policy have lurked just beneath the surface of the investigations into Asian donations to the Democratic Presidential campaign.
But the figures today showed a $3.7 billion trade deficit with China for the month, compared with $2.7 billion a year ago. 
The widening disparity continues a trend suggesting that the trade gap with China this year will rival the one with Japan. 
That puts further pressure on the Administration to force China into lowering a vast array of trade barriers in negotiations, now under way in Geneva, concerning China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
Mr. Gore had hoped to make only glancing references to that subject during his meeting with China's leaders next week. 
But as one senior Administration official said today, "This is not the time to appear soft on Chinese trade issues."
C. Fred Bergsten, the director of the Institute for International Economics, who has been deeply involved in Asian trade issues, noted today that "there's no question now that Gore will have to go harder on market access issues."
The pressure on the Administration also increased today because three leading Democrats, including Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House minority leader, introduced legislation that would require a Congressional vote before the Administration could agree to let China join the World Trade Organization.
White House officials have said in the past that they would "consult" Congress, but they want to avoid a lengthy debate that could link China's human rights record or arms proliferation to its membership in the club of trading nations.
"This is not a garden-variety entry into the W.T.O.," said Mr. Gephardt, who is widely considered a potential competitor with Mr. Gore for the Democratic Presidential nomination in three years. 
"There are enormous implications of how this is done, for every worker in America and every major company in America."
At the White House today, Mr. Gore's aides changed course on one element of the trip, saying that the Vice President would attend the signing of a deal to sell roughly $1 billion in Boeing aircraft to China, if the deal is sealed in time for his visit. 
Earlier this week, when the Chinese offer was first made known, Mr. Gore's office said he would "consider" attending the signing.
In the past, that would have been just the kind of event that Administration officials would have unhesitatingly jumped at to make the case that exports and economic engagement with China were sustaining high-paying jobs in the United States. 
But recently there has been a rethinking of how deeply President Clinton and Mr. Gore should involve themselves in individual transactions. 
In part, that is in response to the Administration's critics, who say that it has been too close to business executives with interests in China and too mercantilistic in relations with Beijing.
The figures released today contained other complications for Mr. Clinton. The deficit with Mexico was flat compared with January 1996 but rose sharply from the end of last year, just as the Administration is seeking approval from Congress to negotiate an extension of the North American Free Trade Agreement, to embrace Chile and, ultimately, other Latin American nations.
Reading too much into one month's trade figures is always risky, because a few major sales -- especially of aircraft or computers -- can send the monthly numbers sharply in one direction or another. 
Over all, the decline of six-tenths of a percent in exports, to $70.8 billion, reflected a drop in military shipments and a slowdown in aircraft deliveries. 
Imports of goods and services rose 2.2 percent to $83.5 billion, due in part to increased auto shipments from Canada as well as higher prices and greater demand for imported oil. 
Using the old method, the Commerce Department said January's deficit of $19 billion for goods alone was the largest ever.
The widening trade deficit also reflects broader trends, including the fact that America's economy is growing at a faster pace than most of its major trading partners, sucking in imports and drying up markets abroad. 
The rise in the value of the dollar in recent months also appears to be starting to cut into America's exports.
