
The nation's trade deficit narrowed markedly in June as exports rebounded to a new record and imports subsided for the first time this year, the Commerce Department reported today.
The decline in the deficit, to $8.2 billion from $9.54 billion in May, followed two sizable increases and reflected what analysts said was the faster growth of the American economy in the spring than had initially been estimated. 
Stocks rose and the dollar advanced against most leading currencies. 
Yields on Treasury bonds increased.
"This shows a lot of strength," said James F. O'Sullivan, an economist at J. P. Morgan & Company. 
"The trend in exports is booming," he added, despite the dollar's strength and the lackluster performance of various trading partners whose economies have only begun to revive.
Despite the decline in June, the most recent month for which figures are available, the trade deficit for the first half of 1997 was still about 6 percent larger than in the corresponding period of 1996, though below the level of the first half of 1995.
And while the deficits narrowed with Canada and Mexico, two of the country's biggest trade partners, imbalances with China and Japan increased significantly, prompting fresh expressions of displeasure by the Clinton Administration.
The trend toward widening deficits with Asian countries could increase, economists said, because of economic difficulty accompanying currency crises in several South and South Asian nations.
Nonetheless, the report provided further evidence of the American economy's recent strength, showing that demand for goods and services from overseas was helping to keep growth rolling along.
Indeed, combining the latest trade data with figures showing a larger buildup in inventories than had been thought, analysts now say that the economy probably grew at a rate upward of 3.5 percent in the April-June quarter, perhaps by as much as 4 percent.
That would be considerably above the 2.2 percent pace the Commerce Department estimated at the end of July. 
If borne out, it could undermine a widely held view that the economy had slowed substantially, as policy makers desired, from a first-quarter growth rate of 4.9 percent, which raised concerns about resurgent inflation.
And if consumer spending revives, as it shows signs of doing, analysts said the Federal Reserve could decide to cool the economy by raising interest rates. 
On Tuesday, the Fed made no change in rates, apparently preferring to sit tight without clearer evidence of inflation. 
The next policy meeting is scheduled for Sept. 
30.
Today's trade report showed a June deficit nearly $2 billion smaller than had been expected. 
In addition, the May deficit was revised downward by $700 million from an initial figure of more than $10 billion.
But despite the overall decline, the Clinton Administration continues to be stymied in its efforts to reduce the trade deficits with big Asian nations. 
"Our trade with China is problematic," Secretary of Commerce William M. Daley said at a briefing. 
He noted that exports so far this year had risen 3 percent while imports from China jumped 26 percent.
"There is no reason why our products cannot have a higher presence in the Chinese market, as they do in ours," said Mr. Daley, who plans to visit China in October.
June was only the fourth time that the American deficit with China surpassed the deficit with Japan. 
Major contributors to the China deficit, which was up $500 million to $4.3 billion, were imports of clothing, shoes and toys, the Commerce Department said.
With Japan, the American deficit swelled $500 million to $4.1 billion -- with the imbalance in auto trade, now about $2.5 billion, and in office machines accounting for much of the increase.
Mr. Daley urged Japan to be "more aggressive" in opening its economy and not rely on exports for growth. 
On Friday, the Administration sent a letter to the Japanese complaining about slow application of an agreement to open the Japanese market to American automotive products.
In contrast to the imbalances with Asians, the United States sold record exports to Mexico, reducing that deficit by $500 million in June, to $1.2 billion. 
The deficit with Canada, the other partner in the North American Free Trade Agreement, eased $100 million, to $1.4 billion.
Over all, exports climbed nine-tenths of 1 percent, to $78.4 billion, while imports eased seven-tenths of 1 percent from May's record, to $86.6 billion, the report showed.
Analysts were surprised by the lower imports because an earlier report showed a big jump in inventories held by wholesalers for the month. 
Imported goods tend to enter the country through these middlemen.
About two-thirds of the revision in the May deficit, to $9.5 billion from $10.2 billion, reflected stronger exports, the department's report also showed.
As usual, the June deficit would have been far bigger without surpluses in services and in advanced technology products, of $6.8 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively.
