
In two signs that the global economic crisis is easing, South Korea said today that it was immediately paying back nearly $3 billion in emergency loans that kept it afloat last year, and China successfully raised $1 billion from foreign investors.
The South Korean move was a sign that the country, still deep in recession, now felt confident enough to draw down its reserves to repay the International Monetary Fund.
The Chinese move to raise money on Wall Street -- with a bond offering that was in such demand that the country raised twice as much money as had been expected -- made it the first emerging-market economy in Asia to issue international bonds since the Russian default in August.
Neither event by itself is evidence that the crises are over. 
But both are indicators that investors around the world take into account when deciding when a panic is over, whether, in short, it is safe to go back in the water.
The I.M.F., which has been desperate to declare a restoration of confidence in the markets, immediately seized on the South Korean repayment as a sign that the country had hit bottom. 
The managing director of the fund, Michel Camdessus, called the repayment an "important watershed in the process of Korea's emergence from last year's foreign-exchange crisis."
The bailout of South Korea, which the fund led, totaled $58 billion. 
The country drew on just part of that to meet its obligations this year.
China's move, raising money that a country with $144 billion in foreign reserves really does not need, was a sign that investors still hungered to invest there, despite continuing risks elsewhere in Asia. 
When the offering was priced today China had to pay investors an interest rate only 2.8 percent higher than the United States Treasury pays on 10-year Treasury securities. 
The 10-year note was set to yield 7.346 percent.
"At this moment, if China can indicate that our economy has the resilience to withstand external shocks we can also help boost confidence with the region," Deputy Finance Minister Jin Liqun said in a telephone interview today from the New York headquarters of Goldman, Sachs & Company, the lead underwriter of the offering along with Credit Suisse First Boston.
To persuade investors to return to Asia, Mr. Jin made extensive presentations on Tuesday in New York about Chinese prospects, arguing that China had weathered the worst of the storm.
China is an exception. 
It has fixed the exchange rate of its yuan against the dollar, and Mr. Jin repeatedly said today that "we certainly are committed to maintaining the value of our currency," though did not specify for how long.
The solidity of the implicit guarantee is important to investors, who saw Thailand, South Korea and Indonesia end similar commitments last year.
