
Two Vietnamese fishermen who prosecutors said were part of a criminal organization that held more than a hundred Chinese immigrants for ransom were convicted on Friday of kidnapping and conspiracy.
The Vietnamese men, Johney Pham and Nhat Duc Nguyen, of Cape May, N.J., were found guilty in Federal District Court in Manhattan of taking part in an international human-smuggling operation that shipped 105 illegal aliens on a Taiwanese freighter from China to the United States in March 1994.
The man accused of leading the organization, Chen Chong Biao, is still a fugitive, prosecutors said. 
Thirteen others have pleaded guilty in Manhattan to charges ranging from kidnapping to smuggling aliens. 
Two other gang members were convicted at trial, and three pleaded guilty in Baltimore.
After 65 days at sea, the Chinese aliens, who had promised to pay the smugglers $25,000 each for transport to America, were ferried to land aboard Vietnamese-owned fishing trawlers in Cape May.
Then they were packed into unventilated U-Haul trucks and driven to houses in Maryland, New Jersey and Queens, witnesses testified. 
The aliens were held hostage at gunpoint and severely beaten, as gang members tried to force them to call their families in China and plead with them to pay ransom to other conspirators in Manhattan's Chinatown, witnesses said.
The three-week trial opened another window on the ugly underworld of smuggling humans from China to America, which gained wide attention in June 1993, when the Golden Venture ran aground off the Rockaways and 10 illegal immigrants drowned trying to swim ashore.
Defense lawyers for Mr. Pham and Mr. Nhat admitted that their clients had agreed to help hide the illegal immigrants in the 1994 incident but claimed they did not know the Chinese gang members were holding people against their will and demanding ransoms.
But prosecutors depicted Mr. Nhat as a full partner in the smuggling operation. 
They said Mr. Nhat was the leader of a Vietnamese group that helped the Chinese smugglers led by Mr. Chen to get their human cargo ashore aboard two fishing trawlers -- the Blue Chip and the Captain Denny.
Mr. Pham, who was paid $5,000 to drive the rented trucks packed with people to houses in Maryland and New Jersey, also knew the immigrants were being held hostage, the prosecutors said.
"Nhat Duc Nguyen and Johney Pham shuttled victims around like cargo and delivered them to gun-toting guards at the Maryland safehouses," Allen D. Applbaum, a prosecutor, said in his summation. 
"They are all over this conspiracy from beginning to end."
Each defendant faces a maximum sentence of life in prison. 
Judge Louis L. Stanton set sentencing for March 1996.
Though the prosecution presented more than 30 witnesses, the most condemning testimony came from two former members of the ring who testified against Mr. Pham and Mr. Nhat in exchange for reduced charges.
The former members, Chen Chong Jei and Thai Van Nguyen, were on the Blue Chip when it picked up the illegal immigrants and helped guard the immigrants at various times during their ordeal.
Mr. Chen also testified about meetings in March between Mr. Nhat and the other Mr. Chen, who is accused of being the gang leader, at which they hammered out details of their agreement. 
The meetings took place in Chinatown and in Atlantic City, he said.
The operation was smashed on April 5, 1994, when agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Immigration and Naturalization Service raided the houses in New York and Maryland, releasing more than 60 illegal aliens who had not paid ransom.
At trial, the Government presented transcripts of translations of secretly recorded telephone calls from two cellular phones the smugglers used to call the hostages' relatives in China. 
In some transcripts, the immigrants plead for their lives, saying they have been severely beaten.
The most chilling testimony came from one of the hostages, who was identified in court documents as Zhu Zchin Di. 
He described his ordeal from the January day he boarded a fishing boat in China, to the day in April when Federal agents freed him from the smugglers.
Mr. Zhu said he paid the smugglers $10,000 in China and planned to get a job at a restaurant and pay off the rest in $1,000 monthly payments.
He told how several of the immigrants were injured trying to climb aboard the freighter from a fishing boat in rough seas off the coast of China.
Once they arrived in the United States, instead of being taken to New York to find a job, Mr. Zhu said he was held in Mr. Nhat's attic in Cape May for almost two days.
Then, he said, he was taken in the back of a rented truck to a house in Maryland that amounted to a makeshift prison, complete with armed guards and handcuffs. 
He said he was told that if he tried to leave he would be killed.
During his 10 days of captivity, the guards beat the immigrants mercilessly, forcing them to call their relatives for money repeatedly, he said.      
