
In a last-ditch effort to avert a political crisis, the United Nations Security Council urged North Korea today to preserve evidence of how much nuclear fuel it may have diverted to its weapons program.
Adopting a position worked out earlier today among the five countries with veto power -- the United States, China, Russia, Britain and France -- the Security Council issued what amounted to a final warning that the North Koreans not cross an important threshold.
The statement the Security Council approved unanimously today carries less weight than a full Council resolution, but was politically palatable to the Chinese, whose support is important. 
The statement also had no explicit threat of economic sanctions, another move to win China's approval.
In a parallel diplomatic move reflecting the situation's increasing urgency, Secretary of State Warren Christopher sent a message to the Chinaese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, over the weekend imploring Beijing to use its influence to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear program.
President Clinton cited China's ability to put pressure on North Korea as one reason he decided last week to renew China's favorable trade status with virtually no conditions. 
But it remained unclear whether the Administration's conciliatory approach toward Bejing would yield the benefits that the White House has claimed.
Other senior Administration officials have said publicly that they simply do not know whether Beijing is willing or able to influence the North Koreans, or support tough economic sanctions in the United Nations if North Korea continues to defy international efforts to halt its nuclear program.
China's concerns are twofold. 
American officials say Beijing shares Washington's goal of having a nuclear-free Korean peninsula. 
But China also does not want to risk the instability that imposing sanctions on the North could bring. 
China has historically opposed applying economic sanctions to rogue nations.
Today's debate among the five permanent members, in fact, centered on how tough the statement should be. 
American officials said France sought to make explicit the threat of economic sanctions if North Korea failed to comply, but China balked at that wording.
But no one doubts that the crisis has intensified in recent days as North Korea has stepped up a seemingly relentless effort to remove spent fuel rods from a nuclear reactor. 
One Administration official said today that the pace of withdrawal had accelerated even beyond the heightened tempo first detected last week.
The International Atomic Energy Agency, which sent inspectors to observe the removal of fuel rods at North Korea's main reactor at Yongbyon, has cautioned that the North is within days of destroying important evidence of how much nuclear fuel has been shifted to its weapons program.
Washington has threatened to seek economic sanctions against the North if the evidence is ruined. 
North Korea has denied that it has diverted fuel but at the same time has refused to agree to allow inspections to resolve the issue. 
The Government in the North has said it would consider sanctions tantamount to an act of war.
 
Time Slipping Away
The hastily convened meeting of the five permanent members today reflected the view of many officials that the time to reach a diplomatic solution is slipping away, and that a Security Council debate on sanctions may come soon.
"There's a growing gloom that the possibility to preserve historical analysis will be destroyed," said one senior American official, who had expressed some optimism as late as Saturday that a compromise could be worked out.
Administration officials expressed exasperation at the latest twist in the tortuous talks with the North Koreans, where optimistic predictions have repeatedly collapsed under warnings of impending confrontation.
Just last week, the Administration signaled a conciliatory stance toward the North, offering to open a new round of high-level talks about diplomatic and economic ties that North Korea has long sought.
 
U.S. Goes the Last Mile
"We've walked up to this point before, and there's always been some way in which that irrevocable action has been avoided by them," said a senior American official. 
"Whether this time we'll play the same cat-and-mouse game, or this will be the action to trigger stronger measures, like sanctions, we probably won't know until Tuesday or Wednesday."
The Administration has argued to countries reluctant to consider sanctions, like China, that Washington has gone the last mile diplomatically. 
The Administration has offered North Korea political and economic inducements if it would halt the removal of fuel rods, and would only resort to sanctions once all diplomatic options were exhausted.
At issue now is the atomic energy agency's demand that North Korea put aside 300 of the 8,000 fuel rods so that measurements might be carried out in the future to determine how much plutonium the North might have diverted to its weapons program in past years.
Hans Blix, the agency's director, said last week that the North had already removed more than 3,000 of the rods, effectively discharging nearly half the fuel in the reactor's core. 
Two international inspectors remain at the site.
American officials have held out hope that a technical compromise could be worked out in which the North identify the 300 crucial fuel rods for future analysis in a different way than how the atomic energy agency insisted.
