
In a videotaped address that seemed to radiate across Asia with its admonitions against intolerance by authoritarian governments and violence against women, the Burmese Nobel laureate, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, today opened a meeting of private women's groups gathered from all over the world to shape the issues of the Fourth World Conference on Women, which opens on Monday.
"For millenia women have dedicated themselves almost exclusively to the task of nurturing, protecting and caring for the young and the old, striving for the conditions of peace that favor life as a whole," said Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi (pronounced awng sahn soo chee).
"It is time to apply in the arena of the world the wisdom and experience" women have gained, she added.
Her criticism of repressive and male-dominated governments was as blunt as any statement she has made since her release from house arrest this summer, and she said her videotaped message had only reached China after unspecified "difficulties."
The address was an extraordinary beginning for what may be the largest convocation of women ever assembled to lobby world governments -- if only because it was delivered in China. 
The Communist Party leadership here has become so intolerant to the kind of challenge Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi represents that it has jailed thousands of dissidents and persecuted those who have undertaken even modest efforts to petition for democratic reform.
The women's meetings here, an hour away from the main conference in Beijing, are private and separate, yet officially connected to the main conference by an agreement between the United Nations and China.
Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's message was in marked contrast to the official male-led Burmese delegation, which, reports say, will insist Burmese women already have full equality with men.
"Insecure people tend to be intolerant," she said, "and their intolerance unleashes forces that threaten the security of others."
In the address, recorded in Myanmar, formerly Burma, she said women have not been given political power in countries around the world and have been exploited in Asia's sex trade.
"It is want that has driven so many of our young girls across our borders to a life of sexual slavery where they are subject to constant humiliation and ill treatment," she said. 
"It is fear of persecution for their political beliefs that has made so many of our people feel that even in their own homes, they cannot live in dignity and security."
The official Chinese news media did not report her words, but the many foreign shortwave broadcasts that reach China are likely to carry the speech.
More than 4,000 women showed up for Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's address, at a converted cinema that sat only 1,500. 
Most were turned away.
It was not clear what prevented her from delivering the speech in person, except that her arrival as an pro-democracy opposition leader would have drawn obvious parallels to China's suppresion of its own opposition movement.
The opening day of the conference, where more than 17,000 delegates have arrived so far, was also marked by acts of defiance against the Chinese authorities, who have erected one of the most pervasive and intrusive security environments ever put in place for a United Nations-sponsored meeting.
Outside, the human rights group Amnesty International staged a demonstration to call attention to the plight of political prisoners around the world.
The Chinese authorities had said they would not tolerate demonstrations outside the perimeter of the conference site here, and they repeated today that they will not brook any criticism of Chinese leaders.
"The Chinese have said they will not allow free speech on the grounds of the forum," said Pierre Sane, secretary general of Amnesty International. 
"We're calling their bluff."
Addressing the security problems, Irene M. Santiago, the executive director of the conference, said, "We are really going to hold the U.N. accountable to us" to insure that freedom of expression is guaranteed and that harrassment of delegates and journalists is ended.
During a news conference today, Ms. Santiago also spoke with exasperation about the problems that have afflicted the forum because of inadequate services and the physical separation from the conference in Beijing.
But she added, some Chinese officials have tried to help the women make the best of the site, which she said was far superior to that of the Nairobi conference in 1985.
      
