
A United Nations panel has recommended that a new international tribunal be convened to try about a dozen senior Khmer Rouge officials on charges of crimes against humanity while they ruled Cambodia, according to diplomats and senior Administration officials.
Under the recommendation, a separate Cambodian truth commission would consider all other cases.
But in a sign of the growing tensions between China and the United States, the Chinese have told Administration officials who are lobbying for a tribunal that Beijing would veto the idea if it is brought before the United Nations Security Council, those officials said. 
The Khmer Rouge relied almost exclusively on Chinese support during their rule, which led to the deaths of nearly two million Cambodians from 1975 to 1979.
"China has always emphasized it defers to the domestic decision of Cambodia," said an Administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"The only way the Chinese will not veto this is if the Cambodian Government goes to the U.N. Security Council and asks for it."
The recommendation for a tribunal was given to the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, last week, but will not officially be made public for several weeks, officials said.
In contradictory statements during the last two months, Mr. Hun Sen has alternately complained that the world is at least a decade late in condemning the Khmer Rouge, has given half-hearted support for an international tribunal and has questioned whether a trial would lead to new violence.
At the same time, Mr. Hun Sen has grown closer to China, signing five new agreements in Beijing last month that provide Cambodia with increased trade and economic benefits. 
In the same month, China's Foreign Minister, Tang Jiaxuan, said in Bangkok that Western nations, especially the United States, had come up with the idea of trying the Khmer Rouge, which he said was inappropriate because "these are internal problems of Cambodia" and should be decided only by the Cambodians.
"China has outmaneuvered the United States once again," said Stephen R. Heder, a professor of political science at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London and a Cambodian scholar.
"It's highly unlikely that Hun Sen can be turned around. 
He's been prepared to have a trial or not have a trial depending on the highest bid and China and its friends are willing to give him economic benefits, security guarantees and general diplomatic support that the United States can't offer."
The proposal does contain a way to circumvent a possible Chinese veto. 
The proposed International Criminal Tribunal for Cambodia could be put before the General Assembly for a vote, should it be blocked in the Security Council. 
But the five permanent members of the Council, including the United States, are wary of setting such a precedent.
Written by three outside experts, the proposal for a Cambodia tribunal includes innovations based on the experiences in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and South Africa, among other nations, according to officials. 
To set up the tribunal quickly and to save money, the offices of the tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will be used. 
The trial of the top dozen or more officials would be held at the Hague, in Manila or in Canberra.
The truth commission, which was the idea of Thomas Hammaberg, the Secretary General's Special Representative on Human Rights in Cambodia, would be established in Cambodia and would allow Cambodians to have a full airing of what went on in one of this century's worst cases of mass murder.
"It's a good balance of the twin imperatives of justice and national reconciliation," said Craig Etcheson, program director of The International Monitor Institute and the former head of the Cambodian Documentation Center. 
"You establish a record through the tribunal and at the same time you allow Cambodians to feel that their suffering has been acknowledged and to find their way to reach social reconciliation within their community."
Mr. Hun Sen also said he is reluctant to approve a tribunal because world powers ignored his requests for nearly two decades to set up a Khmer Rouge trial, waiting until it suited their timetable.
From 1979 to 1991 Cambodia was hostage to the Asian cold war, and the United States, among other countries, refused to even officially acknowledge the mass killings for fear of upsetting China. 
Then, the Khmer Rouge signed a peace treaty and other countries worried about upsetting Cambodia's delicate recovery.
It was only in 1997 that a real push began, stimulated in part by Mr. Hun Sen and his then co-Prime Minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh. 
They petitioned the Secretary General that June asking "for the assistance of the United Nations and the international community in bringing to justice those persons responsible for the genocide and crimes against humanity during the rule of the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979."
Pointing out that Cambodia did not have the "resources or the expertise" to conduct a trial, Mr. Hun Sen argued that "only in this way can this tragedy be brought to a full and final conclusion."
Two weeks later, however, Mr. Hun Sen overthrew Prince Ranariddh and his ardor for a trial has since cooled.
There is little dispute over which Khmer Rouge leaders should be tried and whether there is sufficient evidence to convict them. 
At the top of the list is Nuon Chea, second to Pol Pot, the head of the regime who died last April, followed by Ta Mok and Khieu Samphan. 
Mr. Nuon Chea and Mr. Khieu Samphan turned themselves in to Mr. Hun Sen's Government in December and are living in a western Cambodian city with other Khmer Rouge defectors. 
Mr. Ta Mok is at large in the jungles of western Cambodia.
Cambodians fear that the long delay will prevent a trial from ever being held. 
According to a recent private poll cited by senior Administration officials, 80 percent of Cambodians favored an international tribunal. 
In a smaller survey done in 1997 by the Cambodian Documentation Center some 75 percent of Cambodians favored a trial.
While Secretary General Kofi Annan has yet to read the proposal, senior United Nations officials say he is worried about the precedent set by the arrest in Great Britain of General Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator.
"The Secretary General is listening to the Pinochet argument that it is better to bury the mistakes of the past, a senior United Nations official said.
      
