
Despite heavy lobbying by the United States, China narrowly escaped criticism of its human rights record today in a vote by the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
The commission voted 21 to 20 to reject a resolution expressing concern about human rights in China. 
Russia voted against the proposal.
The resolution would have obliged the commission to investigate human rights in China. 
That would have been considered an insult to China as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council.
The proposed resolution cited reports of torture and other violations, but it also praised the Government for improving the lives of its people through economic and legal reforms.
China's representative, Jin Yongjian, said the sponsors had "turned a blind eye to the achievements of China in the field of human rights."
Even though the measure was defeated, human rights groups regarded the vote as a victory because it was the first time the commission had formally considered the China rights issue at all.
"For the first time the commission is looking at the human rights records of the Security Council members," said John H. F. Shattuck, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights.
Last week the panel criticized Russia for using force to stop the southern republic of Chechnya from seceding. 
On Tuesday it considered and overwhelmingly rejected a Cuban resolution expressing concern about racial discrimination in the United States, Mr. Shattuck said.
The commission, in the final week of its annual six-week session, also took these actions today:
*Condemned the Sudan, 33 to 7, for summary executions, killings, detentions, slavery, abuses against women and children, forced displacement and systematic torture, and called for talks on the establishment of a permanent system of rights monitors.
*Condemned Iran, 28 to 8, for a high number of executions and cases of torture, for discrimination against women and non-Islamic religions and for excessive force in suppressing dissent.
*Rejected, 21 to 17, a resolution criticizing Nigeria for banning some newspapers and for torture, executions and restrictions on leaving the country.
*Denounced Iraq, 31 to 1, for "massive and extremely grave violations" including "broad-based discrimination and widespread terror," and expressed "special alarm" over Iraq's refusal to make use of United Nations provisions to meet the basic needs of the Iraqi people.
The commission also adopted without a vote resolutions expressing concern over human rights in Haiti, Zaire and Myanmar.
Other resolutions urged Haiti to set up an independent police force, called on Zaire to end torture, arbitrary arrest, summary executions and forced displacement of certain communities, and deplored Myanmar's military offensive against political opponents.
