
In a sign of the new importance that Congress is placing on China's growing international power, lawmakers have taken several steps recently to insure that intelligence officials track the country, and particularly its military, more closely.
Not since the cold war, when the Soviet Union was subject to similar measures, have members of Congress pressed for such an extensive effort to keep tabs on a foreign power.
Last week the House passed a provision in the intelligence authorization act calling for a report to Congress within one year on Chinese intelligence and military activities that affect the United States.
Two weeks ago the House approved creation of a center, financed with $5 million from the Pentagon, to employ academics independent from policy makers to study Chinese military affairs. 
The center is needed, the act says, because of the "low priority accorded to the study of Chinese strategic and military affairs within the Government and within the academic community."
Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who co-sponsored the provision for the intelligence reports, said, "I don't think we have enough counterintelligence activity going on concerning China, as well as straight intelligence gathering, especially for a country with so much military capability."
The Senate has not passed either measure, but Congressional aides said approval was likely, suggesting that both provisions might become law later this year.
The Senate Intelligence Committee is considering hearings on China soon, including an option for an open hearing, and the House Intelligence Committee has held several closed sessions on China in recent weeks, Congressional aides said.
These new steps come as Chinese efforts to influence American domestic politics are at the center of Senate hearings into campaign finance irregularities. 
Members of Congress have also begun pressing for ways to insure that sales of American technology to China, including supercomputers that can be used to make lighter and more efficient nuclear warheads, are subject to greater governmental scrutiny.
The Pentagon welcomed Congress's intent to set up a center at the National Defense University, a branch of the Defense Department, to study Chinese military affairs.
"We believe it's a positive step to help focus attention on an important country in the coming decades," said Charles Wells, a spokesman for the Defense Intelligence Agency, the intelligence arm of the Pentagon.
Other intelligence officials gave differing assessments of whether the intelligence community was doing a good job of evaluating China's strategic and military plans.
"There is a tremendous amount of analytical work on the Chinese military" being produced already, one official said. 
A senior intelligence official said the number of people studying China had increased and the quality of their work was "better than it has ever been."
But another official said the end of the cold war had not brought about a needed reallocation of resources.
"The proportion of dollars spent on studying China in a strategic context has stayed about the same since the end of the cold war, and hardly anyone is looking beyond 15 years," by which time China could become a significant power, another official said. 
All of the officials spoke on the condition that they not be identified.
Increasingly, Congress has pushed intelligence officials to file public reports on China. 
Last year's intelligence authorization act required a report twice a year by the Director of Central Intelligence on the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
The most recent report found that China was the biggest supplier of such weapons.
But most of the intelligence work on China is secret. 
And some of it is contracted out to experts.
In 1995 American intelligence officials hired outside consultants to analyze China's aerospace abilities, including the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which has a long history of joint ventures with China, Government and industry officials said.
But now, China's dealings with McDonnell Douglas are the subject of a criminal investigation, adding to concerns by some officials about whether the Federal Government is looking in the right places in its efforts to understand China better.
McDonnell Douglas, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Science Applications International Corporation, the prime contractor responsible for the study of Chinese aerospace, have no comment, their spokesmen said.
In 1994 a Chinese state-owned company acquired aerospace machines from McDonnell Douglas, some of which were improperly diverted to a Chinese military plant in Nanchang, leading to the criminal inquiry. 
Part of the inquiry involves an attempt by McDonnell Douglas, while still working on the intelligence consultancy, to obtain sensitive American satellite photos of the Nanchang plant, American officials said.
The request for the photos was denied, and no one has been charged in the case, which is under investigation by a Federal grand jury here.
