
The Clinton Administration has determined that China has violated an international arms control agreement by shipping sensitive missile technology to Pakistan and therefore must be subjected to United States economic sanctions, officials said today.
Officials said that the Administration has yet to decide on the nature of the sanctions that will be imposed on China as a result of the violation of the agreement, the Missile Technology Control Regime.
Under American law, the Administration is required to impose varying degrees of economic sanctions depending on the seriousness of the violation. 
The law also gives the Administration the authority to impose sanctions and then waive them if that is deemed to be in the national interest.
 
Strictest Penalty Not Imposed
State Department officials met today and decided not to impose the strictest measure of economic sanctions since the intelligence agencies determined that the Chinese had not shipped actual missiles, but rather technology that would allow Pakistan to build M-11 missiles, officials said.
But even if a trade embargo is limited to electronic equipment, space systems or other technology, this could affect a multibillion-dollar market.
The State Department officials would not provide any details on sanctions since China has not been officially notified of the determination. 
But this evening, they began telling members of Congress of the decision to impose the measures.
And several officials confirmed that a determination had been reached that China's actions were a violation of the arms control treaty. 
Officials said an announcement of sanctions could come as early as Wednesday.
"I don't have any specific time when a decision concerning sanctions might be made, but I should point out that U.S. law requires us to move expeditiously," said Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman.
Although Beijing did not sign the missile control treaty, it promised last year to abide by its provisions in order to avoid trade sanctions that were about to be imposed by the Bush Administration.
After an extended internal debate over China's record on human rights and arms sales, the Clinton Administration this spring decided to grant China most-favored-nation trade status. 
But Mr. Clinton outlined a series of concerns, including the missile technology sales, on which he said China would be judged in future consideration of its trade status.
Though reports about the sale of the missile technology have persisted for several months, American intelligence agencies were split over whether evidence indicated a violation by China and Pakistan of the control regime.
The issue was raised by Secretary of State Warren Christopher during a meeting last month in Singapore with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen. 
It was also discussed by Lynn E. Davis, Assistant Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, during a trip to Beijing in July.
In addition, State Department officials have recently met with representatives of Pakistan to see if they could shed light on the transfers of missile technology.
Chinese officials have consistently denied violating the arms control agreement. 
Last month Mr. Qian said that evidence of the transfer of M-11 technology was a fabrication. 
The technology in question would allow Pakistan to build the M-11 missile, which is capable of delivering an 1,100-pound nuclear warhead a maximum distance of 186 miles.
The dispute with China is similar to a recent controversy with Russia over the sale of rocket engines and technology to India. 
Last month, Moscow agreed not to proceed with an agreed-upon sale of rocket motors and technology, which the Indian Government said it wanted for its space program.
