
After two days of meetings with senior Chinese officials, an American government delegation left Beijing on a positive note today, with members characterizing the talks as helping to get the bilateral "relationship back on track."
Relations soured after NATO war planes bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade last May, in what the United States has insisted was an accident. 
Beijing reacted to the bombing by suspending talks with the United States on military issues, arms proliferation and human rights.
This week's visit, by a delegation that included Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott and top officials from the State Department, Defense Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was part of an effort to resume dialogue. 
But the meetings came just a month before Taiwan's presidential elections, and seemed in part an effort to avoid the ugly confrontations that preceded the last Taiwan presidential election, in 1996. 
At that time, China lobbed missiles into the waters near Taiwan and American aircraft carriers sailed into the region in response.
American officials said that this week they told their Chinese counterparts they thought "what happened in 1996 was counterproductive," although they said they were "unclear" if the Chinese shared that view.
"We said we should regard the period ahead as a period of opportunity but also a period by definition of some uncertainty, that requires the greatest possible degree of restraint, caution and prudence on everybody's part," one American official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
That such cordial meetings could take place now is considered an improvement.
Joseph Prueher, the recently arrived American ambassador to China who was commander of the United States Pacific Fleet in 1996, has complained that he had no one in the Chinese military he could confer with as his ships were moving towards Taiwan. 
At a recent news conference in Beijing, he advocated more "communication between military leaders so there are not miscalculations."
In addition to Taiwan, this week's meetings, which included a five-hour session with Deputy Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, covered a broad array of foreign policy issues including North Korea, tensions between India and Pakistan and relations with Russia.
The Americans also met with Deputy Prime Minister Qian Qichen and Lt. Gen. Xiong Guangkai, deputy chief of the People's Liberation Army's general staff and its central figure for foreign policy.
The Chinese took the opportunity to express their displeasure with United States military assistance to Taiwan and the national and regional missile defense systems currently under study. 
The Chinese worry that these might be used against them in any conflict with Taiwan.
In turn, American officials said they expressed objections to the Chinese missile build-up in Fujian, the Chinese province closest to Taiwan. 
They said they also reminded the Chinese that military sales to Taiwan were a reaction to threats from China.
The United States sells arms to Taiwan "for defensive purposes, depending on its needs. 
And that doesn't exist in a vacuum," an American official said.
In recent weeks, top Chinese officials, including Mr. Qian, have restated their longstanding threat to use military force if Taiwan makes any formal moves towards independence.
Despite these warnings, the mood on the mainland in the run-up to the Taiwan elections this time is far calmer than it was four years ago, when large stretches of the Chinese coast across from Taiwan were turned into a military zone and civilian airports there were closed to commercial traffic.
The American officials said that the Chinese have been studying Taiwan politics closely and seemed to understand the complexities of the election, in which ambiguity has become a virtue when it comes to relations with the mainland.
All three of Taiwan's leading presidential candidates have declared that they will not pursue independence from the mainland.
