
In a gesture of good will toward Beijing, the Clinton Administration has begun to pave the way for the Hughes Aircraft Company to launch a commercial satellite from China.
If the Administration gives its approval within the next few weeks, as expected, it will represent the second time this year that the United States has eased punitive economic sanctions against China.
The latest step, reported today by Secretary of State Warren Christopher as he arrived here for talks with Prime Minister Paul Keating, comes as Washington presses Beijing to substantially improve its human rights record so the Clinton Administration can extend China's preferential trade benefits when they expire in June. 
The launching would put an Australian communications satellite in orbit.
Senior Administration officials, including Mr. Christopher, who is to make his first trip to China as Secretary of State later this week, have denied that Washington is changing its sanctions policy toward China, but the Hughes decision is bound to be interpreted in Beijing as another gesture in line with the Administration's six-month-old policy of intensified political and economic engagement.
 
Pentagon Aide to Beijing
Indeed, as part of the strategy to engage China rather than to isolate it, Frank Wisner, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, will accompany Mr. Christopher to Beijing and stay to discuss ways to upgrade the two countries' military relationship, senior Pentagon officials said today. 
Mr. Wisner will be the highest-ranking Pentagon official to visit China since the 1989 crackdown against pro-democracy demonstrators.
Last August the Administration imposed sanctions on an estimated $1 billion in high-technology trade with China, after Beijing shipped missile technology and components to Pakistan in violation of international accords.
The sanctions affected the planned launchings of seven commercial satellites on Chinese rockets. 
In November, on the eve of President Clinton's meeting with President Jiang Zemin of China, Mr. Clinton's national security advisers agreed to keep the sanctions in place unless China signed a formal agreement adhering to the principles of the international arms accord.
But in early January, the White House reversed itself and approved the launching of two commercial satellites from China, one by Martin Marietta, the other by Hughes. 
White House lawyers said satellites that did not include items on the State Department's munitions list could be approved for export.
Mr. Christopher said tonight that approval of the launchings would be consistent with United States law because Hughes had reconfigured the satellite to remove sensitive coding equipment. 
That means the satellite would need only Commerce Department licensing, a much easier process.
Asked about the wisdom of allowing the launching when Washington is pressing China on human rights and on the missile accord, Mr. Christopher said it "simply sends a signal of even-handed treatment."
