
As a sign of improving relations, the United States today agreed to allow the export of high-technology satellites to China that was frozen after Beijing secretly transferred missile components and technology to Pakistan.
In return, China pledged that once those sanctions are waived, it will not sell or transfer surface-to-surface missiles covered under an international accord controlling the transfer of sensitive missile technology.
The agreement, signed by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China and Secretary of State Warren Christopher before television cameras in the State Department Treaty Room, also commits the two sides to cooperate in promoting an end to the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons.
Even though China has promised in the past to abide by the international missile accord, only to break its promises, Mr. Christopher touted today's agreement as "a very important step forward."
Mr. Qian's two-day visit, which included a meeting on Monday with President Clinton, reflected an improvement in relations between the two countries since the United States softened its tough stance on human rights and extended the trade benefits to China in May.
In recent weeks, China signed $6 billion in trade deals with American companies, and on Monday Mr. Qian presented letters from President Jiang Zemin inviting Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore to visit China.
Mr. Jiang is said to be eager, even desperate, for Mr. Clinton to visit Beijing, and more than a month ago the Chinese began asking the Americans what kind of diplomatic breakthrough would be needed to get Mr. Clinton to go. 
The probings come amid fresh reports that have reached the American Embassy in Beijing that the health of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping is worsening.
Mr. Clinton has no plans at the moment to visit China, the White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said today.
In Mr. Clinton's meeting on Monday, as in other meetings with Mr. Qian and other Chinese officials, the issue of China's deteriorating human rights record was raised. 
"The President expressed disappointment" about the lack of progress on human rights, a White House statement said on Monday.
Among the Administration's requests were the release of Wei Jingsheng, China's best known dissident, as well as Chinese political prisoners who are ill and Tibetan prisoners, senior officials said.
These officials said they could not confirm a report in a Beijing-backed newspaper in Hong Kong today that Mr. Wei, who has not been seen in public since he was detained last April, has been granted parole and sent to several economically advanced regions to see how China had changed under its reforms.
"We made clear during these discussions that human rights is an important part of our relationship with China," one senior Admninistration official said. 
"The human rights situation certainly hasn't gotten better."
Under the agreement signed today, China for the first time accepts the internationally recognized definition of what constitutes a violation of the missile accord, known as the Missile Technology Control Regime. 
In addition, it commits China to ban the export to any country of surface-to-surface missiles with a range of at least 185 miles and a payload of at least 1,100 pounds.
But the Administration has yet to persuade Beijing to follow the lead of Russia and formally adhere to the accord in its entirety, or to become a full member of the accord.
In a recognition that there is still a long way to go on arms-control issues, a State Department statement issued at the ceremony said, "The two countries agreed to work together to promote missile nonproliferation through a step-by-step approach to resolve differences over missile exports."
In August 1993, after American intelligence agencies reported that China had sent technology and parts for M-11 missiles to Pakistan, President Clinton banned the export to China of several high-technology satellite systems for two years.
But the sanctions, which were scheduled to expire in any case in August 1995, hurt American business and were a major irritant in the relationship between Washington and Beijing.
Even with the sanctions, the Administration has permitted the export of satellites that did not include sensitive military technology. 
In other cases, American companies themselves withdrew their applications for approval because of the sanctions.
Today's agreement paves the way for American companies to begin to sell their satellite technology to China once again. 
In particular, it will immediately allow three satellite projects worth hundreds of millions of dollars to proceed, if the manufacturers decide to do so.
Senior Administration officials denied that today's decision was driven by commercial considerations.
"This is really not an economic decision," one such official said. 
"This is a non-proliferation decision. 
The thrust of the story should not be that to develop American exports we wiggled around non-proliferation concerns."
China has never admitted that it sold components for M-11 missiles to Pakistan in violation of the international agreement intended to curb the spread of such technology.
