
The State Department's top human rights official emerged from two days of talks with Chinese officials today praising the resumption of dialogue between Washington and Beijing after a two-year hiatus, but reporting no progress on improving China's overall record.
At a news conference, the official, John Shattuck, gave a positive account of China's "attentiveness" in the talks, which he called "intensive" and which he said have set the stage for more blunt discussion when President Clinton meets the Communist Party chief, Jiang Zemin, next month in Seattle.
In an executive order issued in May, Mr. Clinton tied China's future trading status with the United States to "significant overall progress" this year in its respect for human rights.
But by all accounts China's human rights record continues to deteriorate with recent detentions of journalists, a life sentence for an official who leaked a speech Mr. Jiang delivered to an open Communist Party assembly and coming secret trials of pro-democracy advocates arrested last year.
Mr. Shattuck reported no progress in persuading China's leaders that their policy of jailing political dissidents, suppressing freedom of expression, jamming foreign news broadcasts and preventing free emigration must be altered to avoid a showdown with the United States Congress next spring.
"We certainly indicated to them that progress is needed," he said.
If Secretary of State Warren Christopher is not able to certify such progress next spring, Mr. Clinton may be forced to revoke China's most favored nation trade status. 
A revocation could affect a third of China's exports and abruptly reduce its $18 billion trade surplus with the United States.
Though China has escaped punitive treatment in each of the annual reviews of trade relations, Mr. Clinton's executive order and the tough line of his Presidential campaign could put Washington and Beijing in an especially contentious position next year over China's trading status.
Mr. Shattuck pointedly warned the Chinese that the politics of China relations were changing in Washington. 
Among his objectives for this trip, he said, was to "convey to the Chinese in the clearest possible terms that the President and the Congress are for the first time united on these issues."
Some Western analysts are also concerned that China's policy of suppressing pro-independence forces in Tibet could easily complicate next spring's White House deliberations. 
Mr. Shattuck left tonight for Tibet, where he planned to visit at least one prison as part of his inspection of the region.
