
The Clinton Administration, in an effort to resolve the crisis in relations with China, has been quietly signaling Beijing that if it met Washington's minimum human rights demands, the United States would consider ending the annual threat of trade sanctions to change Chinese behavior.
Administration officials said today that there was already a consensus within President Clinton's economic team, which is now spreading to the White House and even parts of the State Department, that the annual rite of threatening China with a withdrawal of its beneficial trade status if it does not meet certain human rights conditions is outmoded and should be replaced.
That sentiment, which has been conveyed to China by the Administration, also seems to be taking hold on Capitol Hill, from which the pressure to link human rights and trade originally came.
 
Threat of Trade Sanctions
The United States has for years used the threat of trade sanctions to promote free immigration and human rights in Communist countries, from the former Soviet Union to China. 
Any move by the Administration and Congress now away from that approach would be a major policy shift, one that reflects the increasing importance of trade to the American economy.
"I think that today, the Congressional mainstream would still want to maintain some linkage between trade and human rights, but the drift is toward delinkage," said Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 
"It is impossible to improve the relationship if you have to go through this fight every year."
He added that there is "a very strong possibility that the Administration will recommend, and the Congress will adopt, the use of other tools" besides trade sanctions to promote American human rights concerns provided that China meets President Clinton's basic human rights demands laid out in an executive order last June.
Administration officials are increasingly arguing that the current policy is outmoded because, as the President has told aides and lawmakers in recent days, the last thing Mr. Clinton wants to do is withdraw China's trade benefits, which would costs thousands of American jobs and billions of dollars in contracts. 
So in some ways the policy rests on an empty threat.
It is also outmoded, other officials argue, because trade is now such an important instrument for opening up Chinese society, for promoting the rule of law and the freedom of movement there, and for encouraging the Chinese authorities to allow citizens to own everything from their own satellite dishes to foreign newspapers, that revoking it would be self-destructive for both sides.
Finally, American policy toward China is only effective if there is a united front, and that united front has broken down as more Americans do business in China and refuse to see their economic interests imperiled by making them a weapon for pressing human rights concerns.
Administration officials say that in dropping the threat of trade sanctions, they would continue to press China in other ways -- from diplomatic censure to holding up World Bank loans.
 
Conditions for China
Last May the President signed an order, which many in the Administration now regret, stipulating the precise steps that China must take to win renewal of its trade benefits, which allow it to send its imports to the United States at the lowest available tariff.
The President has told lawmakers and aides that while he would do all that he could to avoid having to withdraw trade benefits from Beijing, he feels politically, morally and legally bound to fulfill the basic terms of that executive order.
One senior official said, "We have told the Chinese, 'Get us over the executive order, and we will consider all kinds of alternatives.'
"
The Administration's intent, officials say, is both to offer an inducement for China to cooperate, but at the same time to signal hard-liners in the Chinese leadership that they cannot get by with just doing nothing.
Administration officials said that they believed last May that they had to adopt the executive order because Mr. Clinton, during the campaign, had strongly criticized President Bush for "coddling" China and he did not want to appear to be going back on another campaign promise. 
They also did it out of a fear that Congressional Democrats might otherwise have forced an even more stringent approach on them through legislation.
The order calls for China to begin putting into effect an agreement made two months ago to end its practice of using prison labor to make products exported to the United States, and to fully comply with American demands to allow a list of Chinese dissidents and their families to leave the country.
 
Visit to Prison
The Chinese have told the United States they are prepared to deal with most of the immigration cases and have already allowed one visit by a team of American inspectors to a suspected prison labor camp. 
The Administration feels that China is thus at least getting close to satisfying its demands on these points.
In addition, the President's order calls for "overall significant progress" in China's handling of and accounting for political prisoners, relations with Tibet, and the jamming of foreign radio programs. 
The Administration has always been prepared to interpret that progress loosely, but officials say that Beijing, while it has been inching in the right direction, has not yet given them even the bare minimum they need to convince Congress on these points.
Therefore, the Administration's China policy between now and June is to redouble efforts to persuade Beijing to take the last few steps. 
This is going to be done primarily through quiet diplomatic channels, and not high-profile visits -- in light of the confrontation that erupted during Secretary of State Warren Christopher's recent tour.
 
Views of Economic Official
There has been much wrangling over the Administration's China policy in recent days. 
At a White House meeting on Monday, members of the Clinton economic team -- particularly Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen -- said they wanted to see more frequent meetings by all the principal policy makers on China to insure that the views of the economic officials of the Administration were being fully taken into account.
The economic aides said they were not troubled by Mr. Christopher pressing the human rights issue, but said that on his recent visit to China he or some of his aides seemed to be doing it in a confrontational manner that was encouraging Beijing to dig in its heels.
Secretary Christopher, backed by the President's National Security Adviser, Anthony Lake, asked that Mr. Clinton issue a public statement reaffirming his commitment to the executive order and the general approach to China being carried out by the Secretary of State.
