
Bowing to Chinese entreaties, the United States offered today for the first time to take part in high-level talks with North Korea to help resolve a crisis caused by North Korea's refusal to honor a treaty on nuclear weapons.
The offer, a substantial easing of the Administration's stance, was made largely at the behest of China, officials said. 
Until now, the Administration had urged that the standoff be resolved by the United Nations, and had warned of sanctions against North Korea.
If accepted by North Korea, the meeting, which was suggested by Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff during a visit to South Korea, would be the most direct dialogue between Washington and Pyongyang in more than a year. 
The proposal indicated the depth of distress over North Korea's continuing refusal to open its nuclear-weapons installations to inspection.
 
An Awkward Dependency
Officials say the shift is the clearest indication of the degree to which Washington has sought Beijing's assistance in trying to put an end to North Korea's nuclear-weapons program.
Senior Administration officials say they have little option but to seek Chinese help. 
But other Government officials have expressed concern that relying on Beijing to help cajole Pyongyang could cause the White House to feel obligated to reward China by expanding trade, despite widespread criticism of its human rights record.
In his Presidential campaign, Mr. Clinton criticized the Bush Administration for overlooking China's repressive policies, and Democratic lawmakers introduced legislation today that would impose strict conditions on China in return for privileged trade status. 
But Administration officials said it appeared unlikely that the White House would agree to such a strict approach.
The trade proposal, by Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic leader, and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, would grant China most-favored-nation trade status only if Beijing improved human rights and bolstered efforts to halt the spread of weapons.
 
Calculating Tit-for-Tat
In interviews this week, senior officials insisted that the Administration's decisions on China would be made without regard to Beijing's cooperation over North Korea. 
But they also said the need for Chinese help could grow most pressing as the White House neared a June 3 deadline to decide Beijing's trade status.
"The consensus is that China is the key to solving the North Korea crisis," said a senior Government official who is concerned that the relationship may be too close. 
"The obvious question is going to be how much influence that gives Beijing, and how it affects our China policy."
According to American officials, Mr. Tarnoff told President Kim Young Sam of South Korea today that Washington was willing to join in talks with North Korea. 
Mr. Tarnoff, the State Department's No. 3 official, said he would represent the United States.
The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, later said that no meeting had been scheduled and no decisions made. 
But he said for the first time that the United States "would not rule out a meeting."
 
North Korea Wants to Talk
Such a meeting would be the highest-level exchange between Washington and Pyongyang since January 1992, when the third-ranking State Department official in the Bush Administration met in New York with a leader of the North Korean Workers Party.
North Korea has sought new talks to reduce tensions between the two countries. 
But Washington's willingness to accept China's advice is surprising because Beijing remains a central obstacle to the economic sanctions that Administration officials believe may still be necessary to persuade Pyongyang to accept nuclear inspections.
Because China alone among the permanent members of the Security Council has threatened to veto such a measure, critics fear that the reliance on China will leave the White House unwilling to give offense to Beijing when it makes its trade decision.
 
A Nervous General
But the Administration has clearly begun to grow wary about leaving North Korea feeling cornered.
Although a State Department official later described it as a worst-case scenario, the commander of United States military forces in South Korea said this week that he was "increasingly concerned that North Korea could slide into an attack" against South Korea.
The commander, Gen. Robert W. RisCassi, told a Congressional committee that Pyongyang's insular Government might launch an offensive "as an uncontrollable consequence of total desperation or internal instability."
Even though North Korea announced its withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty six weeks ago, it remains obligated to submit to nuclear inspections until at least June 12. 
Administration officials have said that if more gentle suasion fails to lead Pyongyang to honor that commitment by late May, they will renew their quest for United Nations approval of punitive sanctions.
The South Korean news agency Yonhap reported Friday that North Korea had in fact decided to honor the non-proliferation treaty, attributing the account to a North Korean diplomat in Cairo. 
But a senior State Department official said tonight that after numerous inquiries, the department had no information to corroborate the report.
The Administration protested loudly when Pyongyang withdrew from the accord, interpreting the action as a sign that North Korea was hiding evidence of its weapons program. 
As an indication of its new muted stance, however, officials pointed to a low-key statement the Security Council issued this month with Washington's support.
 
Treading Softly
While the International Atomic Energy Agency had asked for assistance in compelling North Korea to submit to inspections, the 15-member body did little more than to declare that it was "concerned at the situation."
Such language is tepid compared to that used by the Security Council in the past to condemn Iraq's refusal to honor similar international commitments. 
But a senior official said the central role played by China had caused the Administration to "discard the Iraq template."
He declined to discuss where and when the consultations between American and Chinese diplomats had occurred, but he indicated that they had been extensive.
Senior Administration officials said they remained confident that Beijing shared Washington's unease about North Korean weapons, adding that they saw no reason why China would not serve as an honest interlocutor.
