
The Clinton Administration plans to announce a broad initiative to enforce dozens of trade accords with China, Japan, Canada and other big trading partners, in a move that appears directed at protecting President Clinton from Republican accusations that his free trade agreements are costing jobs in the United States.
Administration officials said today that as part of the initiative, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, would create an enforcement office, charged with forcing several nations to live up to their agreements.
But Mr. Kantor, who was President Clinton's campaign chairman in 1992, said that the effort to be announced on Friday would be much broader, involving the Commerce Department and other agencies.
"We're convinced that you've got to be willing to show the sword to get results," said Stuart E. Eizenstat, President Jimmy Carter's domestic-policy adviser, who was nominated by President Clinton this week to be under secretary of commerce for international trade. 
"We know that making the case for free trade also means showing that we are not going to tolerate violations of the agreements we have already reached."
Administration officials have frequently spoken of a more rigorous monitoring of trade accords. 
And to get those agreements, the Clinton White House has threatened sanctions against trading partners, including close allies, far more often than previous administrations.
But after grabbing considerable attention with its threats, especially during the protracted dispute with Japan last year over automobile trade, the Administration stopped short of invoking many of those sanctions, declaring that last-minute agreements made them unnecessary.
Until now, however, there has been no formal system for resuscitating agreements that are failing, whether with South Korea, Canada or others.
And while Administration officials say that they are simply carrying through on three-year-old promises to enforce American trade laws, the new and tougher tone seems prompted, at least in part, by fear that Patrick J. Buchanan, along with other Republican Presidential aspirants, is striking a chord in voters by arguing that the Administration has become a paper tiger on trade matters -- threatening, but rarely acting.
If a major showdown develops this election year, many trade experts and some Administration officials say, it will probably be with China.
So far, the Beijing authorities have done very little to enforce a significant agreement struck last February to crack down on the piracy of music, movies and computer software. 
American officials say that 29 Chinese factories churning out huge volumes of counterfeit compact disks are still running at top speed.
Mr. Kantor has set a deadline next month for China to change its ways and avoid a renewal of trade sanctions against exports to the United States.
The issue is also politically charged in Congress, where Republicans and Democrats both say that Beijing's continued repression of dissidents, combined with the soaring American trade deficit, has undermined the Administration's policy of "comprehensive engagement.". 
The term describes a strategy in which economic and commercial ties are used to attempt to influence countries' political behavior.
Publicly, the Clinton Administration continues to defend its China policy, arguing that it was right to stop linking the renewal of preferential trade status for the Chinese to their record on human rights. 
In private, though, there is increasing nervousness that Mr. Clinton is open to the same accusation that he leveled at George Bush in 1992: that the United States is coddling China's leaders to benefit American exports.
Assailing China's failure to comply with trade accords has the political advantage of getting tough without bringing human rights into the discussion.
"The pattern has been that the United States calls on China to remedy its trade sins, China agrees to do so, then China breaks its promise," Greg Mastel, a China expert at the Economic Strategy Institute, wrote recently. 
"The credibility of U.S. trade policy around the world will be severely undermined if such blatant disregard goes unanswered."
In a speech scheduled for Friday, Mr. Kantor is expected to steer clear of the matter of intellectual-property rights, another area in dispute with China, because negotiations are under way to resolve it without threatening to reimpose $1 billion in trade sanctions.
He is, though, expected to announce a series of enforcement actions involving other countries.
One of the first is with Canada, which recently placed an 80 percent tax on advertising carried in Canadian editions of Sports Illustrated, a Time Warner property. 
American officials view the tax as an effort to protect Canadian publications from competition, and argue that it violates both the North American Free Trade Agreement and the world trade accord signed last year.
Another early action expected would seek enforcement of Japanese obligations -- not those involving last year's agreement over autos and auto parts, which the Administration says is being faithfully observed -- but Japan's refusal to protect music recordings made between 1946 and 1971.
It may be the first time, Mr. Kantor conceded today, that he has come to the defense of Frank Sinatra, the Beatles and Bo Diddley -- artists whose early recordings have remained popular in Japan.
Another important American ally, South Korea, will also be a target: It reached an agreement last year to permit American meat to be sold in its grocery stores, but it has missed several deadlines to file the agreement with the World Trade Organization in Geneva.      
