
Instead of issuing a blanket sanction against loans to companies doing business in China, American officials are drafting penalties against the Chinese company that sold $70,000 of ring magnets to Pakistan, a violation of an American law, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The penalties, which are being reviewed by Government legal experts, are a reflection of the Administration's judgment that it would be wrong to institute a general sanction that would penalize American companies doing business in China rather than the Chinese company that made the sale.
"A consensus has been reached that this is the most sensible approach and the legal people are working to check its consistency with the law," a senior American official said, while cautioning that a final decision, expected soon, has yet to be made by Secretary of State Warren Christopher and President Clinton.
American officials describe themselves as frustrated by the rigid nature of the 1994 Nuclear Nonproliferation Act, which is being applied for the first time, and by the Chinese refusal to admit any wrongdoing, at a time when the Americans are trying to manage a delicate relationship during a complicated political season in both countries.
Administration security, foreign policy and trade officials met for an hour on Tuesday, then broke up into subcommittees to decide what to do in the face of the law, which requires $10 billion to $11 billion in sanctions against American companies in response to the $70,000 Chinese sale.
The Chinese have refused to be helpful on the ring magnets. 
They say the magnets were not on any forbidden list of products and refuse to promise to refrain from such behavior in the future. 
They said the deal was not a central Government decision, but an open sale by a Government-owned company with a high degree of independence -- the China National Nuclear Corporation.
American officials admit that the ring magnets, which are akin to those used in huge stadium loudspeakers, are not on the American "trigger list" for the Nonproliferation Act. 
But the 5,000 magnets were designed to be used in a Pakistani centrifuge, in an unsafeguarded laboratory, to produce fissile material -- in the same way that Iraq made it, and the Americans themselves made it at Oak Ridge in World War II.
The act requires the Secretary of State to inform Congress and the Export-Import Bank if any country "has willfully aided or abetted any non-nuclear weapons state" to acquire unsafeguarded, special nuclear materials.
If so, the Bank must then halt Government loans or loan guarantees to American companies doing business in the offending state, in this case China, with between $10 billion to $11 billion outstanding. 
The President may waive the Export-Import Bank suspension on national security grounds, but then may, under separate authority, come up with other, more specific sanctions against the Chinese military or the China National Nuclear Corporation itself.
The Chinese corporation has a $150 million deal with Export-Import Bank support, the officials say, on Westinghouse technology for a reactor at Qinshan, near Shanghai. 
There is another, potential $500 million deal between the corporation and Bechtel.
In meetings this week, many officials judged the evidence of central Chinese Government knowledge of the sale to be unclear, raising questions about the "willful" quality of the proliferation. 
And the officials have always objected to the blanket Export-Import Bank suspension in the law. 
So the consensus emerged to declare sanctions against China but then waive the sanctions on national security grounds, and to penalize the corporation itself.
The Administration does not want increased tensions in the relationship, but needs to obey the law and remain credible, while also dealing with Chinese violations of an agreement to protect American intellectual property rights. 
And the Administration wants these issues resolved before May, when it will certify the Chinese as a most-favored nation for trade purposes.
The Congressional debate on that certification will be a way for legislators to register their fury with Beijing on issues from trade to human rights to nuclear exports, and both houses could reject it, forcing Mr. Clinton into an embarrassing veto during his re-election campaign. 
American officials say that Congress, where Mr. Clinton's rival Senator Robert Dole wields strong influence, wants China to be hit hard on the nuclear issue in return for an easier time on certification.
