
President Clinton renewed China's favorable trade status today with virtually no conditions, and said he would abandon his effort to use trade as a lever to force Beijing to make progress on human rights.
While Mr. Clinton said there had been some improvement in human rights, he acknowledged that China's actions had fallen far short of the steps he set forth a year ago as conditions for renewing the trade privileges. 
But he said that as punishment he would do little more than prohibit imports of Chinese guns and ammunition.
Sounding anguished and defensive, the President said at a White House news conference that China's economic and strategic importance had grown so great that it would be unwise to impose the broad sanctions he had threatened.
"We have reached the end of the usefulness of that policy," Mr. Clinton said, "and it is time to take a new path toward the achievement of our common objectives."
[Excerpts, page A8.]
Many American corporations and consumers welcomed his decision. 
[Business Day, page D1.]
But Mr. Clinton's announcement came after weeks of agonizing at the highest levels of the Administration, where officials had to contend with shifting signals from the Chinese Government and a last-minute campaign from rights advocates. 
While his decision had been expected, Mr. Clinton had not been expected to offer so frank an argument that his own approach had been misguided.
Congress could still seek to impose sanctions on China, as it sought unsuccessfully to do during the Bush Administration. 
But Mr. Clinton's remarks amounted to a call for an end to a rite that since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 has caused annual battles linking China's trade status to its human rights conduct.
Thus Mr. Clinton cast aside the executive order issued last year, when he became the first President to tie China's trade benefits to progress in the treatment of dissidents and political prisoners. 
He also cast aside his 1992 campaign language, when he accused President Bush of "coddling" Chinese dictators by blocking legislation that would have punished China for its human rights record.
While saying that China continues to commit "very serious human rights abuses," Mr. Clinton noted that Beijing had made some progress toward meeting his demands.
But he made clear his belief that broad trade sanctions had become too heavy a club to wave at a time when commerce between the two countries has grown to billions of dollars and accounts for tens of thousands of American jobs.
As a single punitive act, Mr. Clinton ordered a ban on imports of Chinese guns and ammunition, which amount to $200 million a year. 
He also said he would maintain the few Bush Administration sanctions that remain in effect, including prohibitions on shipments of United States weapons and other goods to the Chinese military.
But those measures will affect only a tiny fraction of the $31 billion in goods that China sold to the United States last year. 
Thus Mr. Clinton has sided with those in Congress and his Administration who warned against jeopardizing relations with Beijing.
Members of Congress who had called for firmer action expressed anger and disappointment. 
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said he planned to introduce legislation on trade sanctions that would "be more likely to encourage the Chinese Government to improve its practices on trade and human rights."
Human Rights Watch, which led the battle to block renewal of the trade benefits, voiced even greater disdain, accusing Mr. Clinton of "effectively removing all pressure on China to improve its human rights practices."
 
Business Groups Pleased
But the decision was applauded by business groups, including the United States Chamber of Congress, which likened the policy of tying human rights to trade to "using a blunt instrument for brain surgery."
The decision by Mr. Clinton leaves intact the Jackson-Vanik Amendment of two decades ago that ties trade benefits for Communist countries to their immigration policies. 
But since it first won the privilege in 1980, that barrier has never prevented China from winning renewal of its "most favored nation" trade status, which allows it to send its exports to the United States at the lowest applicable tariffs.
Instead, Mr. Clinton's approach becomes roughly comparable to Washington's strategy toward other nations -- using diplomatic pressure but not holding trade hostage in efforts to make progress on rights.
Today, Mr. Clinton mentioned China's importance in putting pressure on North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons program as one of the reasons he believed it wise to tread softly. 
He also cited China's role as the most populous country, with 1.2 billion people, and the third-largest economy.
 
The Vanity of Pressure
But the fundamental reason he offered for the shift amounted to a repudiation of a year's worth of American pressure tactics. 
He said there would be "inevitably a reluctance" for China to act on rights issues "if it looks like every step that is taken, is taken under the pressure of the United States, some outside power making them do it."
Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, Anthony Lake, nevertheless suggested that the President's strong stance during the 1992 campaign and last year had "allowed us to achieve the progress that has been achieved this year" in focusing Beijing's attention on human rights.
Among the areas Mr. Clinton singled out as examples of progress were China's resolution of all emigration cases involving dissidents and its agreement to a plan to prevent goods produced with prison labor from being shipped to the United States.
But he used strong language to criticize China for its "arrest and detention of those who peacefully voice their opinions" and for its continued repression of religious and cultural traditions in Tibet.
 
A Round of Consultations
Before making his announcement, just after 5 P.M., Mr. Clinton spent much of the day on the phone with Congressional leaders and foreign policy experts to gauge their reactions to the steps he might take. 
He also met for 30 minutes with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who urged the President to impose at least symbolic sanctions, Administration officials said.
Among those who welcomed Mr. Clinton's decision was Rep. Gary Ackerman, Democrat of New York and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific. 
Mr. Ackerman said the separation of trade policy from China's human rights record "will promote American prosperity while enhancing our ability to advance American values and interests throughout the world."
But the minimal penalties Mr. Clinton imposed for what he described as China's "very serious human rights abuses" left labor leaders, human rights advocates and some Democratic lawmakers voicing scorn.
Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., called the step "a disappointing setback to those who are risking their lives and liberty in China for the values and principles that America was created to advance."
Rep. Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who joined Senator Mitchell in efforts to persuade Mr. Clinton to hew to a hard line, described her reaction as one of "great disappointment."
She said she would join in efforts to overrule Mr. Clinton with legislation in the belief "that sanctions on China are in order."
