
The Clinton Administration said today that it was imposing trade sanctions on Taiwan for refusing to halt the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns, the first time that Washington has deployed trade sanctions to protect the environment.
While trade sanctions have often been used by the United States as a lever to promote human rights or to lower trade barriers imposed by other countries, they have never been used to protect endangered wildlife.
"I am delighted that the U.S. has taken the lead in this worldwide battle to save the rhinoceros and tiger before it is too late," Diana E. McMeekin, head of the African Wildlife Foundation, said. 
"It is as if the governor has issued a last-minute stay of execution for those magnificent creatures on the edge of extinction."
The sanctions on Taiwan will involve a ban on all Taiwan wildlife-product exports to the United States, which amount to about $25 million a year in coral and mollusk-shell jewelry and in snake, lizard and crocodile skin shoes and other leather products, the White House said.
This is a fraction of Taiwan's trade with the United States, which last year involved $25.1 billion in exports to the United States and $16.25 billion in American exports to Taiwan.
 
 
Underground Trade
Tiger and rhinoceros parts are used by people in Taiwan and many other Asian nations for medicinal purposes, and because many people consider them sexual stimulants. 
Their use has become so widespread that an underground trade has developed and populations of both animals have been decimated.
"This is the first time any country has acted on the international call for trade sanctions to protect endangered species, but if the illegal trade in rhinos and tigers is not eliminated, these species could be extinct in five years," President Clinton said in a statement. 
"The world must know that the United States will take strong actions to protect the earth's natural heritage."
[In a statement released Tuesday in Taipei, Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs expressed "deep regret and dissatisfaction over the U.S. 
Government's obviously unfair and unjust sanction."
Asked if Taiwan planned reprisals, a Government spokesman, Eric Chiang, said, "We haven't discussed any counteractions."]
The American move underscores the fact that as trade grows more global and as barriers between countries come down, the environmental consequences can be enormous. 
When advances in hunting techniques are combined with lower trade barriers and rapidly growing populations that demand medicines made from exotic wildlife, a species can be wiped out in one generation.
Tigers, commonplace in circuses and zoos around the world, will shortly be extinct in the wild if this trade is not stopped. 
At the turn of the century, the world tiger population was estimated at about 100,000; today, there are fewer than 6,000.
In 1970, there were more than 65,000 African black rhinos and today there are fewer than 1,800, according to the African Wildlife Foundation. 
There are only about 10,000 rhinos of all species left in the world.
It is a common practice in Asia to grind the bones of both animals for medicines and aphrodisiacs. 
Tiger and rhino parts are prescribed by doctors in Taiwan, China and Korea for fevers, arthritis and impotence.
The Administration's Interagency Rhino/Tiger Task Force, which recommended sanctions to the President last week, had been considering imposing sanctions on China as well. 
At the last minute it decided to act only against Taiwan, saying China had taken some limited steps to curb the sale of exotic-animal parts.
At a time when Chinese-American tensions are running high over human rights issues and Washington is considering revoking Beijing's preferential trade status, the Administration probably did not want to open a new front with the Chinese on wildlife -- even though the Chinese are considered by experts to be among the worst offenders.
Still, the move against Taiwan, argued the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, constitutes "a major step forward."
"Other administrations have threatened these kinds of measures to protect the environment before, but none has ever acted," he said.
The United States had warned Taiwan and China in November that it might impose trade sanctions if they did not demonstrate by March 30 "measurable, verifiable and substantial progress" in curbing illicit trade in tiger and rhino parts.
China took some steps, the most notable a public burning of tiger and rhino medicines, and made an effort to register stocks of those medicines and to educate people against their use. 
But Taiwan did little to satisfy American demands to safeguard rhinos and tigers, which are protected under the Convention on International Trade and Endangered Species.
