
Federal agents in California quietly arrested a Chinese citizen last week and charged him with trying to obtain a component vital to missile guidance systems. 
Officials said the arrest shed light on what many in Washington say is an effort by China to smuggle American technology to improve the accuracy of its weapons.
The news came as Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright arrrived today in Beijing, where she is likely to complain of a missile buildup by China in her talks with leaders there.
The Customs Service has yet to make a public announcement of the arrest of the man, Yao Yi, but Federal officials and a criminal complaint filed in Federal District Court in Boston say Mr. Yao tried to buy fiber-optic gyroscopes from a Massachusetts defense contractor.
After the State Department refused to approve the deal, Mr. Yao dealt with another Boston company, which promised to help get the gyroscopes out of the United States. 
But that company was a dummy corporation set up as part of a sting operation by the Customs Service.
Federal officials are trying to determine whether Mr. Yao, who was arrested while attending a conference on fiber optics in San Diego, was working as an entrepreneur or as a purchaser for the Chinese military. 
During the transaction, Mr. Yao said he was representing a Beijing firm called Lions Photonics and insisted that the gyroscopes were destined for a Chinese university that was working on a railroad project.
While such gyroscopes can be used in railroad projects, Federal officials are skeptical, because an associate of Mr. Yao's said they also were seeking infrared sensors, which are commonly used in missiles to detect heat-generating targets.
One Federal official said using this kind of gyroscope for a railroad project "would be like flying an F-14 to the grocery store."
The arrest of Mr. Yao, who is believed to be 33, came only hours after the Clinton Administration, in an unrelated case, decided to prevent Hughes Electronics from exporting to China a $450 million communications satellite ordered by a Singapore consortium with links to officers of the Chinese Army. 
The State and Defense Departments said they feared that the satellite and the technology to launch it into a precise orbit could further improve the accuracy of Chinese missiles.
And as Mr. Yao was being escorted into Federal court in San Diego on Friday for a hearing at which he agreed to be transferred to Boston to face charges, the Pentagon delivered a report to Congress detailing China's buildup of tactical missiles on its coast facing Taiwan.
The report concluded that China was "still decades" away from being able to project military force far beyond its borders but that its cruise and ballistic missiles "will give Beijing the 'credible intimidation' needed to accomplish political and military goals without having to rely on overwhelming force-on-force superiority."
In the gyroscope case, a man identified by authorities as an associate of Mr. Yao, a Canadian citizen of Chinese origin, Collin Xu, was arrested two weeks ago in Boston. 
The authorities charge that he took delivery of the fiber-optic gyroscopes, all but one of which was a dummy, and he is being held without bail.
Mr. Xu pleaded not guilty. 
His lawyer, Richard M. Egbert, declined to discuss the case on Friday, saying, "The facts will come out when we develop them."
An affidavit filed in Boston by a customs agent, Timothy N. Gildea, asserts that Lions Photonics first sought to buy four advanced gyroscopes in December 1997 from a Massachusetts company that is not identified in the complaint.
Officials familiar with the case say the company was Fibersense Technology Corporation of Canton, Mass., which makes fiber-optic gyroscopes for the military, chiefly for missiles, aircraft and space vehicles.
The complaint says the company told Mr. Yao and Mr. Xu, who said the gyroscopes would be used for a "superspeed train navigation system," that they would need permission from the State Department because the gyroscopes were on the State Department's munitions list, a compilation of technologies that can be exported only with a license.
Two such applications were filed in May 1998, one listing the end user as Zhejiang University, and another listing the final user as Changsha Rail University, both in China.
The applications were immediately denied by the State Department, which noted that China was a "prohibited destination" for the gyroscopes.
In August a new order was received by the Massachusetts company for nearly identical equipment, listing a new company as the purchaser: Micro Techland in Montreal. 
An exemption to the State Department licensing rules permits the shipment of some types of equipment without a license to Canadian companies for use in Canada.
Their suspicions aroused, officials at the military manufacturer alerted the Customs Service, which soon began its sting operation. 
Mr. Yao was referred to officers of the agency's dummy company.
The undercover operation soon received an identical order for the gyroscopes. 
An expert on military gyroscopes, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the type the Chinese were trying to purchase were "tactical" gyroscopes used on missiles, on the gun turrets of tanks and sometimes on railroads.
For months the undercover company negotiated with its Chinese customers by E-mail, arguing over price, specificiations and even warranty conditions.
The final order amounted to about $70,000, and at one point, according to partial transcripts of the conversations included in the criminal complaint, Mr. Xu asked, "Do you also do infrared sensors?"
Mr. Xu ultimately picked up the gyroscopes in the Boston area, Federal officials say, and was arrested on his way to a Federal Express office. 
On Feb. 
19, Mr. Yao entered the United States, and he was arrested on Monday night in San Diego.
      
