
The Clinton Administration issued its annual human rights report today, declaring China guilty of "widespread and well-documented human rights abuses," and announced that the United States would again co-sponsor a critical resolution on China at the coming meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva.
The State Department had held out the possibility that better Chinese behavior would be rewarded at the Geneva meeting, which convenes on March 18. 
But China's human rights record has worsened rather than improved, the Administration said today, making public its annual report on human rights in 194 countries around the world.
China has been guilty of human rights abuses including torture, arbitrary detention, coercive family-planning practices and organ transplants from executed prisoners, the report said. 
Toward the end of 1995, it said, "almost all public dissent against the central authorities was silenced."
In its overview, the report implicitly challenged the Clinton Administration's strategy, supported by many business interests, of strengthening economic ties with China regardless of Beijing's human rights record.
"The experience of China in the past few years demonstrates that while economic growth, trade and social mobility create an improved standard of living, they cannot by themselves bring about greater respect for human rights in the absence of a willingness by political authorities to abide by the fundamental international norms," the report said.
Senior officials were concerned about the release of this sensitive report, delayed because of the Government shutdown over the budget, as they try to improve a difficult relationship with Beijing. 
In recent months the United States has accused China of violating agreements on the spread of nuclear and missile weapons, of trying to intimidate Taiwanese voters who are electing a President on March 23 and of breaking its pledge to crack down on the flagrant pirating of American music, videos and computer software.
A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official, Liu Huaqiu, is now in Washington for talks with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and other officials charged with finding a consistent policy toward China.
Despite the strong language in today's report, human rights advocates remain critical of Administration policy. 
Mike Jendrzejczyk, Washington director of Human Rights Watch Asia, said: "Overall it is an accurate, hard-hitting report, and probably more critical than last year."
"But it underlines the glaring disparity between the Administration's analysis and its policy," he added, calling the overall approach too soft on China.
Although the United States will co-sponsor the human rights resolution in Geneva, Mr. Jendrzejczyk said, the Chinese are pushing Washington not to lobby hard for the resolution, which could lead to its easy defeat when a vote comes in late April. 
Even John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor who is in charge of compiling these reports, said today the American vote in Geneva would depend on Chinese behavior at the time.
While saying little that American officials have not regularly discussed, these annual human rights reports carry the weight of an American political judgment that many countries, especially in Asia, reject as hypocritical.
In the report Russia was criticized for abuses of human rights in its effort to put down an armed revolt in Chechnya.
The Administration said abuses had decreased in Turkey and in Israel, where the redeployment of most Israeli troops from large areas of the West Bank and Gaza Strip had reduced the incidents of abuse. 
In Turkey, however, the improvement came against "a continuing pattern" of abuses, including restrictions on expression, torture and excessive use of force against the Kurdish population in the battle against terrorism. 
Similarly, Egypt was criticized for excessive force, including torture and extrajudicial killings, in its campaign against Islamic militants.
There were "familiar patterns of abuse" in countries like Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Colombia, Indonesia and countries in crisis, like North Korea and the Sudan, the department said.
Over the last 20 years, Mr. Christopher said, the reports also "tell a vivid story of how much the world has changed."
Latin America, he noted, had greatly improved, with a strong movement toward democratization throughout the hemisphere. 
But displaying how the reports are used for current political purposes, Mr. Christopher sharply criticized Cuba for stifling dissent and shooting down civilian airplanes. 
He also touched on other countries that he called "rogue states that possess the greatest threat to America's security -- states like Iran, Iraq and Libya -- that are among the greatest violators of human rights."
And he mentioned Nigeria and Burma as abusers of human rights as well as protectors of the drug trade.
As the State Department focused today on human rights, Mr. Lake, the national security adviser, gave a speech at George Washington University about America's security challenges in a post-cold war world.
While listing the promotion and defense of democracy, "which enhances our security and the spread of our values," Mr. Lake spent little of his speech discussing human rights. 
Instead, following the new tone of a Clinton Administration encouraged by its relatively successful use of the American military in Haiti and Bosnia, Mr. Lake concentrated on "the use of force" and "the example of our power," in addition to "the power of our example."
"Until human nature changes," Mr. Lake said, "power and force will remain at the heart of international relations."      
