
President Clinton said today that he was canceling a visit to Taiwan by Pentagon officials planned for this week out of concern that it could heighten tensions between Taiwan and China.
"I don't think this was the best time to do something which might excite either one side or the other and imply that a military solution is an acceptable alternative," the President said at a White House news conference.
Asked if the United States would assist Taiwan in case of an attack by China, President Clinton said the United States "would be required to view it with the gravest concern," but he stopped short of saying American military force would be used.
The current dispute between Taipei and Beijing began on July 9, when Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, asserted in an interview that their talks should be conducted on a "state to state" basis. 
Subsequent explanations by Taiwan officials seemed to nudge the island closer toward formal independence, something Beijing has insisted that it would use military force to prevent.
Before the rift, the Pentagon officials had scheduled a visit to Taiwan this week to discuss cooperation over air defense systems and the possible sale of new military equipment.
The Administration has instead decided instead to send diplomatic envoys to to Beijing and Taipei to encourage a peaceful resolution.
The United States has long adhered to a "one China" policy, which holds that Taiwan and the mainland are part of a single Chinese nation and that reunification should be carried out only by peaceful means.
For decades the Communist authorities in Beijing and the Nationalist authorities in Taipei each insisted that they ran the legitimate government of one China and forced the rest of the world to choose between them.
But as more countries switched diplomatic recognition to Beijing, and as Taiwan-born politicians like Mr. Lee supplanted the Nationalist leaders who had retreated to the island in 1949 after being driven from the mainland in the Chinese civil war, Taipei dropped its claim to be the mainland's rightful ruler, though not the goal of eventual reunification.
Beijing, for its part, has continued to press hard for reunification, by military means if necessary.
Clinton Administration officials say the envoys sent to Taiwan will urge President Lee to reconsider his remarks, while the officials sent to Beijing -- Assistant Secretary of State Stanley Roth and Kenneth Lieberthal, who oversees Asian affairs at the National Security Council -- will press the Chinese not to consider using force to resolve the issue.
"Our policy is clear: we favor the one-China policy," President Clinton said today. 
"We favor the cross-strait dialogue. 
The understanding we have had all along with both China and Taiwan is that the differences between them would be resolved peacefully."
He said he was "still not entirely sure" what "the Lee statements were trying to convey."
While the Administration insisted today that it was not trying to punish Taiwan by canceling the Pentagon officials' visit and that it had no plans to curtail arms sales there, friends of Taiwan on Capitol Hill stepped forward today to defend Mr. Lee.
Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, the New York Republican who is chairman of the House International Relations Committee, announced today that he would block all Congressional approval of foreign arms sales until he had received assurances from the Administration that it was still fully committed to helping Taiwan defend itself.
"There are reports circulating that the Administration is considering curtailing security assistance to Taiwan due to its displeasure with President Lee's recent statements," Mr. Gilman said.
"If true," he said, "these short-sighted, wrong-headed sanctions are not in the U.S. interest, will undermine Taiwan's fundamental security and may destabilize the fragile peace in northeast Asia."
His counterpart in the Senate, Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said today that the Administration's one-China policy was "a puzzling fiction," and he saluted Mr. Lee for "having the courage to state the obvious -- that the Republic of China on Taiwan is a de facto sovereign state."
In a statement that included references to "Red China," Mr. Helms accused the Administration of "caving in" to Beijing and dragging the United States "even deeper into the one-China hole."
"At a time when the United States should be seizing every opportunity to break free of Beijing's definition of 'one China,' " he said, the Administration was "paralyzed by its own anachronistic policy, better known as appeasement."
      
