
A Taiwan-born scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory was fired today for security breaches after the F.B.I. questioned him in connection with China's suspected theft of American nuclear secrets, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said.
The scientist, Wen Ho Lee, was questioned for three days by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, starting on Friday, but "stonewalled" during the questioning, Mr. Richardson said.
Mr. Lee, a computer scientist working in the nuclear weapons design area at Los Alamos, N.M., has not been charged with a crime, but he has been identified by Federal officials as the prime suspect in the spying.
China denies any such theft. 
But Administration officials said China, working with stolen data, has made a leap in developing nuclear weapons with much smaller warheads.
The handling of the spying case brought sharp criticism from Capitol Hill. 
Senator Fred Thompson, an influential Republican from Tennessee, attacked the Administration for failing to notify Congress in 1997 that China had stolen nuclear secrets when the Administration certified that Beijing was no longer helping other nations build nuclear bombs.
That certification ended a 12-year ban on the sale of nuclear technology to China, an action long sought by American companies eager to bid on the estimated $60 billion Chinese market for civilian nuclear plants.
Mr. Thompson said Senators would take up a "serious and immediate review" of the certification issue.
The F.B.I. began to question Mr. Lee on Friday to determine whether he had given American secrets to China. 
The questioning continued through late Sunday, but Mr. Lee failed to cooperate, according to Mr. Richardson.
F.B.I. officials acknowledged last week that they did not have enough information then to arrest Mr. Lee, but hoped that their questioning would lead to a break.
While he agreed to talk with investigators and nuclear experts, his failure to fully cooperate has apparently still left the investigators without enough evidence to prosecute.
But Mr. Richardson dismissed Mr. Lee for "failure to properly notify Energy Department and lab officials about contacts with people from a sensitive country, specific instances of failing to properly safeguard classified material and apparently attempting to deceive lab officials about security matters."
Reached at home in Los Alamos this afternoon, Mr. Lee's wife, Sylvia, a former secretary at Los Alamos, refused give his whereabouts or to comment on the matter.
Mr. Lee, who officials said is in his late 50's and has been working at the lab for more than a decade, did not hire an attorney to represent him during his questioning, officials said.
Mr. Lee has been the prime suspect in a nearly three-year investigation of reports of Beijing's theft of nuclear technology, senior officials from the bureau and the Energy Department said.
Until recently, China's nuclear weapon designs were a generation behind those of the United States, largely because Beijing had been unable to produce small warheads that could be launched from a single missile at multiple targets.
But by the mid-1990's, China had built and tested such small bombs, a breakthrough that officials say was accelerated by thefts from Los Alamos.
The espionage is believed to have occurred in the 1980's, officials said, but was not detected until 1995, when American experts from Los Alamos analyzing Chinese nuclear test results found similarities to America's most advanced miniature warhead, the W-88.
By February 1996, investigators from the Energy Department and the F.B.I. searching travel records and other data at Los Alamos and other weapons labs had identified five possible suspects, officials said.
Mr. Lee quickly emerged as the prime suspect, they added.
Investigators say they now believe that Mr. Lee gave the Chinese sensitive information on nuclear detonations during a 1988 seminar, senior Administration officials said.
But after opening a formal criminal investigation in June 1996, the bureau did not at first pursue the case aggressively, according to several senior officials.
Only in the last several weeks, after prodding from Congress and the Secretary of Energy, did officials administer lie-detector tests to Mr. Lee.
After a first test in December the bureau, unsatisfied with the results, gave Mr. Lee a second test in February, and the test indicated that he was being deceptive, officials said.
The F.B.I. then decided to interview Mr. Lee on Friday.
In response to criticism of their handling of the case, bureau officials said Chinese spying is far more difficult to investigate than the more traditional espionage of the former Soviet Union.
The Chinese often take advantage of scientific exchanges and other forms of informal contacts, gathering sensitive information from such a wide range of sources that it is often difficult to pinpoint exactly how American secrets leak out.
In fact, American officials say, they have concluded that Beijing is continuing to steal secrets as major nuclear weapons laboratories in the United States have been increasingly opened to visitors from other nations.
In this case, since the reported theft of the W-88 design information apparently occurred so far in the past, the Justice Department at first lacked the grounds to obtain a secret wiretap on the suspect, making it difficult initially to build a strong criminal case.
Still the Energy Department failed to move Mr. Lee out of his sensitive position or end his security clearances for more than a year after the bureau's director, Louis J. Freeh, told Energy Department officials in September 1997 that there was no longer any investigative reason to keep him on the job.
In espionage cases, the bureau often wants suspects left alone by their employers for fear of tipping them off to the investigations.
He was finally moved out of a sensitive area several weeks ago, officials said.
Mr. Lee's wife, Sylvia, stopped working at the lab sometime in the last year or two, Energy Department officials said.
F.B.I. and Energy Department officials said her activities had raised questions while she worked at Los Alamos. 
In the 1980's she was invited to China to give an academic paper on high-technology computer processing even though she was only a secretary at Los Alamos.
Her husband, who was the true expert, accompanied her, according to an American official.
Energy Department officials also said co-workers questioned why she frequently invited herself to gatherings at the lab with visiting Chinese delegations.
F.B.I. officials said she was not a target of their investigation, but said it is possible that others were involved in the theft of data. 
They have not yet identified any other suspects.
Meanwhile, in response to criticism of the lax security at Los Alamos and other weapons labs, Secretary Richardson said today that he is ordering polygraph examinations for a few thousand Energy Department and laboratory employees during the next few years.
The order does not cover all employees with "Q" security clearances, which give them access to nuclear secrets, Mr. Richardson said, but it does cover those who work in the most sensitive areas.
Currently only employees of the Central Intelligence Agency are required to submit to polygraph exams on a regular basis. 
      
