
When President Jiang Zemin meets President Clinton on Wednesday in the first state visit of a Chinese leader in a dozen years, there is likely to be a nuclear agreement and possibly one to provide American assistance to clear China's air pollution from its coal-fired power plants.
There will be talk of a new age of economic cooperation, greased by at least $4 billion or more in freshly signed deals, more than half with Boeing.
Naturally there will also be plenty of food and plenty of champagne. 
And the White House will declare, as its top officials have been saying for weeks now, that the main accomplishment of this summit meeting is that it is happening at all.
But that declaration is making a virtue of necessity, senior Administration officials privately admit, because the months of frenzied pre-summit negotiations between Chinese and American officials have produced significantly less than once hoped.
The agreement to get China to reduce its dangerous exports of nuclear expertise will be the substantive centerpiece of Wednesday's meeting, and it will clear the way for billions of dollars in sales of American nuclear power plants to a country whose economic ambitions outstrip its electrical capacity. 
China has also promised to stop selling anti-ship cruise missiles to Iran, reducing threats to American naval ships in the Persian Gulf and helping to mute Republican criticism of Mr. Jiang's visit.
But the once-feverish discussions about getting China to open its markets to foreign competition, especially with state-owned enterprises that are attempting a perilous transition to private ownership, have all but stalled -- and with it, China's hopes that this summit meeting would speed its entry into the World Trade Organization.
In other areas, progress will be at best incremental, senior officials say, and the main importance of this meeting is to provide a new beginning for what they concede has been the single most badly handled foreign policy of Mr. Clinton's Presidency.
In a speech on Friday, Mr. Clinton reiterated the need for broad engagement with China -- "expanding areas of cooperation, dealing forthrightly with our differences" in order to "advance fundamental American interests and values."
But his defense of this visit by Mr. Jiang seemed passionless, and his critics are bound to argue that Mr. Clinton will not get enough in return for ending America's diplomatic quarantine of China after the 1989 military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square.
Representative Christopher H. Smith, a Republican of New Jersey, who will hold hearings on Tuesday on Chinese human-rights abuses, said the summit meeting itself "should never have happened without preconditions on human rights."
"We don't want nice-sounding words and sound-bites," he added. 
"We want meaningful action for the victims of this dictatorship, which understands only power."
There are already concerns about the 71-year-old Mr. Jiang's reaction to the sight of protesters. 
He says his host, Mr. Clinton, should "handle these events."
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said today on NBC's "Meet the Press" that demonstrations were an example of democracy at work, that the Chinese had dictated their own itinerary, and that Mr. Jiang should not expect "a totally fuzzy time."
The biggest accomplishment of this summit meeting is expected to be a written pledge from China to phase out its nuclear assistance to Iran, even though there is no international obligation to do so.
In return, Mr. Clinton will lift a 12-year American ban on sales to China of nuclear technology for civilian power, which Beijing wants to buy and Westinghouse and ABB Combustion Engineering Nuclear Systems desperately want to sell.
Samuel R. Berger, Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, insists that sales of power plants "are the cart, but assurances to end nuclear cooperation with Iran is the horse."
"This is not in the first instance about whether we sell civilian nuclear power to China," he said. 
"It's about nonproliferation."
But many in Congress question the Administration's willingness to crack down on China for the sale of dangerous materiel to Pakistan and Iran. 
The issue has become highly politicized; Republicans have accused Mr. Clinton of downplaying alleged Chinese violations of past pledges to stop dangerous exports.
So Mr. Clinton has made security issues like proliferation and restraining North Korea important justifications for deepening American "engagement" with China at the highest level, and for his refusal to allow American policy toward China to rise or fall on human rights.
For the American business community, however, the power plants are the horse. 
To them, the nuclear sanction is another example of how Washington drives China into the arms of French, Russian and Canadian businesses. 
America's allies long ago came to terms with post-Tiananmen China, noting that China has possessed nuclear weapons for three decades. 
And Westinghouse and ABB Combustion Engineering have spent months documenting to lawmakers how sanctions have already cost the United States $16 billion in lost sales.
"Clearly, the Chinese have the capability to build power reactors on their own and get help from others," said R. Ian Butterfield, director of government affairs at Westinghouse, which is ready to swoop as soon as Mr. Clinton signs the waiver. 
"What they are looking for now is advanced technology, and they are making it clear that they want to standardize on one nuclear-power technology for the country."
Far more business is at stake during this visit, he argues. 
If China's economy keeps expanding rapidly, the country will need $60 billion in new reactors over the next 15 years, and American companies think the vast majority of that business can be theirs.
But the cost will be high: China wants extensive nuclear power technology transfer, just as it has obtained knowledge from Boeing about building sophisticated aircraft. 
And it wants assurances that the United States will be a reliable supplier, no matter what the Congressional mood.
Early this year, Mr. Clinton's aides were betting that the meeting's centerpiece would be China's impending entry into the World Trade Organization, a sign of the country's economic arrival. 
The unspoken part of the deal was that Washington would end the annual Congressional debate over "most favored nation" trade status for China.
But months of negotiations have produced little but doubts over whether Mr. Jiang is truly willing to make the sacrifices to join the W.T.O. 
-- summit or no summit.
China has missed several deadlines to produce a timetable for dismantling layers of protection and subsidies for China's inefficient state enterprises, which employ nearly two-thirds of the urban population.
After his trip to China last month,Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin reported to President Clinton that Mr. Jiang has considered the political impact of the economic dislocations of joining the W.T.O. 
-- and was aware that opening markets too fast could worsen the pain. 
"He is quite realistic about the challenges of making this work," Mr. Rubin concluded.
The economic crisis unfolding in Asia may further slow that opening, especially if Mr. Jiang concludes that a battered Hong Kong will not prove to be a cash cow, helping to pay for the privatization of Chinese enterprises. 
The first stock offering in two of those companies, including the huge China National Aviation Corporation, were indefinitely postponed over the weekend.
China's rethinking of when to enter the W.T.O. is understandable. 
Investors poured $42 billion into the country last year, roughly 40 percent of global investment in developing nations. 
Its growth is double digit and even without Hong Kong, it now has foreign currency reserves of an astounding $130 billion. 
Because Congress has consistently extended "most-favored nation" status to China, the Chinese are enjoying all the biggest benefits of joining the W.T.O. 
-- low tariffs for exports -- without any of the responsibilties of membership.
"The Chinese know that they only get into the W.T.O. one way -- on commercially acceptable terms," said Charlene Barshefsky, the United States trade representative. 
But some experts wonder if the American position is shortsighted.
"I think the U.S. side made a mistake and should have recalibrated its approach," said Nicholas R. Lardy, a senior fellow at Brookings Institution, who argues that it is better to get China inside the tent, preventing it from backtracking on past liberalizations. 
"Unless there is a change in policy there is a risk that China stays out indefinitely."
At every meeting, the Americans ask that dissidents like Wang Dan and Wei Jingsheng be granted medical parole. 
They also want Red Cross visits to Chinese prisons and an institutionalized "dialogue" on human rights, an end to religious repression in Tibet and elsewhere, and continued freedoms in Hong Kong. 
The Chinese respond, almost ritually, that these are purely internal affairs.
