
The United States and China are negotiating to eliminate American trade sanctions on high-technology exports to China, senior Administration officials said today.
But the Administration has so far failed to persuade China to formally agree to an international accord controlling the export of missile technology. 
And President Clinton's senior national security advisers agreed at a White House meeting on Wednesday to keep the sanctions in place unless China agrees.
 
Talks Next Week
The Administration had hoped to strike a deal with China on lifting the sanctions before Mr. Clinton meets China's President, Jiang Zemin, in Seattle on Nov. 
19, the first top-level meeting since before the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre in Beijing. 
Unless Mr. Clinton overrules his advisers, he will not be able to announce the end of sanctions.
"Our conditions for waiving the sanctions haven't changed," a senior Administration official said. 
"We have been urging the Chinese to talk about those conditions, but so far they've refused."
The Administration imposed sanctions on an estimated $1 billion in high-technology trade with China in August, as required under law, after intelligence agencies reported that China had shipped technology and components for M-11 missiles to Pakistan in violation of the Missile Technology Control Regime. 
The sanctions affect the planned launches of seven commercial satellites on Chinese rockets.
But as part of the Administration's larger strategy to win over China rather than isolate it, the White House is looking for a legal way to ease the sanctions.
In an effort to persuade the Chinese to begin talks on the sanctions, and in a major concession to United States business, the White House is pressing for a broad legal interpretation of the law requiring sanctions so some sales can proceed. 
The goal is to have Mr. Clinton accept the broad interpretation so that he can approve the export of one or two of the satellites by the time he goes to Seattle, senior Administration officials said.
White House lawyers argue that satellites that do not include components on the State Department's munitions list are not covered by the sanctions law and should be allowed for export.
"The National Security Council genuinely believes that the legal arguments are not clear cut and that there is some discretion on how to apply the law," an Administration expert said. 
"It's in part a matter of good business and in part that Seattle is coming up."
But it is far from certain whether satellites manufactured by Hughes Aircraft and Martin Marietta, the companies whose exports are pending, will be allowed to ship them.
Mr. Clinton intends to use next week's meetings with East Asian heads of state to point to his foreign policy successes, particularly efforts to increase trade with Asia. 
In his meeting with Mr. Jiang, the President will cite a series of high-level exchanges in the last several weeks between the United States and China, officials said.
 
Contact With Chinese Army
As a result of one such visit, the Administation recently announced the resumption of long-suspended contacts between the Pentagon and the Chinese Army. 
The next high-level visit will be a trip to Beijing this winter by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
Senior Administration officials added that Mr. Clinton would bring a negative message to Seattle as well: that China must make urgent progress on human rights, trade and non-proliferation of nuclear arms.
Senior officials said he would not be able to escape the conclusion voiced by Secretary of State Warren Christopher and other senior officials: that the relationship with Beijing has deteriorated in recent months and that unless there is significant improvement, particularly in China's human rights record, Washington will be unable to renew trade benefits for China when they come up for review in June.
These benefits, which allow China to export goods to the United States under the same low tariffs that apply to most other countries, form the foundation of the two nations' economic links.
There is other worrisome behavior as well. 
China experts in the Administration have concluded that China's underground nuclear test in early October was not a gesture of defiance aimed at the United States but an important military decision to improve strategic nuclear forces.
And Administration officials are convinced that American intelligence reports indicating that China intended to ship ingredients for chemical weapons to Iran were accurate, despite the fact that an inspection of a merchant ship turned up no evidence.
