
The first high-level military-to-military contact in more than four years has ended here after two days of talks between a Pentagon official and China's top military leaders.
They agreed to a "modest" agenda of future dialogue and professional exchanges on topics like international peacekeeping operations and on the problems of converting defense industries to civilian use.
The talks are part of a Clinton Administration effort to broaden American-Chinese relations as a means of heading off a confrontation over continuing human rights abuses in China. 
China's poor human rights record could force the President to curtail trade between the countries next June.
Chas. W. Freeman Jr., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Security Affairs, said at a news conference that the agreed-to exchanges do not mean that the Clinton Administration is removing the sanctions it placed on China after the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
There was no discussion of weapons sales to China, he said, and sharp differences remain over Chinese missile sales to Pakistan and American weapon sales to Taiwan.
At a news conference this afternoon, Mr. Freeman said the long isolation of China after the Tiananmen Square massacre, in which hundreds of civilians were killed by People's Liberation Army troops, "has taken its toll in terms of mutual understanding."
"If you don't have contact and dialogue, it is easy to be unaware of the other side's viewpoint and to misinterpret that viewpoint on occasion," he said. 
"In other words, ignorance can breed suspicion."
The tone of Mr. Freeman's remarks, which were full of praise for China's peacekeeping record in Cambodia and its diversification of its military industries into civilian areas, underscored recent efforts by the Clinton Administration to broaden and upgrade its relationship with China after a marked deterioration during the summer.
Chinese television news tonight featured Mr. Freeman's meeting with Liu Huaqing, the vice chairman of the Central Military Commission and a close ally of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
In remarks carried on the official New China News Agency, Mr. Liu said the meetings represented "a good beginning."
He added that China appreciated the efforts by the Clinton Administration "for improving relations between the two military forces."
Mr. Freeman, who served as the No. 2 diplomat in the United States Embassy in Beijing from 1981-84, said that with the end of the cold war, it was not likely that the military relationship would ever return to the closeness of the days when Washington pursued strategic cooperation with Beijing to put pressure on Moscow.
Underlying this talk of a new partnership is also a deep concern by Administration officials that the President may be forced next spring to cancel China's most-favored-nation trade status with the United States because of a continuing poor record on human rights in China.
 
--------------------
Warning of Trade Retaliation
WASHINGTON, Nov. 
2 (Reuters) -- A senior American official warned today that Washington would take retaliatory trade action if China failed to open up its markets substantially to foreign imports by a Dec. 
31 deadline.
"Dec. 31 is not a flexible deadline," said Charlene Barshefsky, deputy United States trade representative. 
"Absent significant liberalization, the United States will take action."
China agreed to do away with controls on imports significantly by Dec. 
31 in a memorandum of understanding with the United States signed in 1992.
"Thus far, the offers are not adequate," Ms. Barshefsky told a news conference.
Ms. Barshefsky said Washington could take a variety of retaliatory actions, including putting duties on imports under the Trade Act. 
She said that negotiators from the United States and China will meet on Nov. 
29-30 to discuss the issue.
