
As more and more Chinese seek to practice faiths including Tibetan Buddhism, Christianity and Islam, government officials there have increasingly responded with harassment, extortion, detention and even torture, the State Department said today.
As a result, a "marked deterioration" in religious freedom has occurred in China during the last year, enabled by a new law granting state and local officials broad authority to suppress 14 minority religions, including the Falun Gong movement, the State Department said in its second annual report on religious freedom around the world.
"The China government is concerned about things they don't understand, things they can't control and things that have an external influence," said Robert Seiple, the department's ambassador at large for religious freedom. 
"They'll talk about it in terms of stabilityI, but it's basically control."
The Congressionally mandated report's blunt assessment of conditions in China could add to tensions with Beijing as President Clinton prepares to meet with President Jiang Zemin on Friday in New York during a summit meeting of world leaders at the United Nations. 
Mr. Clinton hopes to persuade China to halt the export of missile technology to Pakistan, even as he seeks to place relations on a friendlier footing based on Senate approval of normal trade relations, American officials say.
Mr. Seiple said the president would raise concerns about religious persecution with Mr. Jiang. The ambassador highlighted the "brutal treatment" of members of Falun Gong, a growing spiritual movement that is widely perceived as benign in the West but has prompted mass arrests and lengthy sentences in China.
In its analysis of religious freedom elsewhere, the report faulted Taliban authorities in Afghanistan for continuing to persecute religious minorities by enforcing a strict interpretation of Islamic law that has resulted in public executions, floggings and amputations, and has systematically stigmatized non-Muslim Afghans.
It also said that Iraq, under President Saddam Hussein, has continued to ply a "brutal campaign" of murder and arbitrary arrests against followers of the majority Shiite Muslim population, the report said. 
Meanwhile, in Serbia, President Slobodan Milosevic has marginalized other faiths by favoring the Serbian Orthodox Church, the report said.
Russia's move to replace a landmark 1990 law protecting religious freedom with "ambiguous, unpredictable" legislation in 1997, constituted "a giant step backward," Mr. Seiple said.
Some close American allies were also singled out for criticism. 
The report faulted Israel for subjecting Arab Muslims to "various forms of discrimination," and for depriving them of the same quality of education, job opportunities and social services as Jews.      
