
Six months after President Clinton traveled to Beijing and challenged China's leaders to move rapidly toward political reform, the Administration's policy of engaging Beijing was called into question today when Chinese courts sentenced three of the nation's most prominent dissidents to long jail sentences.
Critics of China on Capitol Hill and human rights groups said the tough prison terms were evidence of the failure of the Administration's policy to encourage trade and diplomatic ties with China in hopes of democratic reform.
The dissidents -- Xu Wenli, who was sentenced to 13 years in prison, Wang Youcai, who received an 11-year sentence, and Qin Yongming, who was reported to have received 12 years -- were charged with subversion.
Given President Clinton's effusive praise for China's senior leaders during his trip to Beijing last summer, the Administration found itself on the defensive today and harshly criticized the prison sentences, even as it continued to insist that the Administration's policy of engagement was helping Beijing toward democracy.
James Foley, a State Department spokesman, said that the United States "deeply deplores" the jail terms and called for the immediate release of the dissidents. 
"These three men appear to have been involved in nothing more than efforts to form a new political party," he said.
While condemning the prison sentences, Mr. Foley and other American officials were careful to note the Administration's assessment that there had been progress in the human rights situation in China, some of it linked to President Clinton's meeting in Beijing with Chinese President Jiang Zemin.
"There had been improvements in the human rights situation in China, modest improvements," Mr. Foley said. 
The severe prison terms -- and other recent instances of harassment of democracy campaigners in China -- are "steps backward in relationship to what had been an improved human rights performance," he said.
Critics of the Administration's China policy noted that the long prison sentences were handed out less than a week after President Jiang delivered a pointed speech in Beijing in which he made clear that China's economic reforms were not a prelude to Western-style democracy.
"The Western mode of political systems must never be copied," he said, adding that those who challenged the Communist Party's supremacy would be crushed.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who has long been among China's harshest critics in Congress, said that the prison sentences were "the clearest demonstration" since the President's visit to China last summer of Beijing's "true intentions regarding human rights."
"The Administration can say what it wants, but it must know today that its policy on China is an embarrassment," she added. 
"What the Chinese have learned is that they have all the latitude in the world."
Mike Jendrzejczyk, Washington director for Human Rights Watch, said the jail terms were proof of the need for the Administration to revise its China policy, which he described as "almost entirely" driven by the Administration's desire to encourage trade.
He said that while there had been some signs of progress in the human rights situation in China over the last year -- notably, China's agreement to sign international treaties on civil and economic rights -- the overall picture was bleak.
"On balance," he said, "any progress China has made by allowing greater openness may have been canceled out by a more repressive attitude."
Human Rights Watch, the largest American-based human rights group, called on the Administration to consider postponing or canceling a planned visit to China early next year by Commerce Secretary William M. Daley and a high-level trade delegation. 
"That would get Beijing's attention," Mr. Jendrzejczyk said.
Other China experts and scholars insisted that the Administration was right to continue its policy of engagement with China, and that there was reason to believe that political reform would follow economic reform.
Peter W. Rodman, a former Nixon and Reagan Administration official now at the Nixon Center in Washington, said that "the United States cannot control the evolution of a society as complex as China's."
"The pattern of this regime is that every once in a while, they ease up a bit and somebody goes too far and there's a crisis," he said. 
"I don't think you can blame the United States for this crackdown, nor can you give us credit for any political reforms. 
On human rights, I just don't think there's much more we can do."
      
