
A broad agreement reached by China and the United States today on textile trade is likely to further increase a sector of cross-Pacific commerce already worth billions, American officials said.
The accord, signed in Beijing today after a deadline on Friday was extended into the weekend, also clears away a politically sensitive obstacle to better diplomatic relations in time for Madeleine K. Albright to make her first visit to China as Secretary of State later this month.
American officials portrayed today's agreement as a breakthrough that allows American textile-sellers better access to China, in exchange for loosening restrictions on the volume of textiles and garments that China exports to the United States, its largest market.
"China has the largest share of the U.S. market and we now have a share of the China market," Rita Hayes, chief negotiator for the United States, told reporters in Beijing. 
"Now it is a two-way street, a level playing field."
That upbeat assessment may be aimed at Washington, where China's growing trade surplus with the United States -- $39 billion, by American estimates; $10 billion, by the Chinese count -- is becoming an issue of concern among members of Congress.
Yet calling textile trade "a two-way street," may be a bit premature. 
In 1996, China exported about $6.5 billion of textile and apparel to the United States, about 1,000 times the $6 million that the United States sold to China in the same category.
Ms. Hayes said that her team won a greater right to sell home furnishings, drapes and designer garments in China, but she was reluctant to describe exactly how. 
It is not clear how much demand exists for such items in China, even if import restrictions were actually loosened.
Of far greater importance, dollar-wise, is how much the United States will expand the quotas that have been aimed at limiting Chinese textile and apparel exports to the United States. 
Ms. Hayes and other officials declined to say, but suggested they would be enlarged.
Textile quotas were originally put in place to limit Chinese exports to the United States, in order to protect the higher prices charged by American textile makers and, arguably, the jobs of American textile workers. 
Chinese trading companies compete with each other hard to obtain quotas, which are allocated by Chinese officials who sometimes favor their friends and acquaintances.
But China's enormous production of clothing, and the seemingly insatiable consumer demand in the United States, has also led many Chinese and Hong Kong companies to find ways around American quotas, on an immeasurable scale, by mislabeling garments or shipping them through third countries. 
The problem has existed for years, so when the United States decided to impose penalties last September, some Chinese officials accused them of doing so simply to gain leverage in trade talks.
Many trade experts argue that textile quotas are now outdated, and some point out that the United States' membership in the World Trade Organization requires it to abandon all such quotas within 10 years anyhow.
Today's agreement, which formally takes effect in January 1998 and lasts for four years, replaces a 1994 agreement. 
As is often the case, the accord was negotiated in an atmosphere of down-to-the-deadline brinkmanship, with final negotiations held in a series of tense and drawn-out meetings that included two all-night sessions.
"I think this morning at the beginning we were unhappy with each other but now we have become friends," said Li Dongsheng, China's chief negotiator and a senior official at the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation. 
"This agreement eloquently demonstrates the common interests of the United States and China in developing trade and economic relations."
But a separate trade-related obstacle remains, since American complaints that Chinese companies are improperly transshipping some apparel through third countries, to avoid American quotas, prompted the United States to impose $19 million in textile penalities last September. 
Ms. Hayes said the penalties were still in effect.
That is a drop in the bucket, when compared with the $6.5 billion in textiles and apparel that China sold to the United States.
Another American trade official, Lee Sands, held two days of talks in Beijing last week to gauge the status of China's effort to join the World Trade Organization. 
American officials have said they will support China's application if Beijing takes steps to cut tariffs and treat Chinese and foreign companies equally.      
