
With pressure growing to respond to China's imprisonment of its best-known dissident, Clinton Administration officials said today that it would be politically impossible to support Beijing's demands for admission to the new World Trade Organization while it continues to repress dissent and to ignore a key trade accord with the United States.
In interviews today, a day after the one-day trial of Wei Jingsheng, who was sentenced to 14 years in prison for his advocacy of democracy, Administration officials continued to defend their policy of "constructive engagement" with China. 
They insisted that their decision not to link trade issues to an improved human rights record last year remains the best hope for influencing China's behavior over the long term, although that policy has come under renewed attack in Congress.
As a matter of practical politics, President Clinton's aides said, China's increasingly belligerent positions on human rights and trade issues are effectively linking the two subjects anyway.
With Congress threatening to revoke China's preferential trade status with the United States, officials said that the Administration is not likely to make the case that China should be given the ultimate economic reward: inclusion in the worldwide trade agreement that went into effect at the beginning of this year.
"It may be a moot issue, because China has still not met the commercial standards for admission," said one senior official, who insisted on anonymity. 
"But we are now sending them the message that while human rights is not explictly part of the negotiations, it is part of the atmosphere, and they are ignoring that at their peril."
The decision not to link human rights and trade was an emotional and hard-fought battle within the Administration in early 1994.
Those supporting the decision argued that stronger links between China and the West would ultimately encourage the democracy movement by bringing commerce, fax machines, computers and the Internet to the Chinese population -- forces the central Government would not be able to control.
But the results in the last 18 months have not been encouraging. 
More dissidents are imprisoned now than at any time since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989. 
Inside and outside the Clington Administration, opponents of the policy are beginning to stir.
For Beijing, admission to the World Trade Organization has become a major goal. 
While Washington is only one voice in the decision, it is the most influential, and so far it has blackballed China's candidacy while expressing a willingness to negotiate.
Among other steps, it has insisted that China must open its markets dramatically and enforce existing agreements -- including a hard-fought accord with the United States to protect music, software and movies, among other goods, from piracy. 
China has periodically responded that the American stance was part of an effort to contain Beijing's growing economic power.
Until a few weeks ago, Administration officials were saying they were encouraged by China's efforts to change its ways. 
But in the last few weeks, that optimism has been reversed. 
Now Mr. Wei's sentencing has changed the politics of the trade issues.
"We feel we went out on a limb for the Chinese, and they sawed it off," a senior official who advises Mr. Clinton on economic issues said today. 
"They refuse to get the message."
      
