
In a rare address to Chinese military officers, Defense Secretary William J. Perry urged China's armed forces today to be more open about the budget and the planning in order to ease concerns abroad.
"Your capabilities in all areas, including the military areas, are growing by the day," Mr. Perry told 300 Chinese colonels and generals. 
"It would be helpful if your defense budget and strategic planning were more open and visible to the outside world."
China's efforts to strengthen its armed forces has led to worries that Beijing might use its military to bully its neighbors and support its territorial claims in the South China Sea. 
And those concerns have been aggravated by the military's penchant for secrecy.
Aides to Mr. Perry reported that the Chinese had agreed to send a team of defense officials to the Pentagon to outline their military plans until 2000, as part of a reciprocal information exchange.
But the officials said it was not clear just how forthcoming Beijing was prepared to be about the areas of concern cited today by Mr. Perry: China's actual level of military spending, its military strategy and its plans to upgrade its weaponry.
As the first American Defense Secretary to visit China since the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989, the simple fact that Mr. Perry was speaking to the officers was itself something of an event.
As he arrived at the National Defense University in Bejing, a military band in gleaming white uniforms struck up "America the Beautiful."
A large Red Star, the emblem of the People's Liberation Army, dominated the room as Mr. Perry spoke to a crowded room of officers dressed in green uniforms with yellow epaulets.
During the speech, a soft-spoken Mr. Perry made his case for closer ties between the American and Chinese militaries, saying that Washingon and Beijing have a special responsibility to insure stabilityI in the western Pacific.
Mr. Perry said China needed to do more to restrain its sale of missile and other military technologies. 
Alluding to Chinese arms deals with Pakistan, he warned that an arms race between Pakistan and India, two nuclear powers, could lead to a "catastrophic" war on China's southern border.
Mr. Perry also warned that a nuclear-armed North Korea would be a menace. 
And he said China and Vietnam needed to eschew inflammatory statements and military issues intended to reinforce their territorial claims in the South China Sea.
Mr. Perry's mention of human rights, however, was brief and somewhat indirect. 
He said the failure to make progress in this area would give ammunition to critics of ties between Washington and Beijing.
Then the Defense Secretary took questions for about an hour from the Chinese officers, most of whom appeared to be looking toward their superiors on the podium for a guide about how to react.
At the end of the event, Gen. Zhu Dunfa, the president of the defense university, said Mr. Perry had given a speech of "great significance," raised his hands and gave a hearty applause. 
The officers quickly followed suit.
Mr. Perry's speech was one of the highpoints of his three-day visit to China, in which he also met with top military and civilian leaders, including Premier Li Peng. 
Mr. Perry's visit ends on Wednesday, when he visits Wuhan and Chongqing, and meets with President Jiang Zemin.
The polite and occasionally warm reception Mr. Perry received from the Chinese military stood in marked contrast to his meeting this morning with American business representatives. 
At the meeting, sponsored by the American Chamber of Commerce, business officials expressed little interest in the military issues Mr. Perry said were important for the future of the region and complained that Washington was not doing enough to help American companies do business here.
But in Washington, Mr. Perry's military talks have attracted more interest, including some criticism from conservatives and human rights supporters.
Mr. Perry sought to deal with the critics today by underscoring the potential benefits for American security of dealing with the Chinese while playing down expectations for immediate results.
Describing the overall progress in the talks as "modest," Mr. Perry said the Chinese appeared sensitive to American concerns. 
But he added, "The value you can put on those steps needs to be seen yet."
