
The United States has decided to sell an early-warning radar system to Taiwan that will allow it to monitor the launch of Chinese ballistic missiles or manned bombers, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The decision has already drawn protests from Beijing and was opposed by a group of mid-level Administration officials who argued that it would worsen recent tensions between Washington and Beijing.
The Administration approved the sale at the recommendation of senior policy makers from the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon, who said that China's deployment of large numbers of short-range missiles along its coastline posed a serious military threat to Taiwan, officials said.
The Defense Department, in a report to Congress earlier this year, said: "Taiwan's most significant vulnerability is its limited capacity to defend against the growing arsenal of Chinese ballistic missiles."
The radar system, which could be worth hundreds of millions of dollars in business to American defense contractors, will give Taiwan several minutes' warning of the launch of ballistic missiles on the mainland.
"I'm pleased that the Administration has finally recognized that it is appropriate to help the Taiwanese protect themselves," said Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, who heads the House International Affairs Committee. 
"If China is pointing missiles at Taiwan, I would expect Taiwan to try to defend itself."
Earlier this month, Mr. Gilman, a New York Republican, threatened to introduce legislation to permit the sale if the Clinton Administration refused to approve it.
He said in an interview that the Chinese had no reason to be concerned about the sale of the radar "because they're the ones putting the missiles along the coastline in the first place."
The spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, Yu Shuning, said that the embassy had already issued a formal protest to the Clinton Administration over the decision. 
The deal was first reported earlier this week by news organizations in Taiwan.
"We have made serious representations with the U.S. side," Mr. Yu said. 
"We say that any arms sales to Taiwan by any country in the world constitutes an infringement on Chinese sovereignty, an interference in our internal affairs."
Beijing considers Taiwan a breakaway province and fears that early warning systems could become part of an anti-missile defense system proposed by Washington that could shelter Taiwan.
Administration officials said opposition to the sale of the radar was voiced by mid-level officers at the White House and State Department who said that it would needlessly provoke China at a time when tensions are already high over trade disagreements as well as allegations of Chinese nuclear espionage in the United States.
But they were overruled. 
A senior Administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that top policy makers at the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon all agreed that the sale should be approved.
"I think there was a fairly good meeting of the minds on this," the official said. 
"We have told the Taiwanese that we will meet their legitimate defensive needs. 
And a passive early-warning system is clearly a legitimate defensive need."
Administration officials said there was still no agreement with Taiwan over exactly what type of radar system would be approved, which companies would build it, and how much it would cost.
"This was an agreement in principle," the senior official said. 
"There wasn't a decision on a specific system."
The contractors thought likely to be asked to bid on the contract include Lockheed Martin, Raytheon and Thomson-CSF of France.
Taiwan's Government said in a report in February that it had determined through intelligence sources that China had deployed more than 100 ballistic missiles that could be fired across the Taiwan Strait at the island. 
The Taiwanese have cited the intelligence in arguing the need for development of a missile-defense system.
The agreement on the radar system was reached during talks with senior Taiwan military officers who were in Washington this week on an annual arms-buying tour.
Under the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act, which was passed by Congress after the United States broke off formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan and established ties to Beijing, the United States agreed to provide the island with the weapons to defend itself from attack by Beijing.
The Taiwan Government had no comment today on the radar sale. 
A spokesman for the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in Washington, which serves as a de facto embassy for Taiwan here, said that the Clinton Administration had requested that it not issue any statement on the agreement.
 
      
