
In an effort to salvage the deteriorating relationship between the United States and China, Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned the Foreign Minister of China that his country risks losing favorable trade status with the United States if it does not make quick progress on human rights and arms issues, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr. Christopher raised a number of worrisome developments in Chinese behavior since the Administration conditionally extended most favored nation status to China for a one-year period, which ends in May.
Despite Mr. Clinton's appeal to China to continue a global moratorium on underground nuclear blasts, Mr. Christopher was unable to win assurances from Foreign Minister Qian Qichen that his country would not conduct the blast. 
Administration officials said that intelligence reports indicate that China has finalized preparations for such a blast at the Lop Nor nuclear weapons site and that it could be set off at any time.
"We are continuing to implore them not to test," Mr. Christopher told reporters after the meeting. 
He said that even if China resumed its underground testing, the United States would continue to pursue its goal of a comprehensive test ban. 
"I do not take lightly the resumption of testing, and we still hope it will not take place; but that will not interfere with our efforts to get a comprehensive test ban."
 
U.S. Attacked at U.N.
Mr. Christopher added that both he and Mr. Qian agreed that relations between the two countries were "in some rough waters."
The Administration is also unhappy that Mr. Qian was either unable or unwilling to make good on his pledge to Mr. Christopher in Singapore in July that China would curb the transfer of M-11 missile technology to Pakistan. 
The absence of any change in the M-11 deal prompted the United States to impose sanctions, as required by law, against several Chinese companies.
Mr. Christopher admitted that the talks today had not produced any change in China's position on the issue of the spread of arms.
The Secretary told Mr. Qian privately that he was distressed by Mr. Qian's speech to the United Nations General Assembly on Wednesday, in which the Foreign Minister sharply criticized the United States for what he characterized as a duplicitous standard in its policy on arms sales and an arbitrary imposition of punitive sanctions.
Without actually naming the United States, Mr. Qian attacked "the hegemonic conduct of a self-styled 'world cop,' who tramples upon international law and norms of international relations" and arbitrarily and improperly uses trade sanctions.
Mr. Qian was apparently referring to the Clinton Administration's charge in August that a Chinese ship was carrying raw ingredients for making chemical weapons to Iran. 
China allowed a joint search of the ship, but no chemicals were found, which embarrassed the United States and called into question the reliability of American intelligence reports.
On the positive side, China has agreed to allow John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, to visit China next month, the first such visit in a year, Mr. Christopher said.
