
Ending more than two months of acrimony, the United States and China agreed here today that Washington would pay $4.5 million in compensation for the victims of NATO's bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Yugoslavia.
The agreement removes one of the biggest obstacles in relations between Washington and Beijing at a time when several sensitive issues -- Taiwan and trade, above all -- remain on the table as the two nations prepare for a meeting between Presidents Clinton and Jiang Zemin at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in New Zealand in September.
David Andrews, a State Department legal adviser who led the American side in the negotiations, said the agreement reflected "the critical importance of the U.S.-China relationship."
He said the money would be paid as soon as possible.
The agreement does not resolve several other issues, including compensation for damage done both to China's Embassy in Belgrade on May 7 and to the American Embassy and consulates in China in days of violent protest after the bombing. 
Talks on property damage will begin in late August.
Mr. Andrews said the Chinese Government would decide how the compensation will be divided among the families of the 3 people who were killed and 27 who were wounded and will distribute the money.
An Administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said in Washington that the agreement was an "important step in putting this issue behind us and mending the relationship with Beijing."
"obviously it's very significant."
The bombing was viewed by Beijing and ordinary Chinese alike as an affront to national dignity, sparked violent anti-American demonstrations and prompted China to adopt a stern line in all contacts with the United States. 
Meetings on human rights, security issues and China's effort to join the World Trade Organization were all postponed.
China demanded a full apology, a detailed accounting of how the bombing occurred and punishment for those responsible as conditions for restoring normal ties. 
To date, Beijing's official position is that Washington's explanation that the bombing was caused by faulty planning and intelligence is insufficient.
But American officials say they have detected recent efforts by Chinese officials to find a way past their more confrontational demands. 
China's state media gave wide coverage to telephone calls that Mr. Clinton made to Mr. Jiang. The two Presidents spoke when teams from the two countries played each other in the Women's World Cup Final on July 10.
They conferred again last week after Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, infuriated Beijing with remarks interpreted as nudging Taiwan closer to formal independence -- something China has vowed to block with military force if necessary.
Earlier this week, the Chinese played host to an American Under Secretary of Commerce, David L. Aaron, for a day of talks that appeared to be breaking the ice for something more substantive.
Previously, China had been unwilling to discuss compensation for damage to the American Embassy and consulates in China, arguing that it was caused by student demonstrators, as opposed to the four NATO-launched missiles that hit the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade.
Mr. Andrews said today that Yin Yubiao, the Chinese Foreign Ministry's director general for treaties and law, had agreed to proceed at the same time on discussions about damage to each side's embassy.
Mr. Andrews went out of his way to say the compensation was voluntary and not an admission of American liability. 
Washington has insisted that the bombing was an accident.
"This payment will not create any precedents," Mr. Andrews said, apparently trying to quell concern about possible claims against the United States in the future that arise from other military action.
Perhaps the most pressing issue in American-Chinese relations in the coming months will be China's desire to enter the World Trade Organization. 
With limited time in a complex schedule of hurdles that have to be crossed to win United States support for China's entry, American officials said the talks would have to restart before the September meeting between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang.
So far, China has been unwilling to resume negotiations. 
The compensation talks had been considered the primary obstacle, but United States officials say they will not know until they actually sit down again at a negotiating table.
The official New China News Agency today reiterated China's position that the bombing was indefensible.
"The Chinese side stressed that the U.S. bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Yugoslavia caused serious personnel casualties and property losses and grossly violated the international law and the norms governing international relations," the agency said. 
"The U.S. side must bear all the responsibility for this and make immediate, adequate and effective compensations for all the losses occurred to the Chinese side."
