
A long dispute within the Clinton Administration over how to handle Pakistan's acquisition of missiles and nuclear technology from China is intensifying, officials said today. 
Over the objections of the State Department, the intelligence agencies are arguing strongly for a finding that could bring about economic sanctions against both Pakistan and China.
At issue is whether to make an official determination that Pakistan has the ability to launch missiles with nuclear warheads. 
The United States has been convinced for several years that Pakistan, despite its denials, has been buying Chinese M-11 mobile missiles and nuclear technology, flouting efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons and adding another destabilizing influence to Pakistan's relations with India.
A senior intelligence official said that the Central Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon and other agencies had all concluded that Pakistan should be judged capable of launching nuclear-armed missiles.
But the official said that the head of the State Department's missile and space division, Allen W. Locke, did not "believe the weight of the evidence" and was objecting to the intelligence community's conclusion. 
The official said a final determination on how to proceed would be made by John Deutch, the C.I.A. director.
The dispute comes a month after the Administration resolved a related dispute, over the purported sale by a Chinese company to Pakistan of equipment used to produce weapons-grade uranium. 
It decided not to impose any sanctions on China.
Mr. Locke did not respond to a telephone call today. 
The State Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said there was "a continuation of our ongoing effort to look into this matter."
He added, "we have not made a determination that either China or Pakistan have engaged in activity that would be sanctionable through the transfer of missiles from China to Pakistan."
The latest state in the dispute was first reported today by The Washington Times.
If Mr. Deutch decides in favor of the intelligence community's assessment, he would set in motion a process under which the Administration would have to decide whether to impose sanctions. 
The sanctions could include a ban on all electronics exports from the United States to China and Pakistan, as well as a more limited ban on imports from them.
Some intelligence officials view the State Department as eager to avoid a big confrontation with China at a time when relations are already strained over a host of other issues, including trade and human rights as well as nuclear proliferation.
The Administration is in last-ditch negotiations to avert a trade war with China over piracy of American videos, music and software, and it is also pressing for Congress to renew China's preferential trade status.
      
