
Two Congressional investigations, set off from different starting points, are examining Citibank and the confidential world of private banking, a growing and highly lucrative service.
The investigations, led by lawmakers who rarely find common cause, are examining how Citibank -- and a handful of other institutions -- handle the private accounts of foreign officials and their relatives. 
The investigations are likely to result in the closest scrutiny yet by Congress of private banking.
The investigations are led by Representative Dan Burton, a conservative Indiana Republican, and Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat.
Mr. Burton is looking at allegations of Chinese involvement in the financing of the 1996 American election campaign, including $300,000 in Chinese Government money for the Democratic Party that was wired from Citibank's Hong Kong branch.
Senator Levin, aides say, wants to know how half a dozen American banks managed sensitive foreign accounts, including Citibank's work for powerful families in Asia, Africa and Central America.
Citibank, a unit of Citigroup Inc., entered the private-banking business in the 1970's, taking some business away from the highly secretive Swiss banks. 
Citibank is a leader in global finance, and while its private bank is relatively small, it has attracted elite clients.
But some customers have come under intense law enforcement scrutiny, and so too has the private bank.
First came Raul Salinas de Gortari, who is the brother of Mexico's former President and who is currently in jail in Mexico. 
Raul Salinas secreted millions in a Citibank account, money that investigators suspect came from illicit activities.
Then came the husband of Pakistan's former Prime Minister, who is also in jail for corruption.
More recently there was Liu Chaoying, the daughter of China's former top military official and the reported paymaster for $300,000 in Chinese military money intended for the Democratic Party in 1996, according to testimony from a participant in the payment.
The Salinas investigation has caused Citibank to tighten its policies.
"Since the Salinas episode, the bank's policy on accepting public figures as customers has toughened," said Tom Lahiff, a vice president and lawyer for Citibank. 
"Public figures are not a target market," he said, adding that public figures who do become clients are reviewed annually by top executives.
In 1992 Citibank Private Bank accepted Mr. Salinas as a client and then helped him move tens of millions of dollars out of Mexico. 
Other banks refused to do business with the Salinas family but Citibank, then the only American bank licensed in Mexico, opened the account with what investigators later found was scant review.
That case prompted a Federal criminal investigation of Citibank. 
No charges have been brought against Citibank and the bank denies any wrongdoing.
Congressional investigators and Federal bank regulators, however, are continuing to investigate Citibank's handling of other politically prominent foreign clients, examining whether Citibank has been more concerned with protecting the clients than cooperating with inquiries.
Last week Mr. Burton, chairman of the House Committee on Government Reform, complained in a letter to Citibank about "undue delays" and a "seeming lack of compliance" with a committee subpoena for records on the $300,000 wired to a Democratic fund raiser. 
Bank records list the sender as Ms. Liu, a Chinese military officer and aerospace executive whose father was then China's senior military official.
"We've been quite responsive to the committee in a short time frame," Mr. Lahiff said. 
"We sent an additional document today and by the end of the week we will have given them everything we can."
Ms. Liu transferred the money a few days after the head of Chinese military intelligence told her and the fund raiser, Johnny Chung, that he would soon have Ms. Liu forward $300,000 to Mr. Chung to support President Clinton and the Democratic Party, according to Mr. Chung's testimony last May before Mr. Burton's committee. 
Mr. Chung pleaded guilty to campaign-related charges, and was sentenced to probation after cooperating with investigators.
In his letter last week, Mr. Burton also questioned the lack of authorized signatures for Citibank accounts held by the People's Bank of China, the country's central bank. 
Last year Federal bank regulators had similar questions about these accounts as they tried to trace tens of millions of dollars from the central bank to an account at Citibank Private Bank that was controlled by the daughter of one of the Communist Party's old guard, Government documents show. 
The woman is the sister-in-law of Ms. Liu and a former official at a small California bank that served the Chinese business community.
Mr. Lahiff said the incomplete documentation stemmed from banking laws, common in some countries, including China, that "prohibit our production of certain information."
The Democrats on the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, where Mr. Levin is the ranking Democrat, are looking at Citibank from a different angle, asking whether offshore private banks, in their desire to offer clients extra confidentiality, may leave themselves vulnerable to money laundering.
A primary focus of the Senate panel is how Citibank Private Bank handled accounts for top foreign officials and their relatives, and whether advising foreign leaders about their investments affects Citibank's business dealings with those foreign countries, committee aides said.
Mr. Lahiff said Citibank had turned over "a lot of documents" to the Senate committee.
The Senate inquiry intensified after a General Accounting Office report last December found that executives at Citibank Private Bank ignored one of the bank's own safeguards in helping to move up to $100 million for Raul Salinas while his brother, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, was President of Mexico.
Mr. Lahiff said the G.A.O. report contained "a lot of errors," but he declined to specify them.
Another case under review by the Senate committee, aides said, involves Pakistan's corruption investigation of Benazir Bhutto, the former Prime Minister of Pakistan, and her husband, Asif Ali Zadari. 
The two were convicted of corruption earlier this year in Islamabad. 
Documents show that Citibank Private Bank in Geneva handled tens of millions of dollars for Mr. Zadari.
Citibank was not cited for any wrongdoing and the corrupt proceeds at issue in the trial did not involve Citibank, one lawyer familiar with the case said.
Private banking, a Citibank official testified in 1994, is a "white-gloved kind of environment" for wealthy clients who "usually come from countries that are in turmoil of some sort" and seek to shelter their money.
At the heart of all these investigations lies a banking practice termed "know your customer."
According to a G.A.O. report last year on money laundering and offshore private banking, Federal banking regulators "consider 'know your customer' policies one of the most important components of an institution's measures for understanding whom it is doing business with, recognizing unusual transactions and detecting illegal or suspicious activities."
When American bank regulators investigated possible money laundering involving the People's Bank of China and Ms. Liu's sister-in-law at the California bank, they raised questions about whether some American banks knew enough about their customers, according to a lengthy report last year by the Comptroller of the Currency.
Money from the People's Bank of China flowed through a number of American financial institutions, but the Comptroller pushed for more information about the Citibank accounts because that bank handled a significant part of the total. 
But Citibank gave the same explanation offered by Mr. Lahiff: Chinese law prohibited disclosure of much information.
Unlike the laws in Switzerland and other r countries, American regulations do not require banks to "know their customer," but most banks do. 
Still, there remains the question of whether pushing too hard for more disclosure will scare customers away.
"The dilemma becomes: how far down the line do you push the customer," said Peter Sperling, a former Citibank executive who helped set up Citibank's private international bank in the early 1970's.
According to one G.A.O. report, "Citibank made no attempt to investigate Mr. Salinas's background before accepting him" as a customer in 1992. 
Mr. Salinas, who was referred to the bank by a prominent Mexican businessman, was arrested in 1995, and his Citibank accounts were later closed.
For prosecutors to show that a bank violated money-laundering statutes, they have to prove that the money was derived from an unlawful source and that the bank knew or should have known this.
But the Federal inquiry into the tens of millions of dollars in transfers by China's central bank in the mid-1990's -- like the inquiry into Citibank's handling of Mr. Salinas's wealth -- has produced no charges.
By now, the China trail is cold or incomplete. 
But Representative Burton continues to press the matter beyond where Federal investigators have gone.
He is trying to trace the $300,000 that Ms. Liu wired to Mr. Chung, a small fraction of which wound up with the Democratic National Committee. 
A select House committee concluded that the payment was an attempt by Ms. Liu to "better her position in the United States to acquire computer, missile and satellite technologies."
Mr. Burton's next stop will be Ms. Liu's account at Citibank Private Bank in Hong Kong.
