
THE CLASH
A History Of U.S.-Japan Relations.
By Walter LaFeber.
Illustrated. 508 pp. 
New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. 
$29.95.
 
ALTERED STATES
The United States and Japan
Since the Occupation.
By Michael Schaller.
Illustrated. 320 pp. 
New York:
Oxford University Press. 
$30.
AMERICAN foreign policy is going through a noble phase just at the moment. 
In Eastern Europe, the United States is erasing the divisions of the cold war, bestowing NATO's security upon grateful Czechs, Poles and Hungarians. 
In the Middle East, it is rededicating itself to the peace process, a task so thankless that a saintly glow illuminates anyone fool enough to undertake it. 
In the Balkans, America is the scourge of war criminals; in Myanmar, it denounces human wrongs. 
But foreign policy is not always like this. 
Look at America's Japan policy.
America's dealings with Japan have seldom been about human rights or justice or peace mediation. 
They have been about profits and guns. 
In 1851 Japan was minding its own business when President Millard Fillmore wrote the Emperor a letter demanding that the two countries commence trade; since then, the American clamor for access to Japan's markets has continued unabated. 
In the early 1940's, after commercial rivalry in continental Asia got out of hand, the two nations fought a horrendous war; at other times, their armies have lined up on the same side. 
Warm or hostile, the United States-Japan relationship has been driven by calculations of raw power. 
Principle was just about irrelevant.
This is how the Japanese wanted it. 
When Japan was forced out of isolation by Fillmore's letter, Asia was being carved up by colonists spouting fine principles from the decks of their gunboats. 
Japan resolved to escape principled subjugation by amassing commercial and military power, and by shutting its ears to foreigners' beguiling rhetoric. 
As a result, Japan has traded with America only when it stood to gain; it has never believed (until recently, at least) that a consistent commitment to free trade is good on principle. 
Equally, Japan has entered security alliances with America only on terms that suited its narrow interests. 
It has been indifferent (again, until recently) to abstractions like human rights and international justice.
Japan's determined Realpolitik, and America's response, lie at the heart of two scholarly new books on the bilateral relationship. 
In "The Clash," Walter LaFeber, a diplomatic historian at Cornell University, takes the story back to the 1850's. 
Michael Schaller, a professor of history at the University of Arizona, deals with the period after 1945 in "Altered States."
Both offer dense chronological accounts that are not for the fainthearted. 
Both draw few general lessons from their research, which may disappoint nonspecialist readers. 
Nevertheless, both books suggest that today's noble phase in foreign policy may soon bump up against its limits.
The noble foreign policy is based on two ideas: that America has the power to force other countries to behave in a principled way, and that its power allows it to take its core security for granted. 
The history of Japan policy shows that both assumptions are dangerous. 
Even at times when America boasted overwhelming power vis-a-vis Japan, it has not been able to make its principles stick. 
And, despite American power, Japan has often behaved in ways that threatened American security.
Consider first America's failure to make Japan accept its principles. 
For 150 years, as LaFeber shows, America has preached the value of free trade; for 150 years Japan has listened only when convenient. 
In the late 19th century, Japan was weak, so it backed America's "open door" policy on Chinese trade and grabbed the commercial opportunities that this policy created. 
In the early 20th century, Japan was strong, so it reversed its attitude to the open door and seized a chunk of China for its own companies. 
After 1945, America continued to explain that free trade yields benefits for everyone. 
Japan pretended to listen.
Japan, LaFeber tells us, has defied the United States on more than just trade. 
In 1904 Japan took advantage of American diplomatic support to go to war against Russia. 
This did not prevent Japan from entering into an alliance with Russia in 1910 to thwart American policy in China. 
After World War I, the United States emerged as the most powerful nation on earth: its industry had escaped destruction, its Navy was building formidable new ships, foreigners (including the Japanese) depended on New York for capital. 
But at the Versailles conference Japan steadfastly refused to bend to Woodrow Wilson's request that it should give up some territorial gains. 
"Wilson found himself now controlling the world's greatest economic and military power," LaFeber writes, "but it was not enough to have his way with Japan."
After World War II, this pattern continued. 
America's relative power increased; its military bases in Japan protected the Japanese from Communism. 
But this did not stop the Japanese from defying America repeatedly, refusing to rearm as rapidly as Washington wanted, demanding that the southern island of Okinawa be returned, undermining the American boycott of China after the Tiananmen massacre. 
Japanese leftists wanted the alliance revoked; when, in 1960, America's Ambassador in Tokyo met Japan's Foreign Minister to exchange signed copies of the security pact, arrangements had to be made for the two to escape over a back wall if rioting mobs caught up with them. 
Even the pro-American right wing has doubted the security alliance. 
In 1972, according to a poll cited by Schaller, only 44 percent of Liberal Democrat candidates for the Diet supported it strongly.
The high point of American power over Japan came right after 1945, when America's occupation force thought it could remake Japan in its own image. 
As a biographer of Douglas MacArthur, the general who reigned over occupied Japan, Schaller is especially expert on this folly. 
The United States started out by purging militarists from public life, hoping that new leaders would sprout up who shared American principles. 
When the vacuum seemed likelier to be filled by a pro-Communist left wing, Washington changed course. 
Nearly 200,000 Japanese had their purge orders revoked; these ex-militarists accounted for 42 percent of the new members of the Diet's lower house after the 1952 election. 
In 1957, Nobusuke Kishi, who had cosigned the declaration of war against the United States in 1941 and been imprisoned for war crimes, visited America as Japan's Prime Minister and Eisenhower's guest. 
Schaller mentions that he was invited to throw out the first ball at a game between the New York Yankees and the Chicago White Sox.
This visit was humiliating; but it teaches a useful lesson about the limits to American power, and so the limits to its ability to pursue principled foreign policy. 
On principle, America should have punished war criminals. 
But it simply could not afford the risk that Japan might acquire weak or Communist leadership. 
On principle, today, America is right to push Japan to open its markets and shoulder more of the defense burden in Asia. 
But perhaps it cannot afford to risk a Japanese backlash -- just as it must beware of provoking Southeast Asians when it speaks up for human rights and Russians when it enlarges NATO. 
It is not a pleasant thing to say, but noble ideals can sometimes be a poor guide to foreign policy.
