
The Government indicated today that it was essentially pleased with remarks over the weekend by Newt Gingrich, who said last week during a visit to China that he accepted a one-China policy but asserted that the United States would defend Taiwan militarily if it was attacked.
The one-China policy has been at the heart of relations between the United States and China since President Nixon established ties with Beijing in 1972. 
In signing the Shanghai Communique then, the United States and China effectively deferred the issue of a resolution to the simmering civil war that has kept Taiwan and the mainland divided since 1949. 
In the meantime, a robust economic boom in the region has drawn the two enemies close together.
At a news briefing today, Shen Guofang, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, said of the House Speaker's visit: "Mr. 
Gingrich mentioned several times in Beijing that he opposed Taiwan independence and approved the principle of one China. 
He also expressed that the American Government and the American Congress will stick to the principle of one China."
With little rancor, Mr. Shen highlighted the positive points in Mr. Gingrich's remarks, which were made to reporters in Shanghai on Sunday, before the Speaker and his party of 12 members of Congress left for Tokyo and a final stop in Taiwan before returning to the United States.
Mr. Shen did not take issue with Mr. Gingrich's pointed warning that if the mainland should use military force against Taiwan, "we will defend Taiwan. 
Period."
The Chinese spokesman said: "Referring to what he said in Shanghai, China has always stood for the position of peaceful unification" with Taiwan.
"However," Mr. Shen said, "the Chinese side will take necessary measures if Taiwan declares independence or if foreign powers interfere in the Taiwan issue."
What those measures might turn out to be, he said, "is the internal affair of China."
Mr. Gingrich's remarks on defending Taiwan seemed to undermine the "strategic ambiguity" by which the United States has avoided issuing a direct warning to China over the use of force, in part because such a warning might incite the pro-independence forces on Taiwan.
The White House issued a statement on Sunday that while it did not rebuke Mr. Gingrich, said that he "was speaking for himself."
The statement reiterated that the United States was committed by the Taiwan Relations Act to provide an "adequate self-defense" for Taiwan, while also insisting that both parties "peacefully address the Taiwan issue."
But some China specialists argued today that Mr. Gingrich's formulation, balanced between his public commitment to "one China" and a determination that no party can solve the Taiwan issue by force, amounted to a clear statement of American political sentiment in the wake of the 1996 Taiwan crisis. 
In March of last year, China carried out military exercises off Taiwan as the island was holding its first direct popular vote for President. 
Beijing viewed the election as undermining the one-China principle.
Other specialists worry that Mr. Gingrich's remarks were not sufficiently nuanced. 
Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a China scholar at the University of Michigan, said Mr. Gingrich seemed to commit the United States to defending Taiwan even if Taiwan took provocative steps like making unilateral statements that could be construed as declarations of independence.
"If this point is left unclear in Taiwan, there are potential downside risks to his statements in China," Professor Lieberthal said.
      
