
Thousands of steelworkers, truck drivers, auto workers and other union members rallied on Capitol Hill and swept through the halls of Congress today in a show of muscle intended to block a trade agreement with China.
Their message, conveyed by union leaders and rank-and-file members who came from as far away as Michigan and Nebraska, was that trade was working for American corporations but not for American workers.
While the immediate issue is whether Congress should approve a deal negotiated by the Clinton administration to bring China into the World Trade Organization, the rally was also a forum for a more diffuse anxiety about economic globalization and its effects on job security at home and on poverty, the environment and human rights around the world.
"This is part of a long-term campaign to make the global economy work for working families," John J. Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., told the thousands of placard-waving union members assembed on the west side of the Capitol.
The day served to kick off a series of demonstrations planned by a diverse coalition of groups for much of the next week around meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Along with the World Trade Organization, those institutions have come to embody, to their critics at least, the perils of placing corporate and financial concerns ahead of ordinary people in managing the increasingly free flow of money, jobs and goods across borders.
Many union members attending today's rally said they were not against trade in general and were not naively demanding a return to a simpler, more secure world. 
Instead, they said, they are only opposing a deal with a country that does not respect workers' rights and would stop at nothing, in their view, to steal the jobs that are the backbone of the American middle class.
"Asking our leaders to keep our jobs in our country is not living in the past," said Jim Brookins, a quality control technician and local union official who traveled here from Rayland, Ohio. 
"It's preparing for the future."
Proponents of the trade deal with China said that the unions were misguided and that the best route to a stronger economy and more security for workers was to open up new markets for American goods. 
The agreement would make permanent the normal trade relations that China has with the United States, which are now subject to annual renewal.
"A few thousand people bused to Washington today by A.F.L.-C.I.O. labor bosses can't change the fact that the sky is blue, the earth is round and trade is the key to the United States creating 20 million new jobs and the lowest unemployment in four decades," said Representative David Dreier, a California Republican who is helping lead the push to win approval for the China deal in the House.
In an effort to counter the unions' message, the administration released a Commerce Department study showing that every state would benefit from increased trade with China. 
And Gen. Colin L. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs, endorsed the agreement, saying that among its other benefits it would be in the nation's security interests.
The administration's agreement with Beijing on the terms under which China would join the trade organization is likely to be approved by the Senate, but its fate in the House is unclear. 
Both parties are split to some degree, and the outcome hinges largely on the votes of about 75 undecided Democrats.
Among them is Representative Thomas C. Sawyer of Ohio, whose district encompasses the heavily unionized Akron area. 
Mr. Sawyer voted to approve the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 over union opposition.
This afternoon Mr. Sawyer got a visit from a union delegation that included Dave Prentice, a pipefitter at a Goodyear Tire and Rubber plant in Akron. 
"If this thing passes, it will hasten the deindustrialization of the United States," Mr. Prentice said after the meeting.
The union members said Mr. Sawyer had assured them that he would vote against the trade deal unless there was an accompanying bill calling for sanctions if China violated labor rights or other human rights. 
Some Democrats are trying to develop such a bill in the hope that it would allow them to vote for the trade agreement without giving up the leverage that the annual Congressional debate over trade privileges have provided to send a signal to Beijing.
The tangled politics of the issue were on full display today. 
Labor leaders were putting most of their pressure on Democrats, warning that failure to back the union position on the China deal could lead to a lack of support for the party from labor in the November elections.
The Teamsters union invited Patrick J. Buchanan, who is seeking the Reform Party's presidential nomination on an anti-trade platform, to speak at a separate rally the union held today -- a clear warning to Vice President Al Gore, who has said he would renegotiate aspects of the pact with China if he is elected president.
On the other hand, most of the unions regard helping Mr. Gore reach the White House and helping the Democrats regain control of the House as crucial to advancing the labor agenda, raising questions about how hard the unions are willing to push to block the trade deal.
"It's unfortunate that the president took this time to bring forward this trade agreement, because to some extent it does split us," said James P. Hoffa, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. 
"It should not have been done."
The police no longer offer estimates of the size of crowds at political events in Washington, and it was unclear whether the rally attracted the 15,000 people cited by the unions.
Labor leaders worked hard during the last month to round up workers to attend today's lobbying effort, but union members said it did not take much to persuade them to come.
For many, the impetus was their regret at not having fought harder in 1993 to stop approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which workers in the most affected industries consider to have been a disaster for American jobs.
During a break between visiting Congressional offices, Ralph Falls Jr., a Teamster who drives trucks for a bakery in Reading, Pa., said friends of his had lost their jobs when a bleach factory closed and moved its operations to Mexico.
"Nafta was supposed to help create more jobs, and it took away more jobs," he said. 
"China will do the same thing."
Studies about the effect of Nafta have generally found that it created fewer jobs than its proponents predicted and killed fewer jobs than its critics have asserted. 
But backers of the trade deal with China acknowledge that they have to do a better job of selling its benefits.
"Supporters of trade with China and open markets have to become more sensitive to the anxieties caused by the pace of change, which unfortunately are disproportionately and inaccurately blamed on trade," said Gene Sperling, the White House economic adviser.
"Never had the case been stronger for jobs and weaker for dislocation than an agreement in which we don't open our market one bit and China opens its market dramatically," Mr. Sperling said.
            
