
THE waiter leaned down, presenting a basket in which several wiggling spotted prawns, just fetched from the fish tank, were awaiting our pleasure. 
Did we want them cooked quickly in wine and oil?
In a good Chinese restaurant, it is always best to take the waiter's hints.
The preparation was tableside, and the prawns continued to flip around until they were added to the pot. 
The air was perfumed with the aroma of rosewater, the prawns unbelievably tender and sweet.
The best Chinese restaurants in Vancouver, like Sun Sui Wah in the up-and-coming Mount Pleasant neighborhood, know what their patrons -- mostly wealthy Chinese emigres from Hong Kong -- expect.
An enormous immigration from Hong Kong over the past decade has made Vancouver one of the most Asian cities in North America -- and, many would say, the best city in the world, outside of Hong Kong, to eat Chinese food. 
An estimated 110,000 Hong Kong Chinese have flowed into this city of 525,000 since the early 1980's in anticipation of the Chinese takeover.
And many arrived with the wherewithal to indulge their connoisseurship of the fine points of Chinese cuisine: the Canadian Government made citizenship easy to obtain for those who could show several hundred thousand dollars in assets. 
Not for nothing has the city earned the nickname Hongcouver.
Chefs from Hong Kong's best restaurants soon followed these emigres, bringing with them a level of sophistication that is seldom seen outside that city. 
So, for example, when Marco Wong, who heads a shipping company in Manhattan, wants the very best Chinese food in North America, he knows to look for it in Vancouver, where his brother, Stephen Wong, is a food consultant and cookbook author.
"It's like the difference between going to a very good bistro and going to Alain Ducasse," said Marco Wong, referring to France's only six-star chef. 
"Nowhere else comes close."
If some of the Chinese food I ate during my five-day stay were French, it would be called haute cuisine.
The Hong Kong connection is evident to the visitor the moment Vancouver comes into view: a city on the water with new, tall, slim towers sprouting like mushrooms, many of them built with Hong Kong money. 
One hears grumbling from old-timers about the new "monster houses" built by wealthy newcomers where modest bungalows once stood. 
And about the new need for classes in English as a second language in the schools. 
But there is no grumbling about the new culinary influences on the Vancouver scene. 
Here is where I discovered that contrary to popular belief, the Chinese can make pastries as fine and flaky as the most expert French baker, that soy sauce comes in at least 60 varieties and that the latest fad among young Chinese, bubble pearl tea, is one that ought to sweep America.
The chefs' demand for the ingredients so readily available to them in Hong Kong has brought those ingredients not just to Vancouver, but also to places like Richmond, a city south of Vancouver whose population is now 40 percent Chinese.
It was at the modern sprawling T & T Supermarket in Richmond that I found those 60 kinds of soy sauce on the shelves, as well as bean curd in at least two dozen different forms, ranging from one labeled "smelly" to one shaped like a chicken and made for vegetarians. 
There are black chickens, duck tongue, geese intestines and taro root ice cream, too. 
Looking almost exotic in this setting were North American staples like Sara Lee strawberry cheesecake, maple syrup and Ritz crackers.
In Richmond you find fish tanks in the supermarkets. 
One tank after another is filled with live sea creatures that are the foundation of much Hong Kong cooking. 
T & T has a sign in English above the crabs:
 
WARNING LIVE CRABS DO BITE
Live is the operative word. 
The freshness of seafood is crucial for Cantonese food because the recipes are quite simple, to show off the quality of the ingredients.
Even the fast food in the food courts of the Richmond shopping malls (where it is possible to go an entire day without hearing a word of English spoken) is intriguing. 
The stalls are similar to those in Asian cities, and they offer an amazing display of quick, cheap, mouthwatering dishes. 
In the Yaohan Center, Pak Tak Chiu Chow serves dishes like savory duck cooked with five-spice powder and soy accompanied by a dip of garlic and rice vinegar. 
The Curry House has a subtly hot lamb curry served with a delicious rice cooked in chicken broth with chicken fat, garlic and ginger.
But one of the most intriguing concoctions is the bubble pearl tea, imported from Taiwan, that is the latest fad among young Chinese. 
It is a fad I would happily embrace: sweetened iced tea frothed with milk, sometimes idiosyncratically flavored with anything from litchi nuts to Ovaltine. 
What makes it so appealing are the gelatinous pearls made of potato flour placed in the bottom of the glass that are sipped through an extra-wide straw. 
The pearls sort of rumble as you slurp them up. 
(Sadly, these giant Taiwanese pearls do not seem to have reached the East Coast yet.) Vancouver has no less than 30 establishments that specialize in these drinks.
Given the inventiveness of Chinese chefs, it's not surprising to find refreshing fusion dishes here as well. 
Chinese restaurant menus turn up such surprises as pan-fried ostrich dumplings and Japanese udon noodles and teriyaki sauce; such oddities as lobster with cream and butter sauce, an import from Hong Kong via France; pomfret with Miracle Whip and a favorite dim sum dessert, a crisp spring roll filled with canned fruit salad and mayonnaise.
Only in a place sure of its Chinese roots would a chef dare to create these fusion dishes, even if they don't all work. 
The fusion goes both ways. 
"We use a lot of Chinese ingredients," said Adrienne O'Callaghan, the chef at a downtown restaurant with the resoundingly un-Chinese name of Irish Heather. 
"We don't think of them as Chinese. 
We think of them as mainstream: Chinese vegetables, rice vinegar, sesame oil, all kinds of noodles, shrimp paste. 
You don't bat an eyelash anymore."
Vancouver has had a Chinese presence since the 1850's, decades before the city's incorporation. 
It's just that the Chinese profile has risen so sharply, so fast.
"Chinese food and Chinese people were always around," said Murray McMillen, the food editor of The Vancouver Sun, "but I didn't feel the culinary influence when I was growing up."
The culinary impact of the large Chinese population in the city has become so pervasive that people here treat Chinese ingredients the way people in Houston treat salsa.
Raazhan Rae, a schoolteacher, used to shop in Chinatown, but now she can find what she needs in her own neighborhood, where most of the residents are westerners. 
"The vegetable department where I shop probably has one-third Oriental vegetables," she said, "and it has fish tanks."
Kasey Wilson, the author of several guidebooks and the co-host of a radio food show, has noticed the difference among her circle of friends. 
"Westerners buy a lot of prepared dim sum, steam them in little Chinese steamer baskets they have at home and serve them as appetizers. 
The fact that you can just pick up a Peking duck and serve it with lingonberry sauce, that barbecued duck is used to top pizzas, that chefs are buying them for their restaurants and cutting them in strips for appetizers . . . "
Those in the know, Chinese or not, who are looking for the best and cheapest fish, shop in Chinatown. 
Sylvia Molnar, a cooking teacher, goes there at least once a week to buy live fish, especially sturgeon and carp.
Visitors to Vancouver are most likely to encounter its Chinese specialties in the restaurants. 
Sun Sui Wah is renowned for its squab and its live fish. 
The restaurant's weekend dim sum are just as sophisticated as its dinner fare. 
For Westerners who want to dip no more than a toe into shark's fin dishes, shark's fin dumplings are the route. 
The glutinous shark's fin makes a pleasing contrast to the shrimp and ham in the filling, all encased in a very tender dough. 
The savvy diner saves room for fresh-from-the-oven egg tarts and the best sponge cake on the planet.
The Shanghai Bistro in downtown Vancouver also puts on an impressive dim sum banquet at lunch every day, and a standout is the silky handmade noodles with spicy eggplant, all cooked to sweet perfection. 
This is also the place for steamed buns filled with pork and cilantro, perfectly cooked so that the buns do not taste, as they often do, like uncooked dough. 
Shanghai scallion pancakes are toasty brown on the outside and soft inside.
The best winter melon soup I had in Vancouver was at the Grand King Seafood Restaurant, improbably in a Holiday Inn. 
(Don't let the locations of Chinese restaurants put you off.)
In Richmond, the President Chinese Seafood Restaurant, in the Radisson Hotel (which also houses a Buddhist temple), does a superb suckling pig and a refined shark's fin soup with a rich, clear broth. 
The deep-fried Alaskan king crab announced its arrival by sending waves of fragrant garlic to the table, and what the Chinese call hollow vegetable but others call water spinach, is superb with ginger, garlic, hot pepper and preserved bean curd.
If you want to try the ovaries of the snow frog, guaranteed to make you beautiful, improve your complexion and clean your system, says Melina Hung, communications director of the Radisson, have them in the pudding. 
You'll never know they are there.
Alas, some of the very best of these restaurants see few westerners. 
"I've had a hard time convincing Caucasians to come to these restaurants," said Stephen Wong, the cookbook author. 
"They won't spend money on pea shoots," a reference to one of the most popular vegetables.
On the other hand, these top restaurateurs have not gone out of their way to welcome westerners. 
But now that some of those wealthy Hong Kong Chinese are returning home, the restaurants may find they have to step up their outreach programs.
 
FIVE-SPICE MAPLE-CURED SALMON
 
Adapted from "New World Noodles" (Firefly Books, 1997) by Bill Jones and Stephen Wong
Time: 15 minutes plus marinating
 
1 side of salmon, about 2 pounds
1/2 cup salt, preferably sea salt
1/2 cup maple syrup
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon grated ginger
1 teaspoon five-spice powder.
 
1. Prepare the salmon by removing all bones and trimming the fat. 
Place the salmon in a long stainless-steel, glass or plastic container.
 
2. In a small bowl combine the salt, maple syrup, soy sauce, ginger and five-spice powder. 
Pour the mixture over the fish, turning to coat it evenly. 
Leave the salmon skin side down, cover with plastic wrap and place a roasting pan on top weighted down with a couple of bricks or cans. 
Refrigerate for at least 12 hours and up to 3 or 4 days.
 
3. Remove the salmon from the curing mixture, and rinse off any excess spices. 
Lay the salmon skin side down on a cutting board, and slice on a diagonal into thin slices, as you would smoked salmon, without cutting down to the skin, which should be discarded.
 
Yield: 12 servings.
 
CLASSIC BUBBLE TEA
 
Adapted from Stephen Wong
Time: 3 minutes
 
1/2 cup chilled, cooked large Chinese tapioca pearls (if substituting regular small tapioca, use 1/3 cup)
1 cup crushed ice
1 cup very strong chilled black tea (or substitute orange pekoe tea or Chinese litchi tea)
1 cup milk, or to taste
Honey or sugar to taste.
 
1. Place the pearls in a large parfait glass.
 
2. Combine all remaining ingredients in a cocktail shaker, and shake vigorously until the mixture is frothy. 
Pour into the glass, and serve with extra-thick straws.
 
Yield: One 16-ounce drink.
