
By convicting Wei Jingsheng in a closed trial today of "conspiring to subvert the Government" and sentencing him to 14 years in prison, China again silenced the most powerful pro-democracy voice in the country and sent a strong warning about the limits of dissent.
Mr. Wei, 45, a onetime electrician at the Beijing Zoo who helped father China's democracy movement in 1978, was also denied his political rights for three years beyond the prison term. 
The harsh sentence drew expressions of anger and indignation from members of Mr. Wei's family, human rights organizations and governments around the world.
[The Clinton Administration criticized China but stopped short of threatening specific retaliatory action. 
But some members of Congress warned that Mr. Wei's imprisonment could lead to renewal of the linkage that Washington once made between trade privileges for Beijing and its rights record. 
Page A20.]
The verdict comes at a time when China's Communist Party leadership has reached a peak of sensitivity and defensiveness in foreign and domestic affairs, in part related to a struggle for pre-eminence among potential successors to Deng Xiaoping, China's 91-year-old paramount leader, who is in extremely frail health.
Over the last 12 months, Beijing has taken increasingly belligerent or intransigent positions on a range of issues from human rights and trade negotiations, to religious freedom in Tibet and political developments in Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
In the case of Taiwan, China has threatened more explicitly to go to war to recover its estranged province than at any time in decades.
The judgment against Mr. Wei sends a powerful signal to a nation in the midst of an economic revolution that any public talk of political revolution, democratic reforms and democracy can be considered seditious.
To many in China, these constraints are not as burdensome as they seem to many foreigners. 
Free speech, even criticism to senior leaders, is tolerated as long as it is private. 
Millions of Chinese crave stabilityII and are not interested in the politics of confrontation that marked the democracy movements of the 1980's.
Outside of intellectual circles, Mr. Wei may be less a symbol and more a curiosity, but the Communist leadership fears that his attack on Communist rule and passion for democracy could take hold among the millions of disaffected Chinese who are not taking part equally in the fruits of China's economic boom.
Thus, Mr. Wei is the largest and most obvious target for this new Government crackdown.
His mordant style first drew public attention and outraged some party leaders when he scrawled it on a poster and hung it on a stretch of wall in Western Beijing that came to be known as Democracy Wall. 
Mr. Deng was among the first to feel his barb in 1979, and Mr. Deng is believed to have ordered Mr. Wei jailed and Democracy Wall torn down.
After serving 14 1/2 years of an initial 15-year sentence, Mr. Wei emerged in September 1993 with the same fearlessness to take on Mr. Deng again, as well as his potential successors.
"The present leaders were the most outspoken group of men, shouting their support of human rights and democracy before they ascended to power," he wrote in an essay on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in November 1993. 
"But their subsequent dictatorship made clear that they have no intention of making good on the promises they once made to the masses."
In April 1994, after a number of run-ins with the authorities, Mr. Wei was rearrested.
With the dispatch of Mr. Wei back to a prison cell, where he has spent all but six months of the last 16 years, China's security services have now jailed or placed under close control all of the prominent pro-democracy leaders who remain from the Democracy Wall or Tiananmen periods.
Wang Dan, a student leader of the pro-democracy demonstrations at Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989, whom the Bush Administration invested great effort to free, has been held without charge since May. 
So has the writer Liu Xiaobo.
Chen Zeming, one of the so-called "black hands" behind the Tiananmen uprising, was released in May 1994 as a special concession to President Clinton, but Mr. Chen, who is suffering from cancer, was abruptly jailed again last June. 
Another student leader who was released last summer, Liu Gang, lives as a virtual prisoner in his home in Liaoning Province.
In Beijing today, many democracy campaigners awoke on the day of Mr. Wei's trial to find themselves under house arrest.
At a courthouse swept by the first snow of winter here, Mr. Wei made an appearance at the Beijing No. 1 Intermediate People's Court and spoke on his own behalf during the six-hour trial. 
Although Mr. Wei was represented by a respected private attorney, Zhang Sizhi, and was allowed to present his defense, the verdict was preordained by the Communist Party leadership, Chinese and Western experts say.
"Wei was defended by a lawyer hired by Wei's relatives, and was allowed to represent himself fully," a Government statement said tonight. 
"After debate between the opposing lawyers, Wei made his closing statement."
Under today's ruling, Mr. Wei would not be able to publish another essay about democracy in China, criticize the Communist Party regime or speak to a foreign reporter until the year 2012, assuming that he survives another long prison term.
No record of today's proceedings at the No. 1 Intermediate People's Court was made public, but tonight, China's Government-run central television and press agency issued a statement that was extraordinary in its acknowledgment that Mr. Wei was engaged in nothing more sinister than publishing and fund-raising activities in support of China's democracy movement.
"The court's investigation showed that Wei, in attempting to overthrow the Government, developed a plan of action," the Government statement said, "which included establishing an organization to raise funds to support democratic movement activities, purchasing newspapers, setting up a company in charge of organizing cultural activities, and organizing non-governmental painting exhibitions, performances and publications with the aim of setting up a propaganda and liaison base, attempting to raise a storm powerful enough to shake up the present Government."
The Government statement made no assertion that Mr. Wei had formed a group, or written a charter or manifesto with the stated aim of toppling the Communist Party or overthrowing the Chinese Government. 
Moreover, there was no assertion that Mr. Wei advocated violence or any activity beyond publishing and cultural performances in support of democratic reforms in China.
"The trial and sentence are an outrage, and a clear effort by Beijing to subvert the rule of law," Human Rights Watch said in a statement.
Outside the courthouse, several dozen foreign reporters and photographers gathered in hopes of witnessing the proceedings, or at least recording the coming and going of the unidentified few Chinese who were allowed to witness it. 
But Public Security officers kept foreign journalists more than 100 feet away from the gate of the courthouse.
Some members of Mr. Wei's family were allowed to attend the trial, but their telephones were not working afterward.
Two of Mr. Wei's personal friends who came to the courthouse despite earlier warnings by the police to stay away were arrested after they mingled with journalists and expressed their concern for Mr. Wei's fate.
"As Wei's friends, we are concerned about him," Jin Cheng said. 
"I think all dissidents are deeply concerned about the trial. 
If Wei is convicted, we don't know what's going to happen to us."
Mr. Jin chatted as plainclothes policemen, who later arrested him, stood close by seeking to overhear or record his comments to reporters.
"What is more important," he continued, "is that Wei is the symbol of China's democracy movement and we are concerned about the fate of the movement."
Reached in Washington, one of Mr. Wei's sisters also expressed her alarm over the verdict.
"This verdict shows how shameful the Chinese Government is," said Wei Shanshan, who is lobbying for White House and Congressional support on her brother's behalf.
"The only thing he did was speak out his thoughts, and this is not a violation of the Chinese Constitution," she said, adding, "he hasn't formed any anti-Government organizations or engaged in any anti-Government activities."
