
The Clinton Administration criticized China today for imposing a harsh new prison sentence on its most prominent human rights campaigner, Wei Jingsheng, but stopped conspicuously short of threatening specific retaliatory action.
But some members of Congress, expressing unhappiness at President Clinton's failure to speak out before Mr. Wei's conviction, warned that the dissident's imprisonment could lead to a restoration of the linkage that Washington once made between trade privileges for Beijing and its record on human rights.
They said the Clinton Administration's separation of the two issues last year only emboldened the Chinese Government to crack down on dissents. 
The Administration contended that it would be easier to encourage Chinese tolerance of dissent if Washington improved its relations with Beijing.
"I think the Administration policy is a dismal failure in every respect, and I think the sentence is a slap in the face," said Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, reflecting the view of many of her colleagues.
Beijing's treatment of Mr. Wei, Ms. Pelosi said, put the renewal next spring of China's preferential trade status "very much in doubt" in the House of Representatives. 
"People have had it," she said.
But some China experts said Western eagerness for doing business in China circumscribed Washington's ability to use favorable trade status to change the Beijing's behavior.
"It can't happen," said Orville Schell, a senior fellow at the Freedom Forum at Columbia University. 
"We're in an era where commerce rules."
China sentenced Mr. Wei to 14 more years in prison just hours after the House unanimously approved a resolution calling for his immediate and unconditional release and the dismissal of all charges against him. 
The House further urged the State Department to make his release one of its primary objectives in Chinese-American relations and to "raise these issues forcefully and effectively in every available forum."
A similar resolution was adopted by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
"Our view is that this Administration should make very clear at the highest level of the Chinese Government that this is unacceptable," said Mark Thiessen, the spokesman for Senator Jesse Helms, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.
But the statement issued by the White House reflected little of the anger that was expressed in Congress across the political spectrum.
"The United States condemns this or any action designed to silence the voices of democracy," the White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, said at today's daily briefing. 
"The United States Government has often called for his release, and today we do so again."
John Shattuck, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, said, "We urge the Chinese authorities to show clemency to this courageous man whose championing of democratic values has gained him international recognition."
Mr. Clinton, when he met President Jiang Zemin in New York in October, included Mr. Wei on a list of four Chinese dissidents whose plight was of concern to the United States. 
Mr. Clinton has not mentioned Mr. Wei's case publicly since then.
But Representative Frank R. Wolf, Republican of Virginia, said today, "I think it's time for the President to personally get involved."
A Republican from California, Representative Christopher Cox, said he would raise Mr. Wei's case when he visits China next month with a delegation from the House Commerce Committee. 
He said he would also ask to visit Mr. Wei in prison.
News of Mr. Wei's fate was felt hardest by his younger sister, Wei Shanshan, who had flown in from Germany, where she now lives, to solicit support for her brother from Congress and the White House.
At a news conference in the Capitol, Ms. Wei said she was worried about her brother's health because he had serious heart problems and high blood pressure. 
She sometimes seemed to fight back tears as she spoke in rapid-fire Chinese.
"If a country like the United States, founded on principles of freedom and human rights, will not even help him, then this leads many to question whether the United States has given up on human rights," Ms. Wei said.
China's imprisonment of Mr. Wei has upset Congress at a time when its members are expressing irritation with other aspects of the relationship. 
These include Washington's growing trade deficit with Beijing, its inability to stop the Chinese from pirating computer software and other intellectual property and China's transfer of nuclear technology to countries like Pakistan.
