
The United States and China are discussing a visit to Beijing next year by Vice President Al Gore or Hillary Rodham Clinton, as a "trial run" for a state visit by President Clinton, Western officials here say.
Mr. Clinton has been reluctant to visit China because of the country's still-repressive human rights practices and has privately admonished the Communist Party leadership to make further improvements before any presidential visit can be considered, Western officials say.
The discussions are part of a continuing effort by the White House and China's party leaders to improve contacts between the two countries as the health of China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, deteriorates.
Thus Mr. Gore's trip "would be a trial run in a lot of respects," a Western diplomat said.
Since early this year, Chinese security officials have detained, arrested or placed under aggressive surveillance hundreds of dissidents during visits by foreign dignitaries, which has added to tension and embarrassment. 
The Chinese are considering holding an environmental conference, possibly in April, to follow the 1992 United Nations conference on the environment in Rio de Janeiro. 
Such a conference would provide a convenient venue for Mr. Gore's visit because of his interest in environmental issues.
China is in the midst of what some experts call an environmental crisis, with major water sources and air quality being degraded at alarming rates. 
Mr. Gore recently invited Qu Geping, a top environmental scientist and a member of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, China's Parliament, to the White House for talks on China's environmental problems. 
Their meeting was followed by a meeting with President Clinton.
One Western official said that if an environmental conference cannot be organized by April, then Mr. Gore, or perhaps Mrs. Clinton, could lead the American delegation to attend a United Nations conference on women in September.
The Administration also plans for Secretary of Energy Hazel O'Leary to travel to China early next year to lead a large delegation of corporate executives of energy and high-technology companies.
China is currently negotiating with a number of American companies competing with European and Japanese companies to win contracts to build electrical power plants, subway systems, dams and other infrastructure projects.
