
With their easy banter, upscale clothes and shared bottles of imported vodka, the large group of young Russians on the eight-hour Moscow-to-Vladivostok flight were obviously people who did this often.
Halfway through the overnight flight, when most of his group had dozed off, Roman, the leader, agreed to explain who they were and what they did. 
It was a variation on a story often heard among Russian entrepreneurs trying to break out of the encrusted mold of socialism.
They were on a "shopping tour" to China, he said -- not of the tourist sort, but to pick up goods to resell in Moscow. 
Most in the group planned to bring back inexpensive track suits and running shoes, but there were also buyers of electronics and household appliances.
The 23 members of the group were independent buyers who had banded together to form a company that organized the visas, travel and hotels. 
The trip cost each of them $500, and each carried anywhere from $3,000 to $5,000 in cash in American dollars in their money belts to spend in China.
 
Other Destinations
There were thousands like them, Roman said, from all over Russia and other former Soviet republics. 
China was the current draw, because visas were easy and the prices were right, but there were also "shopping tours" to Turkey, Poland and elsewhere. 
Some went from Vladivostok to the Polish border and sold their goods to Poles who moved it westward.
The group banded together partly for protection, Roman said. 
They were obvious targets, since bandits knew full well what they were up to. 
It was no coincidence that most of the group were men of an athletic build in their late 20's or early 30's, but in the end there was no guarantee against robbery, he said. 
They had all been hit, most more than once.
On arrival in Vladivostok, they would spend a night in some hotel and then take a train to Harbin in China. 
There they would spend a few days haggling and buying. 
Then, toting their bales of products, they would return to Vladivostok and arrange to ship their wares on the Trans-Siberian Railway back to Moscow. 
In seven days the goods would be in Moscow.
Roman's business was "rags," mostly track suits. 
Back in Moscow, he had six people working with him. 
Most of them would fan out to various flea markets and peddle the clothes.
 
Profits and Risks Both High
The profits were good: Roman said he could sell a track suit for seven times the purchase price. 
But risks and costs were high. 
There were the arduous trips, roughly one per month, the risk of robbery, the long hours, several people to pay and constantly changing costs. 
There was the inherent insecurity of the operation, which could be cut off at any moment by the Russians, the Chinese, Aeroflot or a dozen other unexpected problems.
A current problem is with passports. 
Russia had decreed that new passports are needed for travel abroad. 
But the Chinese were never advised, and Russians with new passports were turned away at the border.
"These people come up to me at the tolkuchki," Roman said, referring to the new outdoor markets that have sprung up in every Russian neighborhood and village, named from the word to "push."
"And they scream at me, 'How dare you sell for these prices!'
'We know what you're buying this for!'
'You have no shame!'
"
"That hurts a lot." he said. 
"I want to tell them, 'Do you think I enjoy doing this?
Do you think I like sitting in these long overnight Aeroflot flights, haggling with Chinese, staying in God-awful hotels?
Do you think this is the life I want to live?'
I'd much prefer to spend the time with my wife and daughter."
 
A Welder by Trade
Handsome and well-spoken, Roman had completed his studies in welding at a technical school and gone on to an institute to do research in welding exotic metals. 
He liked the work, but the institute could not pay a living wage.
So he dipped into the new free market. 
On a trip to Czechoslovakia, he saw that the Russian matryoshka dolls -- the brightly colored wooden figures in diminishing sizes that fit into one large doll -- were selling briskly.
He negotiated to supply them at a lower price. 
He then contracted to buy them directly from artists in Russia. 
The shipments soon started moving to Prague, to everyone's satisfaction: Several artists were making money, he was making money, and the Czechs were making money.
One day the customs agent stopped him. 
"Are these wood?"
"Of course they're wooden."
"Then you need a special permit," the agent said. 
"The Government has decreed wood a strategic export. 
Sorry."
The decree was intended to control exports of raw lumber. 
But a permit would have required extreme effort. 
Roman's business was dead.
Next, when the first cheap Chinese track suits began to filter into Moscow, he thought they could be made even cheaper in Russia. 
He contracted with a textile factory in Ivanovo for the cloth, got a dozen seamstresses together and started putting out Russian track suits.
 
Done In by Taxes
Then the taxes and the payoffs began. 
A 28 percent value-added tax, a 32 percent tax on profits -- in the end, Roman said, he was giving away 90 percent of his profits. 
The business folded.
So he began taking "shopping tours" to China. 
There were no customs on imported goods valued under $5,000. 
Taxes could be evaded in the tolkuchki, and if you kept mobile, you could elude the protection rackets.
Why does he use dollars?
Because there is no other way to carry cash, he said. 
Russia has no travelers' checks or money orders, and $5,000 at the current exchange rate was 5 million rubles -- a bag full of bills.
Roman said he still dreamed of a small business. 
He had some capital saved up. 
All he needed was a dollop of stability.
