
VICTORIA ENG and Timothy Chin both grew up in New York and have fast-paced, high-tech jobs: Mr. Chin is an assistant futures trader for Citibank and Ms. Eng is an actuary systems specialist at the Teachers Insurance Annuity Association. 
But their wedding was full of echoes from ancient China.
Like many Chinese-American couples, they chose the year of their wedding according to the Chinese lunar calendar. 
It showed that 1993 would be a year filled with light to guide people in new ventures.
"Nineteen ninety-four is the blind year," the bride said. 
"That means there's no spring. 
It's the year of darkness. 
Nineteen ninety-three is the year of two springs, and that occurs very rarely, once every blue moon. 
The year of the two springs is a very happy year."
Ms. Eng and Mr. Chin, both 30, carefully chose the day for the wedding, Dec. 
18, as well. 
Many Chinese believe the number 8 symbolizes prosperity and wealth and that 18 means definite prosperity and wealth.
"The Chinese pick days for everything," said Dawn Chin, the bridegroom's sister. 
"You don't say, 'Oh, I'll be free that day.'
There are good days and bad days."
But there were a few rituals the couple skipped. 
For instance, it is a Chinese custom to hand-deliver wedding invitations. 
Weeks before the wedding, Ms. Eng said, "If I can get away with mailing them, I'm going to."
(She did.)
On the morning of the wedding, as the Chinese have done for centuries, Ms. Eng and Mr. Chin formally poured tea for the bride's parents. 
"It's a farewell tea ceremony," the bride said. 
"My parents are saying goodbye to me because after I get married, I'm no longer part of the family. 
I'm gone. 
I'm history. 
In the old days in China, when women got married, it was like they were going to another world."
The actual wedding ceremony was nothing like one in ancient China. 
The couple -- she in a white lacy dress, and he in a dinner jacket -- were married at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel. 
As 200 guests watched, they exchanged vows before the Rev. Jim Covington, a Unitarian-Universalist minister. 
Afterward, 450 guests attended a traditional 12-course wedding banquet at the Silver Palace restaurant in Chinatown.
As is the Chinese custom, the bride changed clothes throughout the night. 
She arrived at the banquet in a red (for good luck) Chinese wedding outfit, a long skirt and a cropped jacket with dragon and phoenix designs. 
Later, she changed into a cherry-red velvet dress with multicolored beading on the front, so that she sparkled like fireworks on the dance floor.
As dish after dish was served (beginning with long jellyfish noodles, which symbolize longevity), the couple and many younger guests congregated on the dance floor to play Chinese wedding games that involved raw eggs, ice cubes and blindfolds, all aimed at pestering the newlyweds.
William Lin, a guest, noted that the games would probably go on very late into the night. 
"Traditionally, friends crash the bridal suite and steal all of their clothes," he said.
In their new apartment, the couple will also follow old traditions. 
"The first night together, we have to sleep in a new bed with red sheets," the bride said. 
"The bed has to be new, and it has to be a gift. 
The groom's mother buys it because the groom's mother wants heirs."
