
HONG KONG'S 6.3 MILLION PEOPLE produce more wealth in a year per capita than their British counterparts, yet there is no Globe Theater here. 
Hong Kong's streets are clogged with more Rolls-Royces than London's, yet there is nothing akin to the British Museum. 
Hong Kong, it is said, and it is widely believed, is a single-minded place, and its mind is on money. 
Hong Kong, it is widely believed, and it is routinely said, is a cultural wasteland.
But tucked away in tiny studios or down red-brick arcades or in small mirrored halls, canvases are being daubed with oils, actors struggle with new scripts, and dancers pirouette over worn boards. 
Indeed, art is being born here, in solitude and collaboratively, in defiance, almost, of a social esthetic that prizes money above all else. 
And it is art, often, that is rooted not in any grand Chinese tradition but in Hong Kong's peculiar circumstances and culture. 
It is art, as well, that at times shudders at the prospect of impending unity with the giant totalitarian neighbor to the north.
"For the true Hong Kong artists," explains Johnson Chang, the owner of Hanart, a gallery that displays both prominent mainland painters and Hong Kong artists, "it's always in the back of their mind: the awareness of this historical era, of this unknown, is very unsettling. 
But it is what makes Hong Kong Hong Kong. 
The one thing that has changed quite a bit in the last few years is that people are looking at specifically what makes Hong Kong Hong Kong."
Over the last 150 years, Hong Kong has been ruled mostly by plumed, beribboned and brocaded emissaries from London who, over the decades, were buttressed by legions of mostly second-rate British bureaucrats (Filth, as they've been known: Failed in London, Try Hong Kong), all in the service of the great British trading houses. 
Nowhere in their thinking was there much room for Hong Kong's local population, whom until recent memory were barred from the clubs, management suites and halls of government. 
British colonial culture here consisted largely of Chinese seascapes by British artists, and portraits, traveling string quartets and the Christmas pantomime, which more often than not poked fun at local ways.
To the colonialists, and the foreign traders and bankers who followed them, this was Hong Kong's culture. 
But here, as Hong Kong grew from a cluster of villages to one of the world's foremost economies, the territory's culture evolved in ways neither completely Chinese nor mimetically British -- in ways that were distinctly Hong Kong, suffused by the transient nature of life here and by the influx of millions of refugees fleeing Communism, and epitomized by a language that emerged at some distance from that spoken just over the fence in China.
Now, with China resuming sovereignty of Hong Kong in less than five months, many of Hong Kong's leading artists are contemplating a future littered with more unknowns than certainties. 
Questions of artistic freedom, sources of financing, the looming shadow of mainland artistry, whether state-sponsored or not, all linger on a horizon that has grown startlingly close. 
And while some artists continue to work unruffled by the thought of impending Chinese suzerainty, others find the prospect threatening, not only because of the censorship and pressures so prevalent on the mainland but especially because the nurturing of an indigenous culture and art scene is so very recent and, in the eyes of some, so very fragile.
"Part of the colonial strategy," argues Oscar Ho Hing-kay, an artist who has moved gracefully from sculpture to drawing in charcoal, "has been to get people to make money. 
This has been the whole model of educational philosophy here. 
Look at how insignificant art courses are here."
(Hong Kong does not possess a full-time academy.) "And the nice thing about this for colonial rule is that you don't ask ideological questions. 
You just make money. 
Art is about asking questions, being rebellious."
Leafing through heavy ivory-colored sheets dark with charcoal images of Hong Kong, cornered with colophons in a dense tumble of Chinese -- not the Chinese of China, but the Chinese of Hong Kong -- Mr. Ho fingers a recent work. 
Under a heavy sky with a hint of central Hong Kong in the distance, two flattened figures peer from beneath large boulders, a work he titles "Strange Rock Disease."
In a choppy, vernacular Cantonese that falls on local ears the way Brooklynese may sound in Los Angeles, a colophon explains: "A bizarre epidemic has broken out in a place near Tuen Mun. 
Those struck down by it have a rock that grows out of their back. 
The rock gets bigger and bigger until it crushes the patient to death. 
It seems like this disease is spreading. 
The medical authorities are so worried that they've classified this disease as highly confidential."
This drawing, part of Mr. Ho's series "Tales Around Town," is drawn from the cornucopia of local myths and folk tales that he has gathered in his explorations of Hong Kong, or simply in his daily encounters. 
"The 'Tales Around Town' are almost like a diary," he explains. 
"You hear them, and you come home and do them."
Mr. Chang of Hanart Gallery, who has displayed Mr. Ho's work, sees in it disturbing images of life and imagination. 
"They're more like paranoia and nightmares about Hong Kong," he suggests. 
"They are like folk ghost stories; he actually didn't make them up. 
There is one in particular that is very dark, this one of the rumor about the stone lion in front of the old Bank of China that devours people."
"Stone Lion Turns Into Demon" is the fifth in the "Tales" series, a blackened, representation of a stone-hewn lion stretching suddenly from its pedestal to snare a passer-by. 
"One of the pair of stone lions outside the old Bank of China building in Central has turned into a demon and has been attacking people around midnight. 
Those in the know say that if you pour red paint on the lion's head it can stop the lion demon."
Despite the apparent blatancy of the symbolism at work in this piece (since 1949, the Bank of China has been Beijing's most prominent granite presence in this British colony), Mr. Ho emphasizes the oral taletelling of the work that is imbedded in Hong Kong life. 
"This is Hong Kong mythology," he says, "twisted around."
Visions of Meaning From a Windowless Room
Gaylord Chan, a snowdrift of white hair pushed back from his face, squeezed past a table of earnest children raptly brushing ideographs onto large sheets of paper and padded into a windowless room bathed by fluorescent tubes. 
Easels with unfinished canvases crowded together, stacks of stretched canvases tipped against walls hung with framed and frameless paintings.
"This is where I work," he said, his hand flitting over the jumble before him. 
From this brightly lighted cave, Hong Kong's eldest, and perhaps its most important, artist has produced a formidable oeuvre. 
But it is not his paintings that have paid the bills; it is the gaggle of children in the front rooms who come to his school for art and calligraphy, as well as older students.
His paintings now are large, boldly defined acrylics on canvas, abstract shapes that suggest urban life and passions. 
The local critic Tsong-zung Chang wrote that Mr. Chan's canvases "are inspired by the mundane signs and symbols of the city: neon lights, billboards, traffic signs."
"These images speak to him," the review continued. 
"They are suggestive of special meanings and hidden messages, secrets unbeknown to the graphic artists who created them."
They show a world that Mr. Chan and many of his colleagues see as destined to be transformed. 
Mr. Chan contends that artists, and the art scene in Hong Kong, will inevitably change under Chinese rule. 
"The audience will change to some extent," he says. 
"Some artists will respond to that. 
But those artists who do art for the sake of art, they wouldn't care less. 
Some will be influenced by what comes from the north, of course. 
If Hong Kong were suddenly taken by Italians, you would see change in that direction."
A Return to Roots To Get Ready for Change
Yet other artists, like Lucia Cheung, stress the Chinese roots of their work, roots inherent in the wash of Chinese cultural and social forces. 
Although she trained in Italy, Ms. Cheung gradually moved in the last decade or so from a distinctly Western style in her paintings to more discernibly Chinese overtones. 
"I found more and more I cling to Chinese work," she explains, showing a visitor through a range of her work hung in her vast apartment. 
"I found something that is so intimate, something more satisfying. 
There's a lot to say through a flower, a petal. 
You can also write down a poem. 
In Chinese painting it is not the process, but afterward. 
Maybe because I am Chinese."
From a long series of somber ink-wash paintings of austere, virtually lifeless landscapes huddled under scowling skies -- paintings reflecting deep angst over the death of her only son -- Ms. Cheung has in the last year or so produced a series of witty paintings of Hong Kong on gold-flecked handmade paper, pondering in many cases the territory's return to Chinese sovereignty. 
One, titled "Meeting as Usual," depicts Hong Kong's skyline and race track, with stylized Tang horses on the track, all suggesting normal life. 
Yet the sky in the scene is the red-starred ceiling of Beijing's Great Hall of the People, the vast hall where the Chinese Communist Party meets every five years.
The advent of Chinese rule is but one constraint facing artists in Hong Kong, according to Ms. Cheung. More troubling in some ways, she feels, is an esthetic indifference to Hong Kong's own artists, a feeling that the only thing of value in Hong Kong is money and how it is made.
"Before, nobody cared about art in Hong Kong," she explains. 
"Now it's changing a bit. 
But people pay much more attention to imported art. 
Local art is not good enough."
"Certainly artists in China face more difficulties than we do," she says. 
"In Hong Kong we are so free. 
There's no lack of materials. 
But you don't have the space, the atmosphere that gives you encouragement. 
Hong Kong is a British colony. 
We are so free to receive everything. 
But you must be wise enough to chose what is good for you. 
To find the balance is difficult. 
You need to look for your identity."
 
On an Open Stage, a Wealth of Styles
At a gallery and theater space called the Fringe, its director, Benny Chia, insisted that the diversity of artistic impulse and creativity, whether on stage or in galleries, were both important expressions of Hong Kong's identity and a vibrant sign of a blossoming, independent culture.
Indeed, the Fringe, a tiny gallery and a somewhat battered stage in one of the few surviving colonial buildings in the high-rent Central district, is the one place in Hong Kong where artists, whether widely known or not, or playwrights, whether working on first plays or on a string of stage successes, can display their work.
But with Chinese rule looming, Mr. Chia wonders what the landscape for artists will look like in six months. 
"It must occur to every artist whether there will be the same degree of freedom after 1997," he says. 
"We know you can create impressive works of art in the most repressive environment. 
But as far as I can tell, the Government has no wish to close its doors on the rest of the world."
On the other hand, Mr. Chia argues, "There are a number of things Hong Kong will benefit from after 1997. 
Psychologically, you will feel like you belong to a larger space. 
In vision, Hong Kong is a very small place. 
People will start to look at what you can do with China."
Mr. Chang, of Hanart, contends that Hong Kong artists will continue to face obstacles simply because of the kind of society Hong Kong is. 
"In Hong Kong, artists are really an underground," he says. 
"Nobody buys their work. 
Nobody is interested in their work. 
Nobody takes them seriously. 
There is no art scene in Hong Kong, like you have in New York. 
The real reason is, Hong Kong is an emigre society. 
Most people consider the real native culture China, not here. 
'True' Chinese art must be from the mainland."
 
A Focus on Home While Looking Ahead
Nonetheless, the growth of Hong Kong's indigenous cultural expression does seem to be well rooted. 
Although a product of British theatrical efforts, the Chung Ying Theater Company under its new artistic director and its first Chinese director, Ko Tin-lung, has dumped Shakespeare in favor of the works of local playwrights like Emily Cheng, Cheung Tat-ming and, most often, Mr. Ko's own prodigious output.
A former actor who worked for a time in the United States, Mr. Ko returned to Hong Kong in 1989 and was named Chung Ying's artistic director in 1993. 
In an early-20th-century red-brick colonial building rimmed with graceful arcades, Mr. Ko puts his 17 professional actors through their paces for his newest production, "A Chronicle of Lights and Shadows," a play exploring the frenzied history of Hong Kong's film industry.
Written in the Cantonese dialect of Hong Kong, the play follows the career of a sometimes working, sometimes out-of-work assistant director, and her loves and betrayals as the film industry alternately soars and swoons.
Despite his central focus on Hong Kong themes, Mr. Ko admits that Hong Kong's internationalism demands some foreign threads. 
"I think we do focus very much on developing new playwrights and new plays," he offers. 
"However I think we have to keep in contact with the world. 
I do think theater is a global village."
A global village perhaps, but one that reaches the stage of Chung Ying very deliberately in Cantonese.
"There's a controversy about whether we should perform in Mandarin after 1997," says Mr. Ko, referring to the official dialect of China. 
"This is an issue. 
Of course you could have two versions of a play. 
But some people say that if you want to retain your identity, you must perform in Cantonese. 
I don't think Chung Ying will have Mandarin versions of its plays."
He laughs and then adds, "Very practically, my actors don't speak Mandarin."
 
Looking at China With Hope and Dread
Although his plays and those he commissions are hardly political, Mr. Ko feels that Chinese rule does pose risks for Hong Kong artists. 
"I think whether we have problems in '97 or not, we will still do what we are doing. 
I think it is an artistic choice. 
If I chose a certain playwright and the play had a sensitive political issue in it, I would support it. 
I do think we in Hong Kong are quite concerned about freedom of expression."
Even closer to the bone, though, is the potential to undermine artistic freedom by withholding government financing. 
Corporate support of the arts is almost unheard-of in Hong Kong. 
Rather, the arts are heavily subsidized by the Government; the Chung Ying company in particular receives about $1 million a year. 
Mr. Ko worries that this financing could be vulnerable to political pressure. 
"In Hong Kong, about 95 percent of local arts activities are either directly or indirectly supported by the Government," he said.
As the cadence of China's march toward Hong Kong grows louder, this territory's almost newborn, and admittedly fragile, art world wonders about the future, as does the rest of the territory. 
And while there seems little that any individual artist is doing to prepare for the raising of China's red flag, there is a general certainty that Hong Kong is different from China, and different from everywhere else.
"We really don't have any contact, emotional or otherwise, with China, with communist China," explains Oscar Ho, the artist who draws local myths. 
"Now, this baby-boom generation here is at its prime just as Hong Kong goes to China."
"We love to see the end of colonialism," exudes Mr. Ho, his boyish, somewhat lopsided grin cleaving his face. 
"We rejoice. 
But at the same time, we dread the return to China. 
So, you see, with this complexity, things are not black-and-white."
