
The Clinton Administration has been unable to persuade two high-profile former members of Congress to accept a nomination as Ambassador to Beijing, a sign of the daunting challenge of managing the deteriorating relationship between the United States and China and of the weakness of a lame-duck President.
In fact, at a time when Congress is investigating China's acquisition of American military secrets, questioning its exploding trade surplus with the United States and criticizing its human rights record, the Administration's feelers have been rejected by at least half a dozen candidates.
Former Representative Lee H. Hamilton, who spent his Congressional career mastering foreign affairs in general and Asia in particular, was asked to take the job, according to Administration officials and friends of Mr. Hamilton. But he begged off and chose, instead, to remain as head of the Woodrow Wilson Center, a prestigious Washington policy institute.
Former Senator Dale Bumpers, Mr. Clinton's long-time Arkansas friend who offered his oratory in defense of the President during the Senate impeachment trial, turned down the tentative job offer, instead choosing to lead the relatively small Center for Defense Information here, officials said.
Three other retired officials also received feelers -- David H. Pryor, a former Democratic Senator from Arkansas; Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Anthony Lake, a former national security adviser -- and all declined to have their names put forward by the President, according to Administration officials and other former officials.
In refusing the prospect of nomination, some of the potential candidates expressed ambivalence about accepting such a demanding overseas position for a tour that might be over in less than two years, with the end of the Clinton Administration. 
But some of those well-known and respected Washington leaders indicated that they were more discouraged by the enormous problems in Chinese-American relations -- and especially by Congressional criticism of the Administration's foreign policies.
Both factors figured in the decisions of Mr. Hamilton, his friends said. 
Mr. Bumpers told associates he did not believe that he was the right choice for the position at this time.
The potential candidates apparently thought a confirmation hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations, which is led by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, would be as unforgiving as earlier hearings over China's trade status.
"Any confirmation hearing will be bruising," said one Administration official, referring to the inevitable committee showdown. 
"The nominee will be asked to answer for all of the ills of China from human rights issues to the closed market. 
What's the point?"
Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, is heading the search for a replacement for James R. Sasser, who became the American Ambassador to China in 1996 after losing his seat as a Democratic Senator from Tennessee. 
He will leave the post in May.
"Obviously, this job is critical to United States national interests and we're looking at people of stature," said David Leavy, a spokesman for the national security council. 
"We don't feel we're behind the curve. 
It's at the top of our agenda."
Mr. Leavy said that only two people had been approached seriously about the job, but he declined to identify them.
But other Administration officials who insisted on anonymity said Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Lake and Mr. Bumpers had all been asked to seriously consider the position. 
Friends of Mr. Pryor said he was approached but had immediately turned the offer down without even discussing it with his wife.
The other official approached was Stephen Bosworth, the current Ambassador to South Korea, former senior Administration officials said.
Administration officials agree that this is a pivotal moment for one of the country's most important foreign relationships and that Mr. Clinton is searching for a prominent envoy whose name alone would convey to the Chinese how highly Washington values its dealings with them. 
At the same time, the officials said, an Ambassador-designate must be perceived as tough on Beijing in order to win confirmation from Congress.
But a confirmation hearing of even the most popular candidate is expected to become a foil for every senator with a problem with China, said a senior Clinton Administration official.
"The confirmation would go on and on and it will be a bruising battle," the official said.
At the root of the Congressional questions are serious disagreements with China's defense, economic and social policies. 
China has doubled the number of missiles pointed at Taiwan since the early 1990's and is arguing with its Southeast Asian neighbors over the Spratley Islands. 
Congress also wants China to open its markets further. 
And human rights groups on the left and the right continue raising questions about basic freedoms in that country.
"I think this is a very rough time for dealing with China," said Edward Friedman, a political science professor and China specialist at the University of Wisconsin. 
"In this period of global economic turmoil, these political and economic difficulties aren't going away."
Added to challenge of having to confront China on these issues, a new Ambassador would face the prospect of being replaced after the Presidential election in the year 2000.
"It is harder to get people to take jobs in the last years of an Administration that is usually exhausted," said Michael Beschloss, a scholar on the Presidency who saw similarities with the predicament President Nixon faced in appointing Ambassadors to South Vietnam toward the end of the American war there. 
"When a country is going very wrong, that's not a time you have people jumping through hoops to become the next Ambassador."
      
