
Further stepping up its military pressure on Taiwan, China said tonight that it would close a huge swath of the Taiwan Strait on Tuesday to conduct "live fire" exercises with naval ships and warplanes as a series of missile tests neared completion.
It will be the first time that China has tried to close such a large portion of the international waterway between Taiwan and the mainland.
The announcement raised immediate questions of whether Beijing was challenging the right of passage by United States naval vessels through the sensitive area.
A United States Navy battle group led by the aircraft carrier Nimitz traversed the Taiwan Strait on Dec. 
19, and Clinton Administration officials have hinted in recent days that they may be considering additional transits by American warships through the strait.
[The White House and Pentagon, which have repeatedly condemned Chinese missile tests close to Taiwan, had no immediate comment. 
A Clinton Administration official said the new exercises had been expected and would probably not hinder shipping. 
"According to the shipping companies, it's only a minor inconvenience," the official said.]
On Friday, China began ballistic missile tests within a few dozen miles of two of Taiwan's major ports, Keelung and Kaohsiung. 
Three Chinese M-9 missiles have been fired into the zones so far without incident.
The announcement of new maneuvers was issued by the official New China News Agency. 
"From March 12 to 20, 1996, the Chinese People's Liberation Army will conduct naval and air force exercises," it said. 
"For the sake of safety, the Chinese Government requests the governments of relevant countries" to notify "ships and aircraft of their countries not to enter the said sea area and airspace during this period."
In Taiwan today, President Lee Teng-hui said the expanding war games would not interfere with Taiwan's first direct presidential election, on March 23.
"The aim of Communist China's exercises is to interfere with the elections and to reduce the votes of the President," he said in a televised address. 
Mr. Lee is expected to win easily but has said he would like at least 50 percent of the vote.
China has been seeking to weaken Mr. Lee's hold on power because it suspects that his drive for greater international recognition for Taiwan, which Beijing views as a renegade province, is a strategy to undermine the official "one China" policy of his Nationalist Party.
"In my recollection, China has never gone this far toward closing the strait," said James R. Lilley, a former Ambassador to China and now a fellow at the American Enterprise Insitute in Washington. 
"It is a challenge, because they are beginning to take us on in international waters, and that is pretty dangerous."
Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a China scholar at the University of Michigan, said the new set of exercises represented an "upping of the ante" against Taiwan.
"If you look at what China has done to date," he said, "it seems to have been very well thought through."
He said the Chinese military had "created the maximum sense of pressure and alarm on Taiwan without exceeding the boundaries of what a sovereign state is allowed to do."
"So without a blockade," he continued, "without attacking any shipping, China has raised the temperature without violating international law. 
And these actions suggest it is playing a very tough game."
The Chinese security authorities today expelled two Taiwanese journalists who had been detained on Thursday on China's southern coast. 
They were accused of "illegally" videotaping "military targets."
China identified the journalists as Sui An-teh and Chuang Chi-wei, a cameraman, both of Taiwan Television, and said they had been admitted to China to cover the annual session of the National People's Congress in Beijing.
Map of Taiwan showing location of missile test area: China announced "live fire" tests near Taiwan as missile tests continue.
