
A senior Republican Senator said today that the White House knew as early as 1995 that China might try to influence American elections, a year earlier than White House aides say they were warned.
The lawmaker, Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, said that despite those warnings, the White House continued to rely on fund-raisers who had close ties to Beijing.
Senator Hatch said that beginning in 1995, the Federal Bureau of Investigation had told the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Justice Department, the House and Senate Intelligence Committees and at least seven lawmakers that China would try to funnel illegal contributions to Congressional races in 1996.
"They knew about it," Mr. Hatch, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee and a member of the Intelligence Committee, said on the CBS News program "Face the Nation."
The White House immediately denied Mr. Hatch's accusations, in unusually sharp language.
"His information is contrary to what is being communicated to me and contrary to what I've briefed you," Michael D. McCurry, the White House spokesman, told reporters today. 
"I suspect that this is another case of a Senator hyperventilating on a Sunday talk show. 
But if he has information or knowledge, factual knowledge of that, he should come forth and produce it."
The F.B.I. warned two officials of the White House National Security Council in June 1996 that China might be trying to influence Congressional races, but President Clinton has said that he and his senior staff were not told. 
The White House and the F.B.I. blamed each other last week for the embarrassing lapse.
The F.B.I.'s top spokesman, John Collingwood, said today that the bureau would not comment on Mr. Hatch's accusations. 
But Mr. Hatch has received sensitive briefings from the F.B.I. on China's connection to the 1996 elections.
China has repeatedly denied that it tried to influence United States elections.
It was unclear from Mr. Hatch's remarks which agencies and lawmakers the F.B.I. warned in 1995 and which it warned in 1996, and if any of them ever told Mr. Clinton. The National Security Council aides and four of the six lawmakers who have publicly acknowledged that they received briefings from the F.B.I. say they were alerted around June 1996.
One lawmaker who was warned in 1996, Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, has also said that F.B.I. agents first approached her in 1991 or 1992 to caution her that China might try to funnel money into her campaign.
Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican who headed the Intelligence Committee in 1995 and 1996, said today on the ABC News program "This Week" that he was told by the F.B.I. in 1996 that "the Chinese were looking to co-opt the Congress and state legislatures."
Mr. Hatch declined to say exactly what he thought the Administration knew in 1995. 
"I can't tell you the exact findings, because that would disclose too much here," Mr. Hatch said. 
"But they knew that the Chinese Government was going to come into this country and attempt to purchase influence and use money, and use various elements here in this country to try to have an influence on policy."
Mr. Hatch also criticized Democrats for relying on questionable fund-raisers with Asian connections, notably John Huang, a former Commerce Department and Democratic National Committee official, when there were clear warnings from the F.B.I. that the Chinese were trying to buy influence. 
Mr. Hatch also renewed his call for Attorney General Janet Reno to name an independent counsel to investigate the matter.
      
