
The capital's long, excruciating wait for a new first couple ended today as Mei Xiang and Tian Tian, two borrowed and ballyhooed giant pandas from China, landed aboard Panda One and headed by police motorcade to the National Zoo, their new home.
With a month of quarantine ahead of Mei Xiang (may sh-ONG) and Tian Tian (t-YEN t-YEN), the fresh darlings of this fickle city are expected to go on display before crowds of novelty starved denizens a week or so in advance of the inauguration of whichever human turns out to be the next president.
"They certainly will be able to distract us from other more serious concerns," said McKinley Hudson, deputy director of the zoo, as the pandas were gingerly delivered by a special FedEx jetliner after a 17-hour flight from Chengdu, China.
Hours before the pair landed at Dulles International Airport in the Virginia suburbs, local television stations were reporting live from outside the pandas' refurbished grotto home at the zoo, much the way journalists have been staking out Vice President Al Gore from outside the steel bars of his home across town.
Clearly, the pandas' arrival lent a merciful leitmotif to a city benumbed from the endlessness of the presidential contest. 
A timely diversion was at hand for a political community that lately seems to be waiting for Godot as much as Gore or George W. Bush. The previous distraction for this pressure-ridden city -- the firing of the Washington Redskins' coach on Monday after the team lost to the Giants -- was carried out with much of the ritual front-page clamor of presidential impeachment. 
But the pandas' arrival was an event of plainer human interest that should last well beyond the city's quadrennial measuring gauge.
Initial reports on Mei Xiang and Tian Tian suggested they might be role models for this political capital in its fruitless search for civility. 
The Washington Post heralded the couple in a full-page dispatch from China and reported: "When they are together, they swat each other playfully, roll around in the dirt together and then eat peacefully side by side."
"This is good news for a change," said Jin Xiaoming, science counselor at the China Embassy, at a crowded arrival ceremony, bubbling with the sort of innocent delight last exhibited by Washingtonians at Monica Lewinsky sightings.
"There!
Look!" came a shout from the crowd as one of the pandas, who were spared a direct photo opportunity, peered briefly through the mesh at the top of the delivery cage to see what was going on.
"Yeah!" the crowd shouted, waving as the panda ducked back down from sight. 
An array of more than 20 television cameras recorded the airplane unloading with the care practiced on Air Force One.
The delivery truck headed into Washington with pedestrians pausing to study it as if the flashing motorcade bore still more Florida ballots that might solve the lingering mystery of democracy.
"I understand our specialists selected the very smartest 2 pandas out of the 100 or so we have to choose from," said Mr. Jin of a lend-lease deal in which China will be paid $1 million a year by the Smithsonian Institution for at least a decade. 
The money, the minister said, will be spent entirely on panda research and preservation at the China Research and Conservation Center for the Giant Panda, where specialists track the 900 to 1,000 pandas in existence.
So far, Washington good will seems to abound at the deal with none of the city's China watchers or shouting-head media analysts vetting such fine-print provisions as the guarantee that any panda offspring from the couple will be the property of China. 
With three panda couples now in residence in this country under lend-lease arrangements, the San Diego zoo's pandas have already produced an offspring, while officials at the Atlanta zoo are hopeful.
Tian Tian, a 3-year-old male, and Mei Xiang, a 2-year-old female, fill the void left at the National Zoo by the demise of its previous celebrity pandas, Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing, whose sex lives attracted a level of scrutiny that presaged the Washington press corps' coverage of the Clinton era. 
But in 25 years at the zoo, the two produced only short-lived offspring.
"Service befitting a president," said Michael L. Ducker, the FedEx executive vice president for international deliveries at the catered hangar celebration, which was decorated with bamboo plants and Chinese lanterns.
Indeed, corporate donors had lined up big time for the new couple, as if for a presidential soft-money hit. 
Beyond FedEx, which has been lobbying intensely for its share of the new delivery routes with China, Fuji Film and the cable channel of Discovery Communications Animal Planet were prominent sponsors of the trip.
Pilots and zoo attendants said the long trip went beautifully, with both pandas munching biscuits and apple slices, as though they were on a Washington-New York shuttle flight.
"They ate a lot, they slept a lot, they played around back there," said Capt. Mike Padron, pilot of Panda One, as the capital city began buzzing about the welcome new faces.
