
Corporate leaders and several of President Clinton's cabinet officers intensified pressure today on wavering senators to reject an amendment that could jeopardize passage this year of a trade bill with China.
As the Senate girds for a crucial vote on the measure this week, supporters of legislation to establish permanent normal trading relations with China are pressing for a bill free of amendments. 
Those supporters say there is not enough time before Election Day to reconcile an amended Senate bill with the version that the House passed in May.
At a White House meeting with Congressional leaders today, Mr. Clinton urged speedy approval of an unamended bill. 
The measure is one of his top remaining foreign policy goals and a necessary step for American companies to benefit fully from a deal reached last year by the United States and China that paves the way for China's entry into the World Trade Organization. 
That 135-member trade group sets rules for global commerce.
At issue is an amendment sponsored by Senators Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, and Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, that would impose sanctions on Chinese companies if they were caught exporting nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or long-range missiles.
Defense Secretary William S. Cohen; Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers; Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger; and the United States trade representative, Charlene Barshefsky, began telephoning senators today, arguing that the amendment would not only imperil the trade bill, but would also actually hamper American efforts to combat the spread of sophisticated weaponry.
Senate aides negotiated the timing of votes. 
Senators could take up Mr. Thompson's amendment on Wednesday or Thursday. 
Final passage of the overall bill, which has overwhelming support, could occur as early as Friday or as late as next Tuesday.
China will enter the W.T.O. no matter how the Senate votes. 
But without Congress's blessing, Beijing could withhold some of the trade benefits, including lower tariffs, from the American farmers and companies that it will extend to other members in the trade group.
Thomas J. Donohue, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, warned of retribution against senators who support the Thompson-Torricelli measure.
"Should this vote get tangled up in the politics of nuclear proliferation and other amendments to the extent that it might not be passed," Mr. Donohue said, "I think that would have a very serious political implication for those who were a party to that action."
Senators easily dispatched several other amendments today, including those on prison labor and human rights in China, as well as subsidies from Beijing to Chinese companies. 
But on the floor and in news conferences, the focus was on the Thompson-Torricelli amendment. 
"This is the vote on P.N.T.R.," Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana said as he used the bill's abbreviation.
Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, stated that opponents "have the votes to defeat Senator Thompson's amendment."
Even Mr. Thompson acknowledged that he faced an uphill battle. 
"We've always known it was going to be a tough vote," Mr. Thompson told reporters. 
"A lot of people are saying they would like to vote for it. 
But since it is on P.N.T.R., they're afraid it will complicate P.N.T.R."
Supporters said the measure was necessary to clamp down on Chinese exports of sophisticated weaponry to Iran, Libya, North Korea and Pakistan.
"What is especially troubling about the Chinese activities is that this sensitive assistance is going to the most dangerous nations in the most volatile areas of the world," said Mr. Torricelli.
Backers of the amendment scoffed at fears that amending the bill would doom the larger bill this year. 
"To say we cannot amend a bill that has been passed by the House would be the height of irresponsibility," said Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, Republican of Texas.
But amendment critics, including farm-state Republicans, said it was senseless to jeopardize a trade bill that would lower barriers to China's vast markets. 
"Approval for this bill will keep the United States economically and diplomatically engaged with one-fifth of the world's population," said Senator Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas. 
"I cannot support a redundant and counterproductive amendment that would effectively kill this legislation."
