
When Sun Lilin emerged from Beijing Children's Hospital, her pockets bulged with bottles of syrup and her hands juggled a tower of boxes containing powders and pills.
She had taken her 5-year-old daughter to the clinic with a cough. 
She left with two Chinese cold syrups, a potent broad-spectrum antibiotic, an inhaler and a little round device that jets powdered medicine into the lungs.
The doctor's visit cost less than $1. 
But the medicines cost $50 -- half a month's salary -- almost all of it for the three Western drugs.
"The medicine has gotten so expensive I really can't afford it," said Ms. Sun, a cleaning woman in a middle school, echoing a complaint of virtually everyone in China these days. 
"But, of course, she's my only child. 
And she's sick. 
I buy her the best."
Imported Western pharmaceuticals have taken China by storm, straining pocketbooks as they hold out promises of cure. 
Indeed, the denouement of nearly every visit to a doctor in Chinese cities today is the prescription of a small pharmacy's worth of this year's hottest medicines, be they nonsedating antihistamines or once-a-day pills for high blood pressure. 
Such sales have been buoyed by a new and unlikely symbiosis: Western drug companies have been aggressively courting China's doctors and hospitals not only with new pills, but also sometimes with gifts, money and even kickbacks, practices that are banned in the United States.
Their goal: to gain access to China's 1.2 billion potentially ailing citizens, most with an seemingly unshakable belief in the curative power of name-brand Western pills.
In response, Chinese doctors prescribed hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of mostly expensive Western medicine last year. 
But they have another motive as well. 
Cash-strapped Chinese hospitals are allowed to sell the medicines their doctors prescribe at a profit, and the profit is far greater when doctors prescribe expensive Western drugs.
"There is a strong interest group forming of drug companies, hospital managers and doctors," said Qiu Renzong, a professor of bioethics at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. 
"In China we produce some equally effective medicines, but doctors don't prescribe them anymore. 
The result is a heavy financial burden on the patients."
 
A Cash Cow For Hospitals
Indeed, drug sales have become a cash cow for Chinese hospitals in the last two years, accounting for around 60 to 80 percent of their revenues, officials say.
Although there are hundreds of Chinese drug companies producing traditional and Western-style medicine, medicine made by foreign or joint-venture companies now accounts for well over 50 percent of prescriptions in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou.
Today, foreign drug and medical equipment companies at times pay for Chinese doctors to study overseas, buy hospitals new furniture and provide airline tickets and hotel vouchers for conferences.
In an even more contentious practice, the companies commonly pay hospital administrators and individual doctors "commissions" for stocking and prescribing their drugs, though such payments are against corporate policies and are illegal in China.
"If a pill sells for five yuan, often more than half of that is spent to give little red packets containing cash to the hospital director of purchasing, to the pharmacy manager and a bit to the doctors themselves," said Dr. Li Ning, the vice president of Chaoyang Hospital in Beijing.
"Of course, hospitals have regulations banning kickbacks," said Dr. Li, a young general surgeon who studied hospital administration at the University of Minnesota. 
"But this is hard to catch, and we know the rules are not very effective."
The relationship between Western companies and China's doctors has certainly in some cases helped introduce valuable drugs and equipment into China, which generally permits the import of any drug approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
But in other cases the high-priced products offer only slight advantages.
 
Medical Costs Rising 35% a Year in China
"Western medicines and medical equipment have greatly contributed to medical costs that are rising 35 percent a year," Dr. Li said.
A number of companies contacted for comment said they could not discuss their practices. 
But Thomas Reinert, a spokesman for Bayer Pharmaceuticals in Germany, said that although companies making sophisticated drugs did feel the need to work closely with Chinese doctors regarding their use, his company priced medicines lower in China than in most of the rest of the world and forbids payments to doctors.
He said the company followed an industrywide international code of conduct allowing, for example, sponsoring medical symposiums, but forbidding payments to encourage ordering of products. 
Still, he said, "there is a gray zone in there."
 
Many Salesmen Flout Codes of Conduct
Privately, many in and outside the industry acknowledge that young Chinese sales representatives, far from corporate headquarters, often flout conduct codes. 
Indeed, "hong bao" -- little red envelopes stuffed with cash -- are a semi-institutionalized part of Chinese life, at times provided to surgeons for operations as well as to local journalists in the hopes of a favorable story.
"Practices that would not be O.K. in the West are quite common in China," said one person in the industry. 
"And it not just international drug companies. 
The Chinese companies are doing it too."
But Western companies have far larger war chests. 
And their incentives are tempting to doctors who often make $120 a month and would otherwise have little opportunity to read foreign medical journals or go to conferences overseas.
And ever since China's hospitals lost the last of their formerly huge Government subsidies last year, sales of Western drugs to patients have become essential for balancing hospital budgets.
While there are tight price controls for Chinese-made medicines, hospitals are allowed to set their own charges for Western drugs. 
Some government workers still have health plans that cover the cost of drugs, but many more now pay for medicines themselves or have only a small fraction of the costs paid by their employer.
Cities like Shanghai and Beijing recently started requiring patients with medical insurance from their government employers to pay for any Western drugs themselves. 
This month the State Planning Commission announced that it was planning to issue new regulations to reform the drug pricing system -- for the third time in three years -- but added that "the consequences of the hospitals' sales business can not be dealt with overnight."
Jeff Trewhitt, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, said the trade group opposed China's proposed price controls. 
"Virtually all companies are putting into that country much more than they are taking out," he said. 
"Most are not making money. 
They are investing in the future."
Recently, at the third Great Wall International Symposium on Interventional Cardiology, a small army of Chinese sales representatives of Western drug and medical equipment manufacturers welcomed Chinese cardiologists. 
Slides, wristwatches and tote bags were handed out -- most promoting drugs that cost more than the average Chinese earns in a day and tests that cost a month's earnings.
"Our hope is that by 2001 our sales revenue in China will reach 100 million marks" -- about $60 million at current exchange rates -- said Li Yumin, who was working at a booth promoting Bayer's new heart drugs. 
"There are 120 million people with high blood pressure in this country. 
Their incomes are rising, and they have better knowledge of disease. 
So we take every opportunity to have contact with Chinese doctors."
He acknowledged that the pill he was promoting, a once-a-day high blood pressure pill and heart medicine called Adalat GITS, was too expensive for most Chinese to use every day for life, the way it best treats these chronic ailments.
The average Chinese patient takes it for only 28 days, he said. 
It costs about $1 a pill, compared with pennies for the Chinese-made version of the same drug, which costs must be taken three times a day and so produces somewhat erratic blood pressure levels.
To help advertise Adalat and a new cholesterol-lowering drug, Bayer helped pay for the heart conference, printing programs and name cards and financing a satellite hookup by means of which doctors could watch advanced heart procedures beamed in from operating rooms.
Bayer also held a seminar featuring a prominent Chinese cardiologist who described some of the latest foreign drug trials, the last of which supported the widespread use of drugs like Adalat.
 
'Those Who Can Afford It Should Take Them'
"I argue that those who can afford it should take more effective and expensive drugs," said the heart specialist, Dr. Hu Dayi.
It was a forum that could have been sponsored by any of the dozens of Western drug companies operating here -- including giants like Glaxo Wellcome, Eli Lilly and Novartis. 
And most of the 200 or so heart doctors in the audience said they appreciated the update, despite its commercial overlay.
"I came here to learn about new techniques and medicines, although they will be difficult to use where I come from because of financial reasons," said Dr. Lian Mingfeng, a heart specialist from a small hospital in Fujian Province.
Drug representatives who work in China like to emphasize their role as educators. 
Jay Chen, regional sales manager for Boston Scientific, said at a recent conference, "We help pay for them to come to the U.S. to learn the techniques. 
It helps bring the technology into the country."
But Western doctors who have attended recent Chinese medical conferences say they are shocked to see the representatives sometimes giving the central lecture at what is billed as an impartial scientific meetings.
"It is like the Wild West, with a lot of flagrantly unethical behavior and few rules," said one, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
 
Chinese Ethicists Bemoan Hucksterism
Chinese bioethicists have bemoaned the merging of academic meeting and sales bazaar. 
Dr. Qiu said his wife, a stomach specialist, had attended English-language medical conferences in Hong Kong, where many of the Chinese doctors could not understand a word. 
Drug companies "pay for their travel and hotel," he said. 
"The doctors go sightseeing and shopping."
Dr. Li, the hospital vice president, said he disliked the close ties between hospitals and drug companies, even though it now keeps his hospital afloat.
"Now the state gives us policies, but no money," he said. 
"So for survival the hospital has to have more patients and prescribe more drugs and scans."
Urban Chinese are avid hospital-goers and have a strong bias toward treating ailments with a tonic or pill. 
Indeed, every sneeze in China seems to be greeted with the concerned inquiry, "Are you taking medicine?"
After a spate of newspaper exposes about counterfeit pills and the poor quality control at some Chinese pharmaceutical plants, many people have grown at least a bit suspicious of domestic products. 
And -- in handbags or in medicines -- the Chinese are extremely fond of name brands, leaving Western pills with gangbuster sales and Chinese hard pressed to afford them.
At a clinic in Yuyao, a city in Zhejiang Province, Dr. Fu Zhiyin prepared to give 35-year-old Huang Yifeng antibiotic pills for her serious pelvic infection. 
How many should she take?
"She should take 36," said Dr. Fu, matter-of-factly. 
"But it depends how many she can afford."
