
CLAIRE BLOOM AT SUNY
Claire Bloom will give a dramatic reading of "The Turn of the Screw" by Henry James at 8 P.M. Friday in Theater D of the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase.
The English-born actress has played just about everything from Ophelia in "Hamlet" at Stratford-Upon-Avon to James Mason's bookish lover in the film "The Spy Who Came in From the Cold" to Lady Marchmain in the British television series "Brideshead Revisited."
Another visitor to SUNY Purchase should be of interest to balletomanes. 
It is the Hong Kong Ballet, making a stop during its American tour at Theater A of the Performing Arts Center, also on Friday at 8 P.M.
Dominated by Chinese dancers, the company includes complements of Japanese, Australian, British and Vietnamese members, but its repertory and style are classical. 
"A Handel Celebration" and "Unknown Territory," a work by the Singaporean choreographer Choo-san Goh, are on the program. 
Mr. Goh created a ballet called "Configurations" for Mikhail Baryshnikov in 1981.
Tickets for Claire Bloom are $25, with discounts for students and people 65 and older. 
Tickets for the Hong Kong Ballet are $14 to $29. 
Tickets may be obtained by calling the SUNY Purchase box office Monday through Friday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. The number is 251-6200.
 
PORTRAIT EXHIBITION
"Portrait as Art," an exhibition of some of the 20th century's most famous faces, may be seen through March 24 at the New Rochelle Public Library at Library Plaza off North Avenue.
Assembled by the New Rochelle Council on the Arts from the works of the photographer Tony Vaccaro and the watercolorist Tony Parisi, the show offers some provocative comparisons. 
Pablo Picasso as a watercolor and Pablo Picasso as a camera subject, for example, reveal the same -- but not quite the same -- craggy visage. 
Among the more than 50 portraits are some of Sigmund Freud and George Gershwin.
Tony Vaccaro is a photojournalist who has had a long association with Look and Life magazines, and Tony Parisi forsook the Manhattan advertising art scene for fine art. 
He has exhibited at the Brooklyn Art Association, Lever House and the Benton and Bowles Art Gallery.
Viewing hours are Monday, Tuesday and Thursday from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Friday and Saturday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
 
CHINESE PAINTING EXPERT
Traditional Chinese paintings by Shou-Cheng Zhang will be on display at the Hammond Museum in North Salem through April 4. 
Professor Zhang was a master of painting at the Shanghai Institute of Chinese Painting before coming to the United States in 1982.
Initially, he taught at Connecticut College in New London, and now he is a professor of Chinese painting at the China Institute in Manhattan. 
Professor Zhang, acknowledged as an expert in the delicate techniques that produce nature paintings of subtle coloring and exquisite detail, has lectured at the American Museum of Natural History and the Asia Society in Manhattan, the New York Botanical Society in the Bronx and the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
He will conduct a workshop in Chinese brush painting at the Hammond Museum on Saturday, with beginners scheduled from 10 A.M. to noon and advanced students from 2 to 4 P.M. The fee is $20, exclusive of supplies.
On Saturday from 6 to 9 P.M., Professor Zhang will present a slide show and lecture on "The History of Chinese Art" after a dinner at the museum. 
Admission to the dinner and lecture will be $30. 
For workshop or dinner reservations, the number to call is 669-5033. 
The museum, on Deveau Road off Old Route 124, is open Wednesday through Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
 
CAJUN MUSIC EVENT
Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys are rising stars in the Cajun music world, having won five 1991 Cajun French Music Association Awards in Lafayette, La., including best band and best album of the year.
They will perform on Saturday from 8:30 P.M. to midnight at the Ethical Culture Society, 7 Saxon Woods Road in White Plains. 
For those who may be unfamiliar with Cajun footwork, free dance lessons will be given from 7:30 to 8:30 P.M.
Mr. Riley plays a single-row, 10-button diatonic accordion handmade by his cousin, Marc Savoy, an expert musician and instrument maker. 
He named the band for his hometown in Louisiana and hews to traditional Cajun or zydeco music sung in French.
David Greely, whose grandparents are French-speaking Cajuns, is the fiddler, and Kevin Barzas is the guitarist. 
His interest in music stems from his grandfather Maurice Barzas, a noted Cajun accordionist. 
Marc Chapman, another Mamou native, is the drummer.
The band's label is Rounder Records, and its latest release is called "Canter to Mamou."
Admission will be $12.50. 
For more information, the number to call is 381-0708.
 
PICTURES AND SCULPTURES
Zachary Ehrenreich's paintings and Eliot Goldfinger's sculptures are on view today through March 28 at the Wildcliff Center for the Arts in New Rochelle.
Both artists are residents of New Rochelle; both were born in Manhattan in the 1950's and both are exclusively involved in figurative work.
Mr. Ehrenreich first learned to paint from his father, a student of Reginald Marsh. 
Today, the paintings of the younger Mr. Ehrenreich are reminiscent of Marsh's informal style in which intimacy and social commentary prevail. 
Experimenting with technique, Mr. Ehrenreich layers oil, tempera, gouache and sometimes all three over watercolor, producing a semi-transparent effect.
Sculptures by Mr. Goldfinger include busts of several New York City mayors, including Edward I. Koch, John V. Linsday and Robert F. Wagner. In addition, he has sculptured portraits of the actor Raul Julia, the tenor Jan Peerce and the caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, among other well-known people. 
He will give a slide-lecture on Thursday at 7:30 P.M. titled "Human Facial Anatomy and Expression for Artists."
Tickets will be $5 at the door.
An exhibition reception will be held today from 2 to 6 P.M. Regular viewing hours thereafter will be Tuesday through Saturday from 1 to 6 P.M. The center is at 33 Wildcliff Road overlooking Long Island Sound. 
For more information, the number to call is 235-4459.
