
THE best thing about visiting Beijing used to be the travelers' horror stories you accumulated. 
There was the time I was awakened in the middle of the night at the Jianguo Hotel by a cockroach strolling across my cheek, and the time a British friend had his contact lens case thoughtfully cleaned out by the hotel maid, who sent the lenses down the drain, and then there were the toilets . . .
These days, however, travelers can easily find a comfortable hotel and good meals. 
They can be met at the airport by an English-speaking representative of their hotel, who can arrange for a car. 
In their hotel they can watch MTV, order a bagel, book a squash court and direct-dial New York.
The most enjoyable time to visit China is late spring and early summer, when the trees and paddies are green, it's warm but not sticky and the parks are full of families with their kites, lofting dragons and the like into the brilliant sky. 
Spring is also one of the best seasons for getting around the Chinese way, on a bicycle. 
Many hotels now rent bikes for a few dollars a day. 
In particular, they allow swooping visits through the ubiquitous hutong, or alleys, that represent traditional Beijing life.
 
Sightseeing
Start your sightseeing at Tiananmen Square, said to be the largest public square in the world. 
Built by Mao after he assumed power in 1949, the 100-acre square is the political focal point of China. 
During the Cultural Revolution, from 1966 to 1976, Mao occasionally reviewed hundreds of thousands of Red Guards crowded together on the square. 
Four years ago, a million protesters swarmed around the square demanding democracy, until the tanks rolled in and opened fire, killing hundreds and wounding thousands. 
Visitors should be aware that the June 3-4 anniversary of the army's suppression of the movement is approaching. 
It is a time when Beijing is particularly tense, and tourists should be careful not to photograph anything that might upset the authorities. 
Last year several foreign journalists were beaten by police here for photographing protesters and secret police.
Toward the north end of the square is the Mao Zedong Memorial Hall, where the Chairman's embalmed body (some cynics insist it is all wax) can be viewed daily from 8:30 to 11:30 A.M. and from 2 to 4 P.M. on Monday, Tuesday and Friday.
Beyond the hall is Tiananmen, the Gate of Heavenly Peace, the entrance to the Forbidden City. 
Since the 1960's, Mao's portrait has hung from the gate, although there are perennial debates about whether it should be taken down. 
In the 1980's, the party opened the Tiananmen rostrum to tourists, for $5.20 a person; it provides a fine view of the square and the city beyond. 
It was from here, on Oct. 
1, 1949, that Mao Zedong -- then a gaunt guerrilla freshly arrived in Beijing -- proclaimed the establishment of the People's Republic.
Behind Tiananmen is the Forbidden City, the former home of the emperors. 
In these low, ornate buildings the emperors paraded with their concubines and eunuchs. 
The Forbidden City complex includes 9,000 rooms spread over 178 acres, the better to accommodate an imperial retinue that at its peak included 70,000 eunuchs. 
Now the Forbidden City looks a bit run-down, and part is closed for repairs until sometime this summer, but the effect is to make it look all the more aged and authentic. 
The best way to tour the compound is with the tape recording by Peter Ustinov, obtained inside. 
Rental of the tape and headset is included in the $7.90 admission price. 
The compound is open 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily. 
(Prices are calculated at the rate of 5.7 yuan to the dollar. 
Note that there are two versions of the currency, however. 
When you exchange money legally, you get foreign exchange certificates, or F.E.C., which is the only form of the yuan that tourist hotels or restaurants will accept. 
The Chinese themselves use the renminbi, the "people's currency.")
Any trip to Beijing should include an excursion to the Great Wall, about 35 miles north of the city. 
While the first wall was built more than 2,000 years ago, the segments that tourists now visit were built only 500 years ago and were further restored in the last decade or two. 
An all-day excursion by taxi, with a picnic at the wall, at a nearby village or at the Ming Tombs nearby, will cost about $75 if negotiated; don't use the meter. 
A small taxi van, known as a miandi, will cost about half as much, but these are normally found on the street rather than at taxi stands.
The Ming Tombs are near the Badaling section of the wall and are often combined with it in one outing. 
The Ming Dynasty lasted from 1368 to 1644, and 13 of its 16 emperors are buried here, along with their empresses and second wives. 
The tomb of Ding Ling, the emperor who ruled from 1573 to 1620, has been excavated and is open to visitors.
With a taxi, you can instruct the driver -- with hand signals or with a note written by one of the hotel staff -- to visit one of the hundreds of hamlets in the area. 
Take one of the narrow tracks off the main road to and from Beijing and follow it. 
If you've brought an interpreter (available for about $2 an hour through your hotel), the villagers will be happy to tell you about their lives. 
More than three-quarters of all Chinese live in villages, and the worst mistake tourists typically make is to travel thousands of miles to come to China and then never meet a single peasant. 
Roughly one person in five on this planet is a Chinese peasant, so it's worth taking a peek, however brief, into the villages.
 
Shopping
The Chaowai Market, a 10-minute walk northwest from Ritan Park, has everything from antique vases to Tibetan carpets to wooden sculptures. 
The market consists of two gymnasium-sized buildings, both divided into private stalls. 
Be skeptical of everything the private traders tell you; fakes abound. 
Some of the vendors speak a bit of English; others negotiate by offering prices on a calculator.
Good buys include wooden jewelry boxes for about $15, carved sculptures for $20, long ornate carvings (originally from bed boards or temples) for $30 or so. 
Nice turn-of-the-century vases (or perhaps good fakes -- you never know) sell for $20 or $30. 
Bargaining is essential, and as with everything in China you will get a lower price if you pay in United States dollars. 
This is not strictly legal but is widely tolerated. 
It's best to get a receipt and a red seal (signifying that the culture bureau allows the export of your purchase). 
Otherwise, there is a mild risk that customs agents will seize your purchase.
Silk carpets are also an excellent buy, although they are still much pricier than wool carpets from Pakistan or Afghanistan. 
The Friendship Store has a good selection, but you can get them much more cheaply through private traders. 
Ask someone from your hotel to call Li Gang, 851-4212, and he will come by your hotel with a dozen choices (specify the size and colors you want). 
Another trader is Wang Jun; call 301-7772 (the operator speaks English) and page beeper number 96212 to call you back; he speaks English. 
The carpets are spectacularly beautiful, and they cost $25 to $30 per square foot, depending on your bargaining abilities, the number of lines per inch and the currency with which you pay.
 
Where to Eat
Visitors to Beijing are often under the misapprehension that Chinese food is good if it is authentic. 
The sad truth is that authenticity in Beijing usually means gravel in the rice, two-day-old vegetables and grease. 
The best Chinese food is still to be found in Taiwan, Hong Kong and the United States, in that order.
In Beijing, the best restaurants are overwhelmingly at foreign hotels, but these tend to be rather short on character. 
If you must have Peking duck -- served in Beijing layered with fat -- try it at the Windows on the World Restaurant (no relationship to the New York establishment), on the 28th floor of the Citic Building, 19 Jianguomenwai Dajie, 500-2255. 
A meal for two with beer is $30.
Two of my favorite restaurants, for charm more than cuisine, are in Ritan Park, in eastern Beijing near the embassy district. 
Be sure to get a table outside. 
The Ritan Restaurant, 500-5883, is in the park's southwest corner, and offers Sichuan cuisine and Beijing-style jiaozi, or meat dumplings. 
The Xiheyaju Restaurant, 501-0385, is in the northeast corner, and offers Cantonese food. 
Both have English menus. 
A meal for two with beer at either one runs around $10.
There's an interesting little Sichuan restaurant called Sichuan Home Town Restaurant, Jianguomenwai Yongan Xili, 502-4291, close to the Friendship Store. 
It has only 20 tables, but in nice weather several are placed outside. 
From the Friendship Store's main entrance, cross Jianguomenwai Street and walk east for 110 yards to the first lane, turn right through the gate, then follow the lane 130 yards to the southeast, through the free market; the restaurant will be on your left. 
There is an English menu; a meal for two with beer is $5.
 
Where to Stay
The Holiday Inn Crown Plaza and Sara Hotel, both in interesting neighborhoods, offer good values. 
The 385-room Holiday Inn is at 48 Wangfujing Dajie, 513-3388, fax 513-2513; $120 for a double. 
The Sara, a 402-room hotel, is at 2 Wangfujing Dajie, 513-6666, fax 513-4248; $85 a double.
One of the best hotels in Beijing is the Palace, 8 Goldfish Lane, Wangfu jing, 512-8899, fax 512-9050, a 577-room establishment that offers two gold Rolls-Royces to pick you up at the airport or take you around (for a mere $325 a day). 
The Palace, with its marble and three-story waterfall in the lobby, is about as grand as a hotel gets. 
(Its restaurants are overpriced.) The hotel is in the Wangfu jing shopping district, an area good for walking but jammed with traffic. 
Rates are $220 for a double room.
Also at the top end is the 749-room China World Hotel, 1 Jianguomenwai Dajie, 505-2266, fax 505-0828, part of the Shangri-La chain. 
It doesn't suffer from the Palace's traffic congestion, but neither is it in a great walking area. 
Situated in the eastern part of the city, it is in the World Trade Center complex, which includes office buildings and several shops. 
Rates are $210 for a double room.
Budget: The 17-room Hao Yuan Guest House, Dongcheng Qu, Deng Shi Dong Kou, 53 Shijia Hutong, telephone and fax 512-5557, is a beautiful, well-situated Qing Dynasty courtyard house that was once the home of Chairman Hua Guofeng, edged out of power by Deng Xiaoping 15 years ago. 
Unfortunately, the staff does not speak English; a deposit of one day's room rate is required for a reservation. 
Rates are $45 for a double room with private bath.
A similarly elegant compound is the 31-room Lu Song Yuan Guest House, at Kuan Jie, 22 Banchang Hutong, 401-7550, fax 403-0418. 
There is an English-speaking staff. 
Rates are $35 for a double room with private bath. 
Both the Lu Song Yuan and Hao Yuan are perfectly comfortable, and have far more character than the Western-managed hotels mentioned above. 
So I recommend them strongly not only to people on a tight budget, but to anyone feeling adventurous about accommodations.
