
Through 5,000 years of history, the Chinese have believed that great catastrophes presage the passing of an emperor and the ushering in of a new dynasty.
So it was said in 1976 that the great Tongshan earthquake, which killed a quarter million Chinese with a single shrug of the earth on July 28 of that year, presaged the death of Mao Zedong on Sept. 
10.
The current emperor, Deng Xiaoping, who succeeded Mao after a brief transition, is said to be terminally ill at 89. 
And though Mr. Deng has tried, as Mao did, to control the shape of the succession, almost no one in China believes the succession arrangements will hold.
For 1994, the business outlook in China cannot be separated from the political outlook. 
If 1993 was the year of "maximum bullish" on China, as one investment banker said last fall, 1994 will be the year of "maximum uncertain."
Although, China's economy is expected to continue its boom, driven by social forces and foreign investment that were unleashed more than a decade ago, great seismic shocks could be lurking just over the horizon.
Government economists say gross domestic product, after inflation, will slow to 10 percent from 13 percent last year, dragged down by bottlenecks in transportation and a shortage of credit. 
By any measure, that is a booming economy, and many economists are worried that another round of spiraling inflation -- exceeding 20 percent in urban areas -- is ahead, proving that the only truism about China's economy is its frightening fluctuations.
Also consider:
*The expected death of Mr. Deng would be likely to have wholly unpredictable consequences for 1.18 billion Chinese. 
Would students flood the streets to resume the quest for democratic reform they mounted unsuccessfully in 1989?
Would the Government invoke martial law?
Or would the conflicts that still exist in the Chinese leadership over style and substance simmer for months, even years, before they are resolved by palace intrigue, purges or a coup d'etat?
*Will the Clinton Administration and China collide in a spectacular "train wreck" in 1994?
Winston Lord, an Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,warned this month that if Washington could not convince Beijing that "significant, overall progress" must be made in human rights before June, Mr. Clinton would revoke China's most-favored-nation trade status. 
That would have a big impact on the economies of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
*Will the crisis over North Korea's nuclear program develop toward the least desired outcome: the Clinton Administration, acting with its allies, uses military force. 
Whether China could sit out a new Korean conflict is a question that even China's leaders may not be able to answer, but the pressure from China's military would be enormous.
The nature of risk analysis is that all things do not come to pass.
Thus, the only thing certain about China fever is that 1994 will witness even greater numbers of investors stampeding toward the Middle Kingdom, despite the uncertainty.   PATRICK E. TYLER
 
