
The government continued to lash out at the Falun Gong spiritual movement today, comparing it to "organized crime" and predicting it would soon "vanish."
"The government can not sit back and do nothing about Falun Gong, a group that has seriously endangered public safety and order," said Ye Xiaowen, director general of the State Administration for Religious Affairs, at a news conference at the Great Hall of the People.
Defending the crackdown on Falun Gong, in which thousands of members have been detained since the group was banned in July, Mr. Ye said: "We should have outlawed it sooner."
Falun Gong, which blends traditional Chinese exercises and meditation with elements of Buddhism and Taoism, promises its followers improved health and spiritual peace. 
It was wildly popular, particularly among the middle-aged and the retired, until the government banned the movement and labeled it an "evil cult."
But some members have continued to practice, and a number have recently come to Beijing to protest the ban. 
Every day for the past 10 days, the police have been carting off small numbers of Falun Gong members from Tiananmen Square, where they sat and sometimes meditated in acts of silent protest.
Today's news conference highlighted what Chinese officials called the "dangerous" and "superstitious" aspects of Falun Gong with video clips that showed the movement's leader, Li Hongzhi, discussing supernatural powers, millennial visions and reincarnation.
Mr. Li, a former government clerk who started the movement in 1992, now lives in New York.
"I am the oldest in the universe -- I produced my parents," he says at one point in the tapes. 
And, at another: "I have so many incarnations, I can protect you all."
Other segments are said to show him urging practitioners to forgo medical care with admonitions like this: "If you go to the doctor it shows you don't trust me."
The group's leaders have said they do not forbid members to seek medical care, but they have also said that practicing Falun Gong promotes health and may limit the need for medical treatments. 
"The Chinese government has produced more fabricated stories about Falun Gong practice, but the truth will prevail since the Chinese people keep coming back to Tiananmen Square," said Erping Zhang, a Falun Gong spokesman based in the United States.
Chinese officials insist that 1,400 Falun Gong followers have died because they did not seek medical treatment, and the government has made this a major justification of the current crackdown.
In the past week, the government has announced its intention to prosecute leaders of the group under a new anti-cult law. 
Most had been arrested over the summer.
At today's news conference, officials spoke for the first time of the fate of the hundreds, if not thousands, of ordinary practitioners -- including office workers, farmers, students and business people -- who have been detained in Beijing this week.
The detainees were not arrested but "taken away and and given some education," said Li Bing, vice minister at the State Council Information Office. 
He said that practitioners who told the police where they were from were sent home.
But he added that some had been "unwilling" to say where they came from and so "we are still trying to reason with them so they can be sent back."
The information office said there "were no accurate statistics" concerning how many had been detained or sent home.
While insisting that Li Hongzhi had duped millions of Chinese, officials at the news conference acknowledged that the social upheavals of contemporary China provide fertile ground for groups like Falun Gong.
"There are people here not used to the fast-changing society," said Mr. Ye, the religious affairs official. 
"They feel upset and disoriented. 
I don't deny that. 
Cults like Falun Gong have emerged and attracted them."
But he characterized those still devoted to the group as "a few die-hards" who "will surely be punished."
Also reflecting the government's intense crackdown, five Western journalists who attended a clandestine news conference with Falun Gong members on Oct. 
28 were summoned to the Public Security Bureau for questioning on Wednesday and had their journalist accreditation cards and residence permits confiscated. 
The documents were returned today to three of the reporters, including Erik Eckholm of The New York Times.
