
During a tough battle last year over how a closed Navy base in Long Beach, Calif., would be used, a Clinton Administration official made what several people involved describe as highly unusual telephone calls to push for construction there of a container terminal that would be leased to a shipping company owned by the Chinese Government.
The calls were made last November to public officials interested in preserving some historic buildings at the old base, and their disclosure coincides with Federal investigations of whether the Chinese Government tried to make contributions to the Democratic Party last year.
The White House official who made the calls, Dorothy Robyn, a member of the National Economic Council, denied in an interview that she had been trying to exert any undue influence over the fate of what had been a major Navy base.
She said that her calls had been made at the request of the Mayor of Long Beach, that they had been intended merely to support the creation of new jobs in an area hit hard by Pentagon cutbacks and that she had never spoken about the project to the shipping concern, the China Ocean Shipping Company, or Cosco.
In the calls, Ms. Robyn urged the preservation officials -- from the Navy, the state and the local government -- to abandon efforts to save any buildings at the base and to allow them to be razed quickly, and the new terminal constructed. 
Some of those officials had been arguing that Long Beach ought to consider using some buildings for schools, recreation centers or other public uses.
There is no evidence that there was anything improper about the calls, but several officials who received them said it was highly unusual for the White House to intervene on behalf of one side in a local battle like this one, especially when the intervention benefited the cause of a business concern.
Louis J. Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said earlier this week that the F.B.I. was conducting "a very extensive investigation" into whether the Chinese Government tried to buy influence in last year's elections. 
While Cosco has not been implicated in the investigation, Hongye Zheng, a senior Chinese Government official who advises the company, attended one of President Clinton's Saturday morning radio broadcasts at the White House last year, as part of a group organized by Johnny Chung.
Mr. Chung is a Chinese-American businessman in Los Angeles who raised $391,000 for the Democratic Party in the last election cycle and enjoyed unusual access to the White House. 
The propriety of some of those donations is now one subject of the Federal investigation.
Despite the Clinton Administration's push at Long Beach, the plan to pave over the 145-acre base remains stalled because of a court battle between the city and the Long Beach Port Commission, which favor the terminal, and private preservation groups, which oppose it. 
Several weeks ago a state judge ordered Long Beach to cancel its contract with Cosco and reconsider competing plans for the location, but the Port Commission voted again shortly afterward in favor of the terminal.
As part of the Federal base-closing program, the Government typically cleans up old bases and then hands them over to local governments after they are reviewed for their historical value, and after re-use plans are adopted by the local community.
The Long Beach city preservation officer, the California state preservation officer and a Navy preservation officer have already signed off on the destruction of the buildings at the former Long Beach Naval Station, and officials at the United States Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, who must also review such decisions, appear likely to give their approval soon.
But several of those officials said the White House pressure had been unprecedented.
"We'd never had a phone call like that in this office before," said Lee Keatinge of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation. 
"There's no base re-use fight that's come close to Long Beach" for that kind of high-level involvement.
Ruthann Lehrer, Long Beach's preservation official, said: "It was made clear that this container terminal plan was the preference of the White House, not any of the other ideas some people were talking about. 
This was clearly not something that the White House wanted studied further."
Twenty-nine bases in California have been closed or cut back since 1988, and Long Beach has suffered huge job losses because of the naval base closing and layoffs at several large aerospace plants. 
The city has said it is pushing for the container terminal because it would create as many as 600 jobs.
The key telephone call occurred the day before the election last November. 
Ms. Robyn (pronounced ROH-bine) addressed about eight of the people involved in the Long Beach battle and said, as several participants in the conference call remember it, "I think this Administration has been very supportive of historic preservation, but in this case the national interest would be best served if this re-use plan proceeds."
Ms. Robyn called some of the officials two days later and reiterated that the national interest -- the creation of jobs -- demanded that the base be used as a shipping terminal and that the issue be closed quickly.
"I participated in a conference call at the Mayor's request and stated what the Administration's position was," Ms. Robyn recalled. 
"We said we support the community's re-use plan."
That Cosco was the prospective tenant of the terminal was "totally irrelevant," she said, adding that she had had no contact with the company.
Ms. Robyn said she had been involved in such base closings before, but always to push a slow-moving Navy bureaucracy to hand over the sites quickly. 
She acknowledged that this was the first time she had stepped in when a community was divided over a re-use plan, and when intervention effectively favored one side over the other.
Cosco already operates from an 80-acre terminal at Long Beach's commercial port. 
Under the plan for the old naval base, the Port Commission would spend $200 million razing the existing structures and building the terminal. 
Cosco would pay about $14.5 million a year to lease the terminal, which would be used to accommodate a new generation of larger vessel that the company has started sailing.
