
Ching Lee Wu, the wife of Harry Wu, says she has hardly slept during the last three weeks as she has tried to mobilize support and publicity for her husband in the press and at various levels of government.
Today at their home here, 40 miles south of San Francisco, the telephone rang continually with calls from supporters, and on Monday she is heading to Washington to lobby on her husband's behalf.
Mrs. Wu urged a tough American response to his arrest, arguing that the Chinese authorities see Washington as too soft to take a strong stand. 
The fate of her husband could depend on it. 
"I think why the Chinese Government is doing this to Harry is because they think the Americans are weak; the American Government does not act very strong, so the Chinese act strong," she said.
"They think maybe the American people are just concerned about money," she said. 
"So we have to let the Chinese Government know that we care about individual people, that the whole country is just like a big family."
Mr. Wu has always had a streak of naughtiness, she said in an interview today.
As a child, he sometimes poked fun at his teachers, she said. 
At home, he could be playful with his wife and her parents, who also live here.
But during the interview, with the tinkle of wind chimes underscoring the quiet of their living room, Mrs. Wu was grim. 
"This is totally different," she said. 
"When you are naughty, that is just for fun. 
This is much more serious. 
Harry knew what he faced if he failed."
Like other dedicated dissidents over the years in China, the Soviet Union and elsewhere, Mr. Wu has taken on the mantle of "political prisoner" as a lifelong identity. 
Imprisoned at the age of 23 in 1960 for dissident activities, he spent what his wife calls "his best years" in the camps. 
He has spent most of his life since then fighting back.
Working with his wife, whom he met in Taiwan and married in 1991, he has become one of the most prominent expatriate Chinese dissidents, running the Laogai Research Foundation, which publicizes abuses in the Chinese camps. 
Laogai is Chinese for "reform through labor," and the term, which is used to denote the labor camp system, has become analogous to the Soviet "gulag," a nationwide archipelago of camps.
"We won't stop the laogai work," she said, leaning forward on a white leather couch. 
"It's very important work, don't you think?"
Mr. Wu, who is 58, and his wife, who left China for Taiwan as a child when the Communists took control in 1949, have no children, though she said her husband sometimes seems happiest in the company of small children.
They have dedicated their energies to the laogai foundation, routinely working past midnight in the small office where they sit face-to-face at computers, surrounded by faxes, telephones and copying machines.
"Harry is a man, but he is passionate," Mrs. Wu said. 
"He left the camps already 15 or 16 years ago, but he still sometimes cries over his friends who died there."
Her husband's dream is to create a museum similar to those that commemorate the Holocaust, and his work sometimes involves inviting fellow survivors to visit and tape record their recollections.
"When they get together, they are different," Mrs. Wu said. 
"Their talking is different from our talking. 
They are laughing, they are crying, they have their own world."
It is a world Mrs. Wu has closely observed, and more than most waiting wives, she can picture her husband's situation now. 
She has heard about the chess games played without pieces but only with the mind, about the fantasy menus concocted by half-starving men, and about the prisoners who die or disappear without a trace.
And she knows first-hand how difficult her husband can be to mold. 
Each time he decides to revisit China, she said, she knows better than to try to dissuade him. 
"Harry is really different," she said. 
"If he insists on doing something, then he will do it. 
Nobody can change his mind."
