
A United Nations conference demanded Friday that Taiwan uphold an international ban on the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns, but it backed off earlier threats of tough measures against China.
The action by the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species could influence United States policy on the issue. 
President Clinton has to decide next week whether to impose limited trade sanctions on the Asian nations under legislation protecting animals threatened with extinction.
Tiger bones and rhinoceros horns are valued in Asia as ingredients in traditional medicines. 
There are fears that this could threaten the animals with extinction before the end of the decade.
The World Wildlife Fund and the Earth Island Institute said they would step up their campaign to persuade the United States to ban imports of wildlife products from Taiwan. 
But they conceded there was little hope that China would face punitive measures despite accusations that it allows smuggling of tiger bones.
"There's never been a more compelling case for sanctions," said Ginette Hemley of the World Wildlife Fund.
Only an estimated 10,000 rhinos are left in the wild.
Unconfirmed estimates say up to a quarter of the tiger population in Siberia was killed this winter and the bones smuggled into China.
There are now said to be only 150 to 200 Amur tigers left in Siberia. 
About 1,500 Bengali tigers are said to have been killed in India the last three years, reducing the population to about 3,000.
At a meeting in Belgium in September, the United Nations committee warned Taiwan, China, South Korea and Hong Kong that it might recommend a ban on their exports of wildlife products if they continued to deal in tiger and rhinoceros parts.
In the past, the six-member committee has called for sanctions against Thailand and Italy for violations of the convention.
Environmental groups maintain that Chinese factories are still producing products made from tiger bones despite the insistence of authorities that this has stopped.
The standing committee was most critical of Taiwan. 
It voiced concern at the Government's failure to bar forbidden imports and consumption.
But the final text was weaker than an initial draft, which said the committee would recommend sanctions against Taiwan.
