
A day after the United States and China imposed trade sanctions on each other, some American companies said yesterday that they were preparing to switch production from China to other Asian nations, while others waited and said they expected a last-minute resolution of the dispute.
Many American executives expressed support for Washington's decision to impose 100 percent punitive tariffs, to take effect in three weeks, on more than $1 billion of Chinese goods ranging from silk blouses to cellular telephones. 
But they also said they were fearful that their investments in China would prove disastrous if a trade war broke out and their competitors in Europe and Asia were to receive favorable treatment from the Chinese.
And Beijing took measured steps yesterday to heighten those fears.
"There are countless markets abroad for Chinese products," Foreign Trade Minister Wu Yi said at a news conference in Beijing, when asked if Chinese exporters would suffer from $1.08 billion in American import tariffs. 
"Other countries are happier about this."
While the punitive tariffs imposed on China for its purported piracy of American software, movies and music are larger than any used in Washington's numerous trade disputes with Japan and Europe, they nonetheless affect only about 5 percent of the total trade between the United States and China, which reached $46 billion last year.
And the American tariffs seem to have been imposed with an almost surgical precision so as to minimize the effect on American businesses and consumers, penalizing Chinese goods that are available from other nations.
Determined to emphasize that the dispute is but one small piece of America's relations with China, Washington yesterday sent to Beijing, as scheduled, an advance team from the Energy Department. 
The Americans are preparing for talks this month in which Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary hopes to persuade China to spend as much as $8 billion in the United States to satisfy its growing need for energy.
The Chinese also seemed to retaliate with moderation. 
Imposing 100 percent tariffs on American-made video games, compact disks cigarettes and alcohol, Beijing left untouched grain and the major American industrial sectors, though the Chinese did suspend negotiations over major automotive projects with Detroit's Big Three auto makers.
"I was surprised by the Chinese reaction; I thought it would be much worse than it is," Robert Dernberger, professor of economics at the University of Michigan's Center for Chinese Studies, told The Associated Press. 
"The restrained nature of the Chinese reaction indicates they want this resolved."
Because the sanctions announced on Saturday do not take effect until Feb. 
26, to insure that goods already shipped are not affected, nearly three weeks are available to negotiate a settlement. 
No talks are scheduled, but after Washington announced similar sanctions against China last year in a dispute over textiles, a deal was reached in five days.
"We've seen this before and the Chinese have caved in at the 24th hour; I think Mickey Kantor thinks they will again," said Gib Ford, chairman and chief executive of Converse, which is based in North Reading, Mass., and makes athletic shoes. 
"This is very typical of the Chinese."
At some of the largest American companies, the watchwords were wait and see.
"Nothing we're doing now is threatened," said Herb Linnen, an AT&T spokesman in Washington. 
AT&T has sold about $500 million in telecommunications equipment in China during the last two years and has invested $200 million in joint ventures with the Chinese.
China is the largest and fastest-growing market for telecommunications equipment in Asia and is expected to invest $40 billion for new equipment between now and 2000. 
"We're competing with the Japanese, French and Germans," Mr. Linnen said.
And at the Boeing Company in Seattle -- the company is America's largest exporter -- Lawrence W. Clarkson, senior vice president of planning and international development, said: "We're not directly affected, but it's highly unlikely that we are going to get any new orders as long as the trade situation exist. 
We're obviously disappointed it came to this but naturally support Ambassador Kantor's decision. 
You can only hope that the parties can quickly get back to the table and reach an agreement before the sanctions are officially in place."
In the last two years, one out of every seven airplanes delivered by Boeing has gone to an airline in China, and the company is scheduled to deliver 18 aircraft to China this year.
"While airplanes and components are not on the list," Mr. Clarkson said, "our concern is what could happen if the trade war expands."
But other companies are more vulnerable, like athletic shoe makers, which have numerous factories in China.
Some American executives said the disruption would not be severe, because the shoes selected for the American tariffs are mostly children's and women's footwear that make up small parts of their business.
"China has been a key country of origin for some of our production," Mr. Ford said, noting that Converse planned to produce three million pairs of shoes in China this year and "our preference is to leave production in China."
He said Converse, "in anticipation of problems," had made plans to move some production from China to Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand. 
But shoes made in Taiwan may cost American consumers more because of higher labor costs, he said.
New Balance, which makes 30 percent of its shoes in China and the rest in the United States, said it was prepared to switch to Taiwanese production. 
"It'll be a disruption, and prices may go up," said Jim Davis, chairman of the Boston-based company. 
"It's not a huge logistical problem to shift production, but just a gearing up of personnel."
Donna Gibbs, a spokeswoman for Nike, the industry leader, said production would be shifted from 10 Chinese factories, which produce 28 to 30 percent of Nike's footwear, to Indonesia, where 12 plants make Nike shoes. 
She described the impact of the tariffs as "very minimal."
Among companies that suffer most directly from Chinese piracy, support for the American position was strong.
The Microsoft Corporation in Redmond, Wash., has complained bitterly that much of its software is pirated, and a spokeswoman, Beverly Bird, said the company would like to see China close the 29 factories that manufacture pirated compact disks, and enforce copyright laws vigorously.
The 29 factories produce 75 million pirated compact disks annually. 
To rein them in the central Government would need the compliance of the powerful local governments that approved the factories in the first place. 
Since they pay no royalties, the factories are extremely profitable.
Robert Holleyman, president of the Business Software Alliance, a trade group in Washington, said the rate of software piracy in China was about 98 percent, with losses to American software publishers estimated at $351 million a year.
"While a copyright law does exist in the People's Republic of China," Mr. Holleyman said, "it is not effectively enforced."
He said the alliance supported the tariffs announced Saturday but hoped the outcome would be a resumption of negotiations and eventual protection for American software companies.
At the Chrysler Corporation, which has been negotiating for two and a half years to start a $1 billion joint venture to build mini-vans in southern China, executives were fatalistic. 
The talks on the project have run into many obstacles, said Tony Cervone, a Chrysler spokesman, adding, "We have not had recent talks anyway."
