
The Chinese government has promised long and loud to protect intellectual property rights as a member of the global trade world. 
But now, the Communist Party itself has fallen victim to copyright pirates: a party-sponsored anticorruption film is available across the country in illegal digital and celluloid versions.
The Shanghai Film Studio, which released the film "Life-and-Death Choice" in June as part of the party's anticorruption drive, says pirated copies are being shown in state-run cinemas in many provinces. 
The studio says its employees have been beaten and harassed while trying to seize illegal prints of the film.
This is a worrisome sign for people anticipating China's entry to the World Trade Organization and the market-opening changes that the country says will come with it. 
The persistent piracy of the anticorruption film shows how hard it is for even the Communist Party to protect its interests in a country where law enforcement is marked by periodic high-profile campaigns followed by a gradual relaxation to the status quo. 
As China rounds the last corner of its circuitous, 14-year route to the global commerce club, the question remains: How much can Beijing deliver on the promises it has made?
Beijing's leaders might be sincere in their vows to fellow W.T.O. members, but China's central government is more like an emperor trying to control a far-flung network of unruly fiefs than an all-seeing Big Brother whose commands are instantly obeyed.
The patent and copyright theft "is very difficult to stop because law enforcement is not enough and there is regional protectionism in many different places," said He Zizhuang, one of the film's screenwriters.
If Beijing cannot enforce rules that are clearly understood by everyone, there may be little hope that the government can quickly carry out some of the more complex trade regulations demanded by the W.T.O.
Last week, Sun Yuxi, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, told reporters that "the Chinese government will adopt a serious and responsible attitude to honor its commitments so as to implement all the agreements it has pledged with various members of the W.T.O."
Comforting as those words were, they sounded disconcertingly similar to the assurances given by China's former foreign trade minister, Wu Yi, after she signed another big trade agreement with the United States five years ago.
Headlines in American newspapers trumpeted that accord as heralding the end of rampant copyright piracy in China, which had brought the two countries to the brink of a multibillion-dollar trade war. 
Yet copyright piracy is still common.
The Business Software Alliance, which is based in Washington, estimated that 91 percent of the software used in China last year had been stolen -- a slight drop from 1994. 
Pirated editions of popular books often circulate in larger numbers than the legal editions. 
The latest Harry Potter book, for example, is already on store shelves, although the legal publication for China is days away. 
And the country's fast-growing Internet has opened new vistas of copyright piracy, as it has in the United States and elsewhere.
After a recent, legal matinee here of "Life-and-Death Choice," Liu Changping, who works for a taxi company and is a party member, declared the movie "very moving," and then left with his wife through the theater's lobby, where hundreds of pirated video disks of Chinese and American films were on sale. 
Some recent Hollywood hits, including "Gladiator" and "Shanghai Noon," were also available on DVD for about $2 each, less than half the price of the legal versions.
A saleswoman said she was sold out of "Life-and-Death Choice."
But down the street at the Shengli Art Cinema, which was also showing the movie, plenty of pirated copies were for sale.
Mr. Liu did not blink at the flagrant display of piracy or see any incongruity in its existence at the same place where the anticorruption movie was being shown. 
Such abuses apparently are so common as to be invisible to most Chinese.
The Ministry of Culture recently urged all the departments that are responsible for regulating the audiovisual market to crack down on piracy of the anticorruption movie.
All party members have been told to see the film, which recounts a stalwart party member's battle against pervasive graft. 
Tickets or video disks are bought by local party organizations with member dues. 
Thanks to the built-in market, more than nine million people have seen the movie. 
By mid-September, it had grossed $12 million -- more than any locally produced film in the last 10 years. 
The orchestrated success has made the film a natural target for copyright pirates.
Protecting intellectual property rights is just one small part of what China promises it will do as a member of the W.T.O. 
Other accommodations are more arcane and less easily put in place at the local level, partly because few people yet have any idea exactly what the trade organization requires.
In mid-January, President Jiang Zemin will preside over a meeting meant to educate top officials, including all the provincial governors, on the finer points of W.T.O. membership.
But Lu Zhiqiang, deputy director of the Development Research Center, an affiliate of the State Council, said few people understood the new trade requirements well enough to act as teachers. 
"Few serious studies have ever been conducted about relevant laws on foreign trade, overseas investment and rules and regulations of the W.T.O. so that Chinese firms can meet challenges while undertaking their obligations," he said in a recent China Daily article.
Nor is the United States likely to have the firepower to force China to follow the agreement.
In June, a request by President Clinton for $21 million to monitor compliance with trade accords, with a focus on China, failed to make it onto an appropriations bill in the House of Representatives.
The House did increase the budget of the United States trade representative's office by $3 million, and some of that money may be used for monitoring. 
But that is hardly enough to track compliance with a complex agreement in a $1 trillion economy.
Already, even while China is very much in the spotlight as it prepares for entry to the W.T.O., the country seems to be backtracking: it has tried to delay the agreed-upon phasing out of certain tariffs on information technology products.
