
In this gray industrial city in central China, Tong Yi lives a life of internal exile, reduced to the status of a nonperson by the Chinese security apparatus.
As the secretary and research assistant to Wei Jingsheng during the only seven months of freedom that China's most famous democracy activist has enjoyed since 1979, Ms. Tong made an excursion across the stage of international fame that was all too brief. 
And it has carried a very high price: more than two years in labor camp, from which she emerged last October to find China a harsher place and herself in a continuing state of persecution.
Chinese police officials refuse to issue her a national identity card, so Ms. Tong cannot get a job. 
She cannot get a passport to travel to New York, where Columbia University is holding a fellowship for her. 
Her phone is tapped. 
She passes her days trying to retain the English she learned in school by listening to broadcasts of the Voice of America and the British Broadcasting Corp. She had to borrow cab fare to come across town to meet a visitor.
"The Government just wants me to be forgotten," she said matter-of-factly.
She has asked a friend to bring her the works of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, saying she now has a deeper appreciation of the Soviet labor camps that Mr. Solzhenitsyn wrote about.
The Siberian camps are closed, but thousands of people remain in the Chinese gulag. 
"Every day is the same as before, and just to pass a single day is very difficult," she said of the prison camps. 
"But when you look back, you realize the time has passed quickly. 
A year of time has no content, no meaning, no memory. 
It just passed; there was nothing worth remembering."
Ms. Tong, 29, was at the center of the free-speech revival engendered by Mr. Wei in late 1993 and early 1994. 
That was the period in which he rediscovered the Chinese society that had been invisible to him during the long years he spent in solitary confinement fighting the malnutrition that caused many of his teeth to fall out.
That was also the period when China's Communist Party leaders were trying to show a new tolerance to the world in hopes that the International Olympic Committee would choose Beijing as the site of the 2000 Summer Games.
They were heady days for Ms. Tong, who was 26 at the time. 
She became the indispensable intermediary between Mr. Wei and the foreign journalists, diplomats, publishers, congressmen and senators who sought him out. 
She made arrangements for the meeting between Mr. Wei and John Shattuck, the State Department's top human rights official, in February 1993 that led to a rupture in China's relations with the United States that has never been fully repaired.
Many Chinese say it was the event that allowed Prime Minister Li Peng and other hard-liners in the Politburo to make the case that the Clinton Administration was willing to covertly support China's democracy movement to overthrow the Communist Government.
Whether the assertion is true or not, it is clear that in the three years since, a relentless crackdown by security forces has sent Mr. Wei and most pro-democracy leaders back to prison or into exile.
"The Government was so afraid of his pen," Ms. Tong said of Mr. Wei, "and now they will not allow him to write anything."
Mr. Wei is serving a new 14-year prison sentence, and the Chinese authorities are putting pressure on him to agree to go into exile in exchange for a parole.
In 1994, when police searched Ms. Tong's apartment, they found a university seal that had been purchased on the black market, the kind many students purchase to save themselves the fees charged by a university to stamp the many documents required for graduate study abroad.
It was an infraction that would have drawn a fine or a reprimand in any other case. 
But it became Ms. Tong's crime.
Twice during her incarceration, Ms. Tong refused to work more than eight hours a day. 
The first time, she was beaten by other inmates who were incited against her by the guards, she said, and the second time, her parents were warned that she would be sent to a remote labor camp known for even more brutal treatment of prisoners. 
On both occasions, Ms. Tong credits her mother and the Voice of America for rescuing her by reporting on the threats against her.
"My mother is really very marvelous," she said with big smile. 
"While I was in prison, she spent many hours each day transcribing the news broadcasts on the radio so that I could read them when I came home."
In all, her mother, Meng Ruiyun, filled 2,000 notebook pages with Chinese characters.
In the camp, Ms. Tong's job was to shred scrap cloth with her hands until it was a bundle of thread that then could be soaked in oil to clean machinery. 
The 18 women in her unheated dormitory room, most of them heroin addicts and prostitutes, worked 12 hours a day or more to fulfill their quotas. 
In winter the indoor temperature stayed in the 30's.
When Ms. Tong walked out of the gate of the He Wan Re-education Through Labor Camp in Wuhan last October, she tried to visit Beijing to see members of Mr. Wei's family and some of her old friends. 
But her 4 A.M. arrival at the capital's train station was greeted by a dozen plainclothes policemen, who threw her into a detention center without charge for 11 days before sending her back to Wuhan.
Since her release, the police frequently remind her of how easily her liberty could again be taken away. 
As one police commander told her, "You are an egg and we are a rock."
But her face shows the pride of endurance when she talks about the abuse and beatings that she suffered in prison. 
"I told them," she said of the guards, " 'You can beat me to death, but I am not afraid.'
"
