
Suddenly, there are pandas everywhere. 
In 1996 the San Diego Zoo got two, which thrilled animal lovers last year by producing America's first successful panda birth. 
Zoo Atlanta got its panda pair last year. 
The National Zoo in Washington is scheduled to get a couple in prime breeding age, perhaps as early as this month.
And almost 20 other zoos have begun the yearslong bureaucratic slog of requesting pandas from China, with St. Louis, Memphis and Oakland leading the pack, said David Towne, president of the North American Panda Foundation.
In California, Oakland has even offered to set up a multimillion-dollar research center in China to map the panda genome with the help of universities and biotechnology companies. 
"This interests them a lot," Vice Mayor Henry Chang said.
But the disquieting reality for New Yorkers is that the Bronx Zoo -- one of the nation's premier zoos -- has none of the pudgy, black-masked bears, and no, repeat, no plans to get any.
"Pandas?
Maybe, way down the road," grudgingly allowed Richard Lattis, senior vice president and director of living institutions for the Wildlife Conservation Society, the Bronx Zoo's parent. 
Apparently aware of the public relations impact of his all-too-brusque reply, he hastened to add that as a child he treasured a stuffed panda.
The now determinedly avuncular zoo official said that the issue transcended spectator glee, cutting to the ultimate purpose of zoos in a fragile ecosphere: how best to marshal public support and scientific expertise to save threatened species. 
He offered four sensible-sounding reasons for the Bronx's panda-lessness.
First, the Bronx Zoo long ago abandoned is mission of exhibiting every kind of animal in favor of more educational exhibits of fewer species: it deliberately has no chimpanzees, for instance. 
Second, its exhibits are linked to areas where it has major conservation projects: the $50 million Congo exhibit that opened last year, with its stunning gorilla habitat, strives to tell the story of the conservation society's scientific work in the African rain forest.
Third, the society's scientists, some of them the first Westerners to study pandas in their Chinese habitat, are not persuaded that American zoos are the best way to preserve a species that has dwindled to 1,000 or fewer bears. 
Fourth, pandas are not cheap, and they drain money from other priorities: the Chinese demand $1 million per pair a year.
Well, sensible shoes, one-piece bathing suits and spinach are great too. 
The truth is that just about everybody adores seeing pandas. 
When the Bronx Zoo displayed a pair of visiting pandas for six months in 1987, a million people came to ogle them, including Lisa Dautrich of Oneonta, N.Y., who acknowledged owning a panda sweater, panda slippers and a panda hat. 
"We have a whole room decorated panda," her husband, Ken, volunteered.
Simply put, pandas are boffo box office, and you either have them or you don't. 
When asked to comment on the panda gap between her zoo and the Bronx, Gail Eaton, senior vice president of Zoo Atlanta, had a swift and pointed response: "Nyah, nyah, nyah, nyah, nyah!"
In a polite voice, she added, "You can quote me."
History suggests that the Bronx Zoo has seldom been nonchalant about pandas. 
Two years after the zoo opened in 1899, William T. Hornaday, its first director, said that what he really, really wanted was a giant panda. 
Not until 1938 did the great zoo get one, Pandora.
That Chicago's highly regarded Brookfield Zoo got a panda a year earlier seemed only a minor slight, particularly because a second bear, Pan, arrived in the Bronx the next year. 
They became the stars of the society's pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair, and an ample-bellied, sleepy-eyed panda graced the cover of the zoo's guide that year.
The good fortune persisted. 
In 1941, Mrs. Chiang Kai-shek sent two more pandas, Pandah and Pandee, to demonstrate the love that non-Communist Chinese harbored for the United States, and particularly, it appeared, the Bronx. 
A central panda fact became apparent: pandas, above all else, are perfect for political pandering.
Mayor Edward I. Koch understood this. 
He looked across his vast realm and saw no pandas. 
Pandora, the zoo's last surviving panda, died in 1951. 
With characteristic energy and abrasiveness, he devoted seven years to lobbying China. 
Mr. Koch became known in Beijing as "the guy who wants the pandas."
Mr. Koch says the door began to open during a lunch he arranged at Gracie Mansion for China's prime minister, Zhao Ziyang, in 1984 -- an occasion remembered for his publicly correcting Mr. Zhao for holding his gift, a Tiffany's crystal seal of New York, upside down.
"Mr. Prime Minister," Mr. Koch remembered saying, "may I speak with you alone about a very important matter."
They retired to the library, where the mayor got to the point. 
"Mr. Prime Minister, I need two pandas."
"We don't give pandas," Mr. Zhao answered.
"I don't want to own them; I just want to borrow them," Mr. Koch said.
The prime minister appeared puzzled. 
"If I get two pandas, I'll get re-elected," Mr. Koch explained.
As the two politicians said goodbye, Mr. Koch asked what he could tell reporters about pandas. 
Mr. Zhao replied, "It is possible that New York City will have two pandas."
Mr. Koch almost did a cartwheel. 
"That's how I got re-elected," he said the other day, perhaps exaggerating, perhaps not.
Bronx Zoo officials were stunned. 
"We got a call and everyone went, 'What?'
" said Linda Corcoran, a spokeswoman. 
Since the city at that time paid a quarter of the zoo's costs, there was no possibility of saying no.
But many wished they could. 
George Schaller, the celebrated Wildlife Conservation Society scientist who spent four years studying the pandas in China, believed that what had become known as the "rent-a-panda program" was characterized by "greed, coupled with a shameful indifference to the pandas' welfare."
His dark views seemed amply confirmed by what happened at the Bronx Zoo: the female ovulated. 
The male was not of breeding age, and what is at best a once-a-year breeding opportunity for a critically endangered species was wasted.
In 1988, Kenneth A. Cook, press director for the World Wildlife Fund, now the World Wide Fund for Nature, said: "If we had known last summer what we know now, we would have gone to the mat against the Bronx Zoo loan. 
Clearly, that was the turning point for a lot of institutions in the United States."
The result, after several tussles with zoos in Toledo and elsewhere that wanted their own short-term loans, was a federal ban on panda importation. 
"They were being shipped around like a circus," said Mr. Towne, the panda foundation president, who is also director of the Woodland Park Zoo in Seattle.
The ban marked a hiatus in a fitful, unpredictable trickle of pandas to the West. 
The first panda came to the United States in 1929 in the form of a corpse shot by Teddy Roosevelt's sons, Theodore Jr. and Kermit. 
Then came the living gifts from the Nationalist Chinese. 
Later, during the 1970's, the Chinese presented pandas to heads of state, including President Richard M. Nixon. Along with the National Zoo, zoos in Europe and Mexico City benefited from these gifts.
The panda loan program began in the early 1980's when bamboo, the pandas' principal food, was dying off, and the Chinese were scrambling for money to help them survive. 
"They began shopping the animals on short-term loans, usually $200,000 a month," Mr. Towne said.
The collapse of the loan program spurred a rethinking of panda policy. 
American zoos and the Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife Service came up with a strict plan requiring longer loans under much stricter controls. 
The consensus was that to save pandas, zoos would pay millions of dollars for panda research and conservation. 
This is today's regime.
Zoos now pay $1 million a year per pair, and a sliding scale of up to $600,000 for any cubs, which are supposed to be returned to China three years after birth. 
All proceeds must go to panda research and conservation.
"The only way pandas are ever going to survive is to make it worthwhile for the Chinese to save pandas," Mr. Towne said.
American zoos have acquired pandas for varying, but compelling reasons. 
Since the mid-1980's, Zoo Atlanta has viewed pandas as part of a broad strategy to upgrade a deservedly shabby reputation, said Terry Maple, its director. 
The National Zoo would love to reverse its breeding record: its previous panda pair produced four cubs who did not survive more than a few days.
To be sure, there is not yet a ground swell for pandas in the Bronx, though David Chen, executive director of the Chinese American Planning Council, which provides services and support for New Yorkers of Chinese descent, said Chinese-American residents would consider their arrival "a friendship type of thing."
Intriguingly, even other zoos root for pandas in the Bronx, mainly because of the zoo's prestige and scientific record. 
"New York would be a great candidate," said Dr. Maple, of Zoo Atlanta. 
"They obviously would qualify instantly."
Mr. Lattis accepts the compliment, but says the zoo has already decided on its next big focus: tigers. 
It plans a huge new tiger area for 2002. 
He contends this will be better than pandas.
"I can get you a lot more excited about tigers than pandas," he said, not entirely convincingly. 
"Pandas aren't as active as tigers."
And just maybe tigers make sense. 
Yuan Zhang, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, said his government was overwhelmed with panda orders. 
"It's very difficult for us to meet the increasing demand for pandas," he said.
In addition to the lovable looks of the plush, teary-eyed beasts, the panda paucity surely accounts for much of their appeal. 
"There remains an unanswered question," said Donald Lindburg, the chief panda person at the San Diego Zoo, proud host to three pandas. 
"How many pandas in the United States would satiate the public's attention?
Rareness is a factor in all this."
Easy for him to say.
