
Digging deep into the scarlet earth along the banks of the Yangtze River, China's archeologists are in a race against time to save the relics of nearly 8,000 years of Chinese history that will otherwise be trapped forever beneath a lake created by the world's largest dam.
The project, the biggest archeological expedition ever conducted in China, is expected to bring together thousands of archeologists who will try to excavate more than 300 square miles of the river bank before it is covered by the new superdam's reservoir.
The dimensions of the archeological effort are matched only by those of the dam itself. 
The Three Gorges Dam, named for the rock formations along the Yangtze that are among the most cherished natural wonders in China, is expected to provide electricity equal to 10 nuclear power plants, and it should forever end the threat of flooding in densely populated areas downstream.
But beyond a price tag of at least $20 billion, the dam will exact a terrible cost, including the forced relocation of more than one million Chinese whose homes will be washed out by the river, and the destruction of areas of the Yangtze river bank considered a cradle of Chinese civilization. 
Even the Three Gorges themselves will be destroyed as a result of the dam.
"I feel the pressure," said Yao Ying Qin, director of the national archeological museum in Yichang. 
"It is like my shoulders have been weighted down from all the pressure."
Mr. Yao is overseeing the effort to save the relics along the Yangtze, a project that will be carried out in stages into the early part of the next century, with the archeologists struggling to stay ahead of the construction teams that are building the dam. 
Construction began last year and is expected to last until 2013.
"If I fail to do good work on the preservation of these relics, we will have dishonored our ancestors," he said somberly.
Chinese archeologists say the only comparable project of modern times was carried out in the 1960's in Egypt, when the Nile was dammed at Aswan, flooding out river banks that held the relics of thousands of years of Egyptian civilization.
With the help of an international campaign led by the United Nations, the Egyptians transported the 3,000-year-old stone temples built by Ramses II at Abu Simbel to a new home before they could be buried by a lake that formed behind the dam.
The Chinese think that they will need an international effort at least as large to save their relics.
The initial budget for the project is nearly $180 million. 
Government archeologists say they hope that the United Nations and foreign researchers will join them in carrying out the excavations -- and paying for them.
Archeologists working from the museum at Yichang, the riverside city in central China where the dam construction teams are based, began intensive work along the river several years ago. 
They say the discoveries so far have cemented the theory that the Yangtze is as much the birthplace of Chinese culture as the Yellow River basin, long assumed to be the sole cradle of Chinese civilization.
"What we have already discovered along the Yangtze provides the unwritten historical record of China," said Mr. Yao, the museum director, leading visitors to a room in the museum where he displays the recent discoveries from Zhongbaodao, a village near Yichang.
In 200 ancient tombs and other sites in the area around Zhongbaodao, archeologists have uncovered thousands of items of pottery, porcelain and stoneware dating back nearly 7,000 years and possibly beyond.
The stone objects included polished tools and axes. 
A kiln dating back 3,000 years to the Shang Dynasty was unearthed. 
At almost every site, the archeologists found jade, often elaborately carved, that had been used for rings, bracelets and necklaces.
"Do you see the workmanship, the artistry?"
Mr. Yao asked, cradling a fragile reddish-gray pot intricately designed with a pattern of feather-like whirls. 
"This dates from 5,000 years ago. 
As you can see, our ancestors were very skillful artisans."
The archeologists began their work at Zhongbaodao because it was among the sites scheduled to be destroyed as a result of the construction work on the dam. 
"I think that after careful work, we have excavated all of the important sites there," Mr. Yao said of Zhongbaodao. 
"We have removed everything that is valuable."
The question being asked quietly among China's archeologists -- who are Government employees and cannot question the Government's policies without risk to their jobs -- is whether they will have the time, the people and the money to perform equally thorough excavations across the hundreds of square miles of river bank that remain unexplored.
There seems to be no way to stop the dam, despite protests from environmentalists, human rights groups and foreign governments. 
Beijing has staked national prestige on the project, which was first proposed in the 1920's by Sun Yat-sen and was later championed by Mao Zedong.
Several big archeological sites have already been earmarked for preservation, including a number of stone temples that will have to be taken apart and then reassembled in new homes. 
Archeologists are particularly eager to preserve an intricately carved four-story stone temple built in Sichuan Province during the Ming Dynasty to honor a legendary general, Khang Fei.
But saving just that one temple will cost millions of dollars, and there are several other endangered stone monuments nearby that are considered nearly as valuable.
"We want the whole world to help us save these treasures because these artifacts do not belong just to China, said Mr. Yao, who is polishing his fund-raising pitch for foreign donors. 
"They belong to the world."
