
Beneath the autumnal crimson and gold of a maple tree, two dozen men and women gathered on Sunday for a candlelight vigil outside the county prison at dusk, as they do each week.
Schoolteachers, computer programmers and secretaries, they came on an unusual mission: to plead for the freedom of 110 Chinese immigrants inside the prison, men most had never met, from a land none had ever seen.
The men were passengers on the Golden Venture, the ship that ran aground outside New York Harbor in June. 
They are being held in York, facing the likelihood that they will soon be returned to China and certain punishment unless the protesters get their way.
"It's not right to keep these men locked up," said Margaret Myers, who in all her 87 years says she has never before joined a public protest. 
"They haven't done anything wrong. 
They're just doing what our ancestors did, and that's O.K. with me."
If sentiment against immigration is on the upswing around the country, Mrs. Myers and her fellow protesters represent a pocket of old-fashioned generosity toward strangers in a place where it might not be expected.
This predominantly white, Christian town with a population of 40,000 about 75 miles west of Philadelphia has rarely welcomed outsiders. 
Ku Klux Klan rallies were held Sunday in nearby Harrisburg and Lebanon. 
They were unrelated to the vigil, but still a reminder of intolerance.
"This area is a breadbasket of racism," said Joan Maruskin, a Methodist pastor who helps organize the weekly vigils. 
"A lot of people don't like what we're doing. 
But that just makes us want to work harder."
The sympathy for the Chinese immigrants seems to be rooted in a sense among some people here that the new arrivals have been singled out by the Government and treated differently from illegal Chinese immigrants who arrived before this year, very few of whom have been deported.
When the Golden Venture arrived in June, and even when the immigrants were farmed out to York's and other county prisons, it seemed little more than a passing news item to most residents of this aging town, best known for an event more than 200 years ago, when Congress retreated here for nine months and drafted the Articles of Confederation.
But in August, almost all the immigrants' requests for asylum were turned down, and several defense lawyers accused immigration judges of deciding cases from the Golden Venture arbitrarily, on orders from Washington. 
They spread word in town that politics was interfering in the cases. 
That, together with a four-day hunger strike by the immigrants, captured the imagination of many residents.
"People here were kind of shocked," said Craig Trebilcock, a local lawyer for one detainee. 
"They believe strongly in the court system, and when they hear about arbitrary decisions coming down because of some political thing, they react."
Justice Department officials deny that immigration judges were instructed to evaluate the immigrants from the Golden Venture on anything but an individual basis. 
But they agree that while most immigration cases drag on for years, these are being expedited as part of a crackdown on smuggling ordered by President Clinton to discourage those who prey on the hopes of desperate foreigners.
Of the 118 men brought to York in June, virtually all applied for political asylum. 
Four won asylum, and four were indicted in a Federal Court in New York for assisting smugglers aboard the Golden Venture. 
The other 110 men, aged 17 to 45, were all denied asylum and filed appeals that are pending. 
Immigration officials say every Golden Venture passenger whose appeal is turned down will be deported.
To judge by their comments, some, perhaps a majority, in York would probably not object.
One man being held, Guo Zhenxie from Fujian Province, said during an interview in Mandarin that he and the other detainees were cheered, if a bit mystified, by the efforts of the residents here on his behalf. 
He noted that in China, where relations with family and friends dominate life, volunteer work for strangers is extremely rare.
Only one question is on Mr. Guo's mind every day. 
He asked it several times: "Are we going to be sent back?"
