
New York commuters who get steamed over traffic snarls might consider the plight of 24-year-old Zhou Hui and his two companions, who have been in traffic jams that last as long as three days.
Hanging out of the cab of his 10-ton truck, which was straining under the 14 tons of lumber draped over its backside, Mr. Zhou gazed up the line of traffic that stretched to the horizon in front of him and shook his head.
"From 12 o'clock last night until 8 o'clock this morning, we have not moved," Mr. Zhou said. 
"Look at us, our shirts are filthy, and we have no opportunity to wash. 
This is the pits."
With its enormous economic surge, China is straining the foundations of its 19th-century transportation system. 
Though road building is a national frenzy, China has fewer paved roads than Depression-era America. 
A national highway network remains a distant dream. 
It is faster to move cargo along the river system or ancient canals than to use the roads.
The burden on the highways is most apparent here, along the central highway of Hunan Province, which has become an extraordinary corridor of commerce that is opening southern China's internal market to Guangzhou, Hong Kong and the world.
Traffic on this stretch of the highway has been backed up more than 10 miles in both directions for weeks as the Hunan Province highway authority tries to put a new surface on a treacherous stretch of potholes, dips, cuts and trenches.
Mr. Zhou is one of three drivers who rotate shifts behind the wheel of the creaking lumber carrier. 
It will take them more than two days to cover the 240 miles from Jianghua in southern Hunan to the lumber mill in Changsha, the provincial capital.
That works out to less than five miles per hour. 
And they have to make the trip five to six times a month.
The long, tedious hours are punctuated by horrific collisions or furious fistfights.
Li Xinhua, 19, is one of the traffic policemen who is supposed to bring discipline to the chaos, where tempers can flare over the loss of time and money out there on the steaming pavement.
"The worst is when some of the drivers get so mad they come down out of their trucks and try to beat us," Officer Li said.
He talked as he commandeered the car of foreign travelers only too willing to use his authority to jump to the front of the line. 
It was Mr. Li's job to tell a policeman five miles ahead to stop the single lane of traffic that was moving south so the opposite lane could have a chance to start moving north again.
This method of alternating lanes was supposed to happen every 20 minutes, but the police have no walkie-talkies, so everything depends on word of mouth passed up the line, or on couriers like Officer Li.
Complicating matters this afternoon is that a truck carrying crushed rock has plowed into a cargo truck, igniting one vehicle's gasoline tank and creating a fire that has blocked both lanes, the one standing still and the one that was supposed to be moving.
One of the drivers did not survive the inferno and lay on the pavement, a charred corpse. 
Several hundred drivers had abandoned their vehicles and their torpor to observe the grisly diversion as firefighters and policemen scurried about their work.
The thousands of truck drivers sitting in line have created a captive market for entrepreneurial Chinese villagers who live along the highway. 
They have opened soda and ice cream stands, fast food shops, even brothels, to profit from the gridlock.
Young Chinese women in frilly dresses and bows in their hair decorate the doorways of every roadside restaurant, beckoning unshaven drivers to climb down and sample their home cooking.
But it can be risky to leave a truck unattended.
"The thieves come at night," Officer Li said. 
"We have caught them stealing pigs from the pig carriers and watermelons from the melon trucks. 
They will even try to take money out of the pockets of sleeping drivers."
Li Shaoyun, 22, has a boring factory job in Changsha, so four times a month he has been "borrowing" a truck from a state-owned company for the run to Guangzhou, where he can buy eight tons of watermelons for a third of a cent each and sell them in the Changsha market for nearly a penny each.
"Last year this road was so bad, you could only make a few miles a day," he said. 
His personal record for worst traffic jam is also three days.
He keeps his melon cargo covered or padlocked behind a grillwork that covers the rear bed, but still the thieves manage to pull a few free.
A thief who gets away in the middle of the night with a melon or two is likely to be seen the next morning peddling fresh watermelon slices from a bicycle to hungry truck drivers.
Echoing the lumber carrier, Mr. Li said, "This is the pits."
